i thought the king preferred the duke of albany to the duke of cornwall.
our wedding day is almost here, my beautiful hippolyta. we'll be getting married in four days, on the day of the new moon. but it seems to me that the days are passing too slowly, the old moon is taking too long to fade away! that old, slow moon is keeping me from getting what i want, just like an old widow makes her stepson wait to get his inheritance.
when should the three of us meet again? will it be in thunder, lightning, or rain?
we used to think so too. but the way he's divided the kingdom recently, nobody can tell which of the dukes he favors more. he's split the kingdom so evenly that it's impossible to see any indication of favoritism.
no, you'll see, four days will quickly turn into four nights. and since we dream at night, time passes quickly then. finally the new moon, curved like a silver bow in the sky, will look down on our wedding celebration.
we'll meet when the noise of the battle is over, when one side has won and the other side has lost.
(pointing to edmund) isn't this your son, my lord?
go, philostrate, get the young people of athens ready to celebrate and have a good time. sadness is only appropriate for funerals. we don't want it at our festivities.
that will happen before sunset.
yes, i've been responsible for his upbringing. i've had to acknowledge that he's my son so many times that now i can do it without embarrassment.
hippolyta, i wooed you with violence, using my sword, and got you to fall in love with me by injuring you. but i'll marry you under different circumstances, with extravagant festivals, public festivities, and celebration.
where should we meet?
i can't conceive of what you mean.
long live theseus, our famous and respected duke!
let's do it in the open field.
you can't conceive? well, this guy's mother could conceive him all to well. she grew a big belly and had a baby for her crib before she had a husband for her bed. do you smell something naughty?
thanks, good egeus. what's new with you?
we'll meet macbeth there.
well, i wouldn't want to undo the naughtiness, since the boy turned out so well.
i'm here, full of anger, to complain about my daughter hermia., step forward, demetrius., my lord, this man, demetrius, has my permission to marry her., step forward, lysander., but this other man, lysander, has cast a magic spell over my child's heart., you, you, lysander, you've given her poems, and exchanged tokens of love with my daughter. you've pretended to be in love with her, singing fake love songs softly at her window by moonlight, and you've captured her imagination by giving her locks of your hair, rings, toys, trinkets, knickknacks, little presents, flowers, and candies, things that can really influence an impressionable young person. you've connived to steal my daughter's heart, making her stubborn and harsh instead of obedient (like she should be)., and, my gracious duke, if she won't agree to marry demetrius right now, i ask you to let me exercise the right that all fathers have in athens. since she belongs to me, i can do what i want with her, as the law says: i can either make her marry demetrius, or have her killed.
(calling to her cat) i'm coming, graymalkin!
but i have a legitimate son a few years older than this one, and i don't love him any more than i love my bastard. edmund may have snuck into the world a little before his time, but his mother was pretty, we had a fun time making him, and now i have to acknowledge the guy as my son., do you know this gentleman, edmund?
what do you have to say for yourself, hermia? think carefully, pretty girl. you should think of your father as a god, since he's the one who gave you your beauty. to him, you're like a figure that he's sculpted out of wax, and he has the power to keep that figure intact or to disfigure it. demetrius is an admirable man.
my toad, paddock, calls me.
no, i don't, my lord.
so is lysander.
(to her spirit) i'll be right here!
(to edmund) this is lord kent. remember him as my friend and an honorable man.
you're right, lysander's admirable too. but since your father doesn't want him to marry you, you have to consider demetrius to be the better man.
fair is foul, and foul is fair. let's fly away through the fog and filthy air.
very pleased to meet you, my lord.
i wish my father could see them with my eyes.
who is this bloody man? judging from his appearance, i bet he can tell us the latest news about the revolt.
i look forward to getting to know you better.
no, you must see them as your father sees them.
this is the brave sergeant who fought to keep me from being captured. hail, brave friend! tell the king what was happening in the battle when you left it.
i'll try to make myself worth your knowledge.
your grace, please forgive me. i don't know what makes me think i can say this, and i don't know if speaking my mind to such a powerful and noble person as yourself will damage my reputation for modesty. but please, tell me the worst thing that could happen to me if i refuse to marry demetrius.
for a while you couldn't tell who would win. the armies were like two exhausted swimmers clinging to each other and struggling in the water, unable to move. the villainous rebel macdonwald was supported by foot soldiers and horsemen from ireland and the hebrides, and lady luck was with him, smiling cruelly at his enemies as if she were his whore. but luck and macdonwald together weren't strong enough. brave macbeth, laughing at luck, chopped his way through to macdonwald, who didn't even have time to say good-bye or shake hands before macbeth split him open from his navel to his jawbone and stuck his head on our castle walls.
he's been gone for nine years and he's leaving again soon.
you'll either be executed or you'll never see another man again. so think carefully about what you want, beautiful hermia. consider how young you are, and question your feelings. then decide whether you could stand to be a nun, wearing a priestess's habit and caged up in a cloister forever, living your entire life without a husband or children, weakly chanting hymns to the cold and virginal goddess of the moon. people who can restrain their passions and stay virgins forever are holy. but although a virgin priestess might be rewarded in heaven, a married woman is happier on earth. a married woman is like a rose who is picked and made into a beautiful perfume, while a priestess just withers away on the stem.
my brave relative! what a worthy man!
the king is coming.
i'd rather wither away than give up my virginity to someone i don't love.
but in the same way that violent storms always come just as spring appears, our success against macdonwald created new problems for us. listen to this, king: as soon as we sent those irish soldiers running for cover, the norwegian king saw his chance to attack us with fresh troops and shiny weapons.
go escort the lords of france and burgundy, gloucester.
take some time to think about this. by the time of the next new moon, the day when hippolyta and i will be married, be ready either to be executed for disobeying your father, to marry demetrius as your father wishes, or to take a vow to spend the rest of your life as a virgin priestess of the moon goddess.
didn't this frighten our captains, macbeth and banquo?
yes, my lord.
please give in, sweet hermia., and lysander, stop acting like she's yours. i've got more of a right to her than you do.
the new challenge scared them about as much as sparrows frighten eagles, or rabbits frighten a lion. to tell you the truth, they fought the new enemy with twice as much force as before; they were like cannons loaded with double ammunition. maybe they wanted to take a bath in their enemies' blood, or make that battlefield as infamous as golgotha, where christ was crucified, i don't know. but i feel weak. my wounds must be tended to.
in the meantime i'll get down to my real business., hand me that map over there., i hereby announce that i've divided my kingdom into three parts, which i'm handing over to the younger generation so i can enjoy a little rest and peace of mind in my old age., cornwall and albany, my loving sons-in-law, i now want to announce publicly what each of my daughters will inherit, to avoid hostilities after i die. the two
her father loves you, demetrius. so why don't you marry him and let me have hermia?
your words, like your wounds, bring you honor. take him to the surgeons.
great princes of france and burgundy, vying for the hand of my youngest cordelia, have been at my court a long time and will soon have their answers., my daughters, since i'm about to give up my throne and the worries that go along with it, tell me which one of you loves me most, so that i can give my largest gift to the one who deserves it most., goneril, my oldest daughter, you speak first.
it's true, rude lysander, i do love him. that's why i'm giving him my daughter. she's mine, and i'm giving her to demetrius.
who is this?
sir, i love you more than words can say. i love you more than eyesight, space, and freedom, beyond wealth or anything of value. i love you as much as life itself, and as much as status, health, beauty, or honor. i love you as much as any child has ever loved her father, with a love too deep to be spoken of. i love you more than any answer to the question "how much?"
(to theseus) my lord, i'm just as noble and rich as he is. i love hermia more than he does. my prospects are as good as his, if not better. and beautiful hermia loves me, which is more important than all those other things i'm bragging about. why shouldn't i be able to marry her? demetrius, and i'll say this to his face, courted nedar's daughter, helena, and made her fall in love with him. that sweet lady, helena, loves devoutly. she adores this horrible and unfaithful man.
the worthy thane "thane" is a scottish title of nobility. thane of ross.
(to herself) what will i say? i can only love and be silent.
i have to admit i've heard something about that, and meant to ask demetrius about it, but i was too busy with personal matters and it slipped my mind., anyway, demetrius and egeus, both of you, come with me. i want to say a few things to you in private., as for you, beautiful hermia, get ready to do what your father wants, because otherwise the law says that you must die or become a nun, and there's nothing i can do about that., come with me, hippolyta. how are you, my love?, demetrius and egeus, come with us. i want you to do some things for our wedding, and i also want to discuss something that concerns you both.
his eyes seem frantic! he looks like someone with a strange tale to tell.
i give you all this land, from this line to that one, dense forests, fertile fields, rivers rich with fish, wide meadows. this land will belong to your and albany's children forever., and now what does my second daughter regan, the wife of cornwall, have to say? tell me.
we're following you not only because it is our duty, but also because we want to.
god save the king!
sir, i'm made of the same stuff as my sister and consider myself just as good as she is. she's described my feelings of love for you precisely, but her description falls a little short of the truth. i reject completely any
what's going on, my love? why are you so pale? why have your rosy cheeks faded so quickly?
where have you come from, worthy thane?
joy except my love for you, and i find that only your majesty's love makes me happy.
probably because my cheeks' roses needed rain, which i could easily give them with all the tears in my eyes.
great king, i've come from fife, where the norwegian flag flies, mocking our country and frightening our people. leading an enormous army and assisted by that disloyal traitor, the thane of cawdor, the king of norway began a bloody battle. but outfitted in his battle-weathered armor, macbeth met the norwegian attacks shot for shot, as if he were the goddess of war's husband. finally he broke the enemy's spirit, and we were victorious.
(to herself) poor me, what am i going to say now? but i'm not poor in love, my love is bigger than my words are.
oh, honey! listen, in books they say that true love always faces obstacles. either the lovers have different social standings, 
great happiness!
you and your heirs hereby receive this large third of our lovely kingdom, no smaller in area or value than what i gave goneril., now, you, my youngest daughter, my joy, courted by the rich rulers of france and burgundy, what can you tell me that will make me give you a bigger part of my kingdom than i gave your sisters? speak.
oh, what an obstacle that would be! imagine being too high on the social ladder, and falling in love with someone beneath you.
so now sweno, the norwegian king, wants a treaty. we told him we wouldn't even let him bury his men until he retreated to saint colme's inch and paid us ten thousand dollars.
nothing, my lord.
or else they were very different ages, 
the thane of cawdor will never again betray me. go announce that he will be executed, and tell macbeth that cawdor's titles will be given to him.
nothing?
how awful! being too old to marry someone young.
i'll get it done right away.
nothing.
or else their guardians and advisors said no, 
the thane of cawdor has lost what the noble macbeth has won.
come on, "nothing" will get you nothing. try again.
what hell, to have your love life determined by someone else!
where have you been, sister?
i'm unlucky. i don't have a talent for putting my heart's feelings into words. i love you as a child should love her father, neither more nor less.
or, even if the lovers are a good match, their love might be ruined by war, death, or sickness, so that the affair only lasts an instant. their time together might be as fleeting as a shadow or as short as a dream, lasting only as long as it takes a lightning bolt to flash across the sky. before you can say "look," it's gone. that's how intense things like love are quickly destroyed.
killing pigs.
what are you saying, cordelia? revise your statement, or you may damage your inheritance.
if true lovers are always thwarted, then it must be a rule of fate. so let's try to be patient as we deal with our problem. it's as normal a part of love as dreams, sighs, wishes, and tears.
and you, sister?
my lord, you brought me up and loved me, and i'm giving back just as i should: i obey you, love you, and
that's the right attitude. so, listen, hermia. i have an aunt who is a widow, who's very rich and doesn't have any children. she lives about twenty miles from athens, and she thinks of me as a son. i could marry you there, gentle hermia, where the strict laws of athens can't touch us. so here's the plan. if you love me, sneak out of your father's house tomorrow night and meet me in the forest a few miles outside of town.
a sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap and munched away at them. "give me one," i said. "get away from me, witch!" the fat woman cried. her husband has sailed off to aleppo as master of a ship called the tiger. i'll sail there in a kitchen strainer, turn myself into a tailless rat, and do things to him, 
honor you. how can my sisters speak the truth when they say they love only you? don't they love their husbands too? hopefully when i get married, i'll give my husband half my love and half my sense of duty. i'm sure i'll never get married in the way my sisters say they're married, loving their father only.
you remember the place, i met you there once with helena to celebrate may day., i'll wait for you there.
i'll give you some wind to sail there.
but do you mean what you're saying?
oh, lysander, i swear i'll be there tomorrow. i swear by cupid's strongest bow and his best gold-tipped arrow, by the goddess of love's innocent doves, by everything that ties lovers together, by the bonfire where queen dido burned herself to death when her lover aeneas jilted her, and by all the promises that men have broken (and men have broken more promises than women have ever made). i give you my word, i will meet you at that spot tomorrow.
how nice of you!
yes, my lord.
keep your promise, my love. look, here comes helena.
and i will give you some more.
so young and so cruel?
hello, beautiful helena! where are you going?
i already have control of all the other winds, along with the ports from which they blow and every direction on the sailor's compass in which they can go. i'll drain the life out of him. he won't catch a wink of sleep, either at night or during the day. he will live as a cursed man. for eighty-one weeks he will waste away in agony.
so young, my lord, and honest.
did you just call me "beautiful"? take it back. you're the beautiful one as far as demetrius is concerned. oh, you're so lucky! your eyes are like stars, and your voice is more musical than a lark's song is to a shepherd in the springtime. sickness is contagious, i wish beauty were contagious too! i would catch your good looks before i left. my ear would be infected by your voice, my eye by your eye, and my tongue would come down with a bad case of your melodious speech. if the world were mine, i'd give it all up, everything except demetrius, to be you.
although i can't make his ship disappear, i can still make his journey miserable. look what i have here.
then that's the way it'll be. the truth will be all the inheritance you get. i swear by the sacred sun, by the mysterious moon, and by all the planets that rule our lives, that i disown you now as my daughter. as of now, there are no family ties between us, and i consider you a stranger to me. foreign savages who eat their own children for dinner will be as close to my heart as you, ex-daughter of mine.
oh, teach me how you look the way you do, and which tricks you used to make demetrius fall in love with you.
show me, show me.
but sir, 
i frown at him, but he still loves me.
here i have the thumb of a pilot who was drowned while trying to return home.
be quiet, kent. don't get in my way when i'm angry. i loved cordelia most of all and planned to spend my old age with her taking care of me. (to cordelia) go
oh, if only my smiles could inspire love as effectively as your frowns!
a drum, a drum! macbeth has come.
away! get out of my sight!, i guess if she doesn't love her father, then i'll only have peace when i'm dead., call the king of france. why is nobody doing anything? call the duke of burgundy.
i curse him, but he loves me.
(dancing together in a circle) we weird sisters, hand in hand, swift travelers over the sea and land, dance around and around like so. three times to yours, and three times to mine, and three times again, to add up to nine. enough! the charm is ready.
cornwall and albany, you and your wives can divide this last third of my kingdom between you. if she wants to be proud, or "honest," as she calls it, she can just marry her own pride. i hereby grant to you two my crown and all the privileges that kingship brings. i'll live one month with one of you, the next month with the other one. all i ask is that you provide me with a hundred knights for my own entourage. i'll keep only the title of king, but you'll have everything else: all the authority and income that come with kingship. to confirm all this, take this crown to share between yourselves. (he gives cornwall and albany the crown)
if only my prayers could inspire that kind of affection!
(to banquo) i have never seen a day that was so good and bad at the same time.
king lear, i've always honored you as king, loved you as my father, obeyed you as my master, and thanked you in my prayers, 
the more i hate him, the more he follows me around.
how far is it supposed to be to forres? (he sees the witches) what are these creatures? they're so withered-looking and crazily dressed. they don't look like they belong on this planet, but i see them standing here on earth. (to the witches) are you alive? can you answer questions? you seem to understand me, because each of you has put a gruesome finger to her skinny lips. you look like women, but your beards keep me from believing that you really are.
i'm furious and ready to snap. stay away or else i'll take my anger out on you.
the more i love him, the more he hates me.
speak, if you can. what kind of creatures are you?
let your anger fall on me then, even if its sharpness pierces my heart. kent can speak rudely when lear goes mad. what are you doing, old man? when powerful kings cave in to flatterers, do you think loyal men will be afraid to speak out against it? when a majestic king starts acting silly, then it's my duty to be blunt.
it's not my fault he acts like that, helena.
all hail, macbeth! hail to you, thane of glamis!
hold on to your crown and use your better judgment to rethink this rash decision. on my life i swear to you that your youngest daughter doesn't love you least. a loud mouth often points to an empty heart, and just because she's quiet doesn't mean she's unloving.
that's true, it's your beauty's fault. i wish i had a fault like that!
all hail, macbeth! hail to you, thane of cawdor!
kent, if you want to stay alive, stop talking.
don't worry. he won't see my face ever again. lysander and i are running away from here. before i saw lysander, athens seemed like paradise to me. but lysander's so attractive that he's turned heaven into hell!
all hail, macbeth, the future king!
i never considered my life as anything more than a chess pawn for you to play off against your enemies. i'm not afraid to lose it if it helps protect you.
helena, we'll tell you about our secret plan. tomorrow night, when the moon shines on the water and decorates the grass with tiny beads of pearly light (the time of night that always hides runaway lovers), we plan to sneak out of athens.
my dear macbeth, why do you look so startled and afraid of these nice things they're saying? (to the witches) tell me honestly, are you illusions, or are you really what you seem to be? you've greeted my noble friend with honors and talk of a future so glorious that you've made him speechless. but you don't say anything to me. if you can see the future and say how things will turn out, tell me. i don't want your favors and i'm not afraid of your hatred.
get out of my sight!
(to helena) in the woods where you and i used to lounge around on the pale primroses, telling each other sweet secrets, that's where lysander and i will meet.
hail!
learn to see better, lear, and let me stay here where you can look to me for good advice.
from then on we'll turn our backs on athens. we'll look for new friends and keep the company of strangers. goodbye, old friend. pray for us, and i hope you win over demetrius!, keep your promise, lysander. we need to stay away from each other until midnight tomorrow.
hail!
now, i swear by apollo...
i will, my hermia.
hail!
by apollo, king, you're taking the names of the gods in vain.
goodbye, helena. i hope demetrius comes to love you as much as you love him!
you are lesser than macbeth but also greater.
oh, you lowlife! scum!
it's amazing how much happier some people are than others! people throughout athens think i'm as beautiful as hermia. but so what? demetrius doesn't think so, and that's all that matters. he refuses to admit what everyone else knows. but even though he's making a mistake by obsessing over hermia so much, i'm also making a mistake, since i obsess over him. love can make worthless things beautiful. when we're in love, we don't see with our eyes but with our minds. that's why paintings of cupid, the god of love, always show him as blind. and love doesn't have good judgment either, cupid, has wings and no eyes, so he's bound to be reckless and hasty. that's why they say love is a child. because it makes such bad choices. just as boys like to play games by telling lies, cupid breaks his promises all the time. before demetrius ever saw hermia, he showered me with promises and swore he'd be mine forever.
you are not as happy as macbeth, yet much happier.
please stop, sir.
but when he got all hot and bothered over hermia, his promises melted away. i'll go tell demetrius that hermia is running away tomorrow night. he'll run after her. if he's grateful to me for this information, it'll be worth my pain in helping him pursue my rival hermia. at least i'll get to see him when he goes, and then again when he comes back.
your descendants will be kings, even though you will not be one. so all hail, macbeth and banquo!
sure, kill the doctor who's trying to cure you and pay your disease. take back your gift to albany and cornwall. if you don't, then as long as i'm able to speak i'll keep telling you you've done a bad, bad thing.
is everyone here?
banquo and macbeth, all hail!
listen to me, you traitor. you'll pay the price for trying to make me go back on the vow i made when i bequeathed my kingdom to them. i've never broken a vow yet. you tried to make me revise my judgment on my youngest daughter, disrespecting my power as
you should call their names generally, bottom means "individually," not "generally. bottom frequently makes mistakes with words. generally, one person at a time, in the order in which their names appear on this piece of paper.
wait! you only told me part of what i want to know. stay and tell me more. i already know i am the thane of glamis because i inherited the position when my father, sinel, died. but how can you call me the thane of cawdor? the thane of cawdor is alive, and he's a rich and powerful man. and for me to be the king is completely impossible, just as it's impossible for me to be thane of cawdor. tell me where you learned these strange things, and why you stop us at this desolate place with this prophetic greeting? speak, i command you.
king, which i can't put up with either as a ruler or as a person. this is your punishment: i'll give you five days to gather together what you need to survive, then on the sixth day you'll leave this kingdom that hates you. if the day after that you're found in my kingdom, you die. now get out of here! i swear by jupiter i'll never revoke this punishment.
this is a list of the names of all the men in athens who are good enough to act in the play we're going to perform for the duke and duchess on their wedding night.
the earth has bubbles, just like the water, and these creatures must have come from a bubble in the earth. where did they disappear to?
farewell, king. if this is how you act, it's clear that freedom has been banished from this kingdom.(to cordelia) i hope the gods will protect you, my dear girl, for thinking fairly and speaking correctly. (to regan and goneril) and you two, i hope your actions carry out your grand promises of love, so that big words can bring big results. farewell to all of you. i'll carry on my old life in a new land.
first, peter quince, tell us what the play is about, then read the names of the actors, and then shut up.
into thin air. their bodies melted like breath in the wind. i wish they had stayed!
here are the rulers of france and burgundy, my lord.
all right. our play is called a very tragic comedy about the horrible deaths of pyramus and thisbe.
were these things we're talking about really here? or are we both on drugs?
my lord the ruler of burgundy, i'll speak to you first. you've been competing with this king for my daughter. what's the least that you will settle for as a dowry? a dowry is a payment traditionally made to a husband by his father-in-law at the time of marriage. dowry?
let me tell you, it's a great piece of work, and very, funny., now, peter quince, call the names of the actors on the list. men, gather around him.
your children will be kings.
your highness, i want nothing more than what you've already offered. i know you'll offer nothing less than that.
answer when i call your name., nick bottom, the weaver?
you will be the king.
burgundy, i valued her highly when i cared about her. but now her price has fallen. there she is, over there. if there's anything you like about that worthless little thing, then go for it. she's all yours. but what you see is what you get, her only dowry is my disapproval. there she is.
here. tell me which part i'm going to play, then go on.
and thane of cawdor too. isn't that what they said?
i don't know what to say.
you, nick bottom, have been cast as pyramus.
that's exactly what they said. who's this?
she's got big flaws. she has no friends or protectors. i no longer love her. her only dowry is my curse and banishment. so do you take her or leave her?
what's pyramus? a lover or a tyrant?
the king was happy to hear of your success, macbeth. whenever he hears the story of your exploits in the fight against the rebels, he becomes so amazed it makes him speechless. he was also shocked to learn that on the same day you fought the rebels you also fought against the army of norway, and that you weren't the least bit afraid of death, even as you killed everyone around you. messenger after messenger delivered news of your bravery to the king with praise for how you defended his country.
i'm sorry, sir, but nobody can make a choice like this in such circumstances.
a lover who kills himself very nobly for love.
the king sent us to give you his thanks and to bring you to him. your real reward won't come from us.
then leave her, sir. i swear to god she's not worth anything more than what i told you. (to france) and as for you, great king of france, i'd never insult our friendship by encouraging you to marry a girl i hate. so i beg you to look around for a better match than this wretched creature that you can barely call human.
i'll have to cry to make my performance believable. and as soon as i start crying, oh boy, the audience had better watch out, because they'll start crying too. i'll make tears pour out of their eyes like rainstorms. i'll moan very believably., name the other actors., but i'm really in the mood to play a tyrant. i could do a great job with hercules, or any other part that requires ranting and raving. i would rant and rave really well. like this, listen. the raging rocks nd shivering shocks will break the locks of prison gates. and the sun-god's car will shine from far away, and make and mar foolish fate. oh, that was truly inspired!, now tell us who the other actors are., by the way, my performance just now was in the style of hercules, the tyrant style. a lover would have to be weepier, of course.
and to give you a taste of what's in store for you, he told me to call you the thane of cawdor. so hail, thane of cawdor! that title belongs to you now.
this is very odd. until very recently she was your favorite, the object of all your praise and the delight of your old age. it's strange that someone so dear to you could do anything so horrible as to warrant this sudden
francis flute, the bellows-repairman?
(shocked) can the devil tell the truth?
hatred. her crime must be extreme and monstrous, or else your earlier love for her wasn't as true as it seemed. but it'd take a miracle to make me believe she could do anything that horrible.
here, peter quince.
the thane of cawdor is still alive. why are you giving me his title?
(to lear) please, your majesty, i don't have a glib way with words and i only say what i mean. if i decide to do something, then i do it instead of talking about it. so i beg your majesty to let people know that it wasn't because i did something atrocious that i fell from your favor. i didn't murder or commit any immoral or lustful act. i'm out of favor simply because i'm not a fortune-hunter and i don't have a smooth way with words, and i'm a better person because of it, even though it has cost me your love.
flute, you'll be playing the role of thisbe.
the man who was the thane of cawdor is still alive, but he's been sentenced to death, and he deserves to die. i don't know whether he fought on norway's side, or if he secretly aided the rebels, or if he fought with both of our enemies. but his treason, which has been proven, and to which he's confessed, means he's finished.
enough. it would've been better for you not to have been born at all than to displease me as you did.
who's thisbe? a knight on a quest?
(to himself) it's just like they said, now i'm the thane of glamis and the thane of cawdor. and the best part of what they predicted is still to come. (to ross and angus) thank you for the news. (speaking so that only banquo can hear) aren't you beginning to hope your children will be kings? after all, the witches who said i was thane of cawdor promised them nothing less.
you mean this is the whole problem, that she is shy and hasn't said everything she means to say and do?, my lord of burgundy, what do you have to say to this lady? love's not love when it gets mixed up with irrelevant outside matters. will you marry her? she herself is as valuable as any dowry could ever be.
thisbe is the lady pyramus is in love with.
if you trust what they say, you might be on your way to becoming king, as well as thane of cawdor. but this whole thing is strange. the agents of evil often tell us part of the truth in order to lead us to our destruction. they earn our trust by telling us the truth about little things, but then they betray us when it will damage us the most. (to ross and angus) gentlemen, i'd like to have a word with you, please.
(to lear) king, just give me the dowry you promised me, and i'll make cordelia the duchess of burgundy right away.
no, come on, don't make me play a woman. i'm growing a beard.
(to himself) so far the witches have told me two things that came true, so it seems like this will culminate in my becoming king. (to ross and angus) thank you, gentlemen. (to himself) this supernatural temptation doesn't seem like it can be a bad thing, but it can't be good either. if it's a bad thing, why was i promised a promotion that turned out to be true? now i'm the thane of cawdor, just like they said i would be. but if this is a good thing, why do i find myself thinking about murdering king duncan, a thought so horrifying that it makes my hair stand on end and my heart pound inside my chest? the dangers that actually threaten me here and now frighten me less than the horrible things i'm imagining.
no, i'll give nothing. i won't budge on that.
that doesn't matter. you'll wear a mask, and you can make your voice as high as you want to.
even though it's just a fantasy so far, the mere thought of committing murder shakes me up so much that i hardly know who i am anymore. my ability to act is stifled by my thoughts and speculations, and the only things that matter to me are things that don't really exist.
(to cordelia) in that case, i'm sorry you have to lose me as a husband because you lost the king as a father.
in that case, if i can wear a mask, let me play thisbe too! i'll be pyramus first: "thisne, thisne!", and then in falsetto: "ah, pyramus, my dear lover! i'm your dear thisbe, your dear lady!"
look at macbeth, he's in a daze.
peace to you, my lord of burgundy. since you love money and power so much, i won't be your wife.
no, no. bottom, you're pyramus., and flute, you're thisbe.
(to himself) if fate wants me to be king, perhaps fate will just make it happen and i won't have to do anything.
beautiful cordelia, you're all the richer now that you're poor. you're more valuable now that you're rejected and more loved now that you're hated. i'll take you and your wonderful virtues here and now, if it's okay that i'm picking up what others have thrown away. it's so strange that in neglecting you so cruelly, the gods have made me love you so dearly., king, the daughter you've rejected is now mine, as queen of france. no duke of spineless burgundy can take this treasure of a girl from me now., say goodbye to them, cordelia, even though they've been unkind to you. you'll find a much better place in france than what you're giving up here.
all right. go on.
(to ross and angus) macbeth is not used to his new titles. they're like new clothes: they don't fit until you break them in over time.
she's yours, king of france. take her. she's no longer my daughter, and i'll never see her face again. (to cordelia) so get out of here. leave without any blessing or love from me., come with me, burgundy.
robin starveling, the tailor?
(to himself) one way or another, what's going to happen is going to happen.
say goodbye to your sisters.
here, peter quince.
good macbeth, we're ready when you are.
sisters, you whom our father loves so dearly, i leave you now with tears in my eyes. i know you for what you really are, but as your sister i'm reluctant to criticize you. take good care of our father and show him the love that you have professed. i leave him in your care, but oh, if only i were still in his favor i could arrange for better care for him. goodbye to you both.
robin starveling, you're going to play thisbe's mother., tom snout, the handyman.
i beg your pardon; i was distracted. kind gentlemen, i won't forget the trouble you've taken for me whenever i think of this day. let's go to the king. (speaking so that only banquo can hear) think about what happened today, and when we've both had time to consider things, let's talk.
don't tell us what our duty is.
here, peter quince.
absolutely.
you should focus instead on pleasing your husband, who's taken you in as an act of charity. you've failed to obey your father and you deserve to be deprived of everything that's been taken away from you.
you'll be pyramus's father, i'll play thisbe's father myself, snug, the cabinetmaker, you'll play the part of the lion., so that's everyone. i hope this play is well cast now.
until then, we've said enough. (to ross and angus) let's go, my friends.
time will tell what you've got up your sleeve. you can be deceitful in the short term, but eventually truth will come out. have a good life.
do you have the lion's part written down? if you do, please give it to me, because i need to start learning the lines. it takes me a long time to learn things.
has the former thane of cawdor been executed yet? haven't the people in charge of that come back?
come with me, my dear cordelia.
you can improvise the whole thing. it's just roaring.
my king, they haven't come back yet. but i spoke with someone who saw cawdor die, and he said that cawdor openly confessed his treasons, begged your highness's forgiveness, and repented deeply. he never did anything in his whole life that looked as good as the way he died. he died like someone who had practiced how to toss away his most cherished possession as if it were a worthless a piece of garbage.
sister, i have a lot to say about things that concern us both. i think that our father will leave here tonight.
let me play the lion too. i'll roar so well that it'll be an inspiration to anyone who hears me. i'll roar so well that the duke will say, "let him roar again. let him roar again."
there's no way to read a man's mind by looking at his face. i trusted cawdor completely.
yes, i'm sure he will, to stay with you. next month he'll stay with us.
if you roar too ferociously, you'll scare the duchess and the other ladies and make them scream. and that would get us all executed.
(to macbeth) my worthiest kinsman! just this moment i was feeling guilty for not having thanked you enough. you have done so much for me so fast that it has been impossible to reward you properly. if you deserved less, then perhaps my payment would have matched your deeds! all i can say is that i owe you more than i can ever repay.
he's so flighty in his old age, as we keep noticing. he has always loved cordelia best, and his bad judgment in disowning her now is obvious.
yeah, that would get every single one of us executed.
the opportunity to serve you is its own reward. your only duty, your highness, is to accept what we owe you. our duty to you and your state is like the duty of children to their father or servants to their master. by doing everything we can to protect you, we're only doing what we should.
he's going senile. but then again he's never really understood his own feelings very well.
well, my friends, you've got to admit that if you scare the living daylights out of the ladies, they'd have no choice but to execute us. but i'll soften my voice, you know, aggravate "aggravate" is a mistake for "moderate." aggravate it, so to speak, so that i'll roar as gently as a baby dove. i'll roar like a sweet, peaceful nightingale.
you are welcome here. by making you thane of cawdor, i have planted the seeds of a great career for you, and i will make sure they grow. (to banquo) noble banquo, you deserve no less than macbeth, and everyone should know it. let me bring you close to me and give you the benefit of my love and good will.
yes, he was hotheaded even in the prime of his life. now that he's old, we can expect to have to deal not only with his old character flaws, which have turned into deep-rooted habits, but also with the uncontrollable crabbiness that comes with old age.
you can't play any part except pyramus. because pyramus is a good-looking man, the most handsome man that you could find on a summer's day, a lovely gentlemanly man. so you're the only one who could play pyramus.
then if i accomplish anything great, it will be a credit to you.
we'll probably witness many more outbursts from him, like banishing kent.
well then, i'll do it. what kind of beard should i wear for the part?
my joy is so overwhelming it brings tears to my eyes. my sons, relatives, lords, and all those closest to me, i want you to witness that i will bestow my kingdom on my eldest son, malcolm. today i name him the prince of cumberland. but malcolm isn't going to be alone in receiving honors, titles of nobility will shine like stars on all of you who deserve them. (to macbeth) and now, let's go to your castle at inverness, where i will become even more obliged to you because of your hospitality.
there's still the king of france's farewell ceremony. let's put our heads together. if our father continues to use his authority as usual, then his recent abdication of the kingdom will just hurt us.
whatever kind you want, i guess.
i'm not happy unless i can be working for you. i will go ahead and bring my wife the good news that you are coming. with that, i'll be off.
we'll have to think about it carefully.
i'll play the part wearing either a straw-colored beard, or a sandy beard, or a red beard, or one of those bright yellow beards that's the color of a french coin.
my worthy cawdor!
we have to strike while the iron's hot.
some french people don't have beards at all, because syphilis has made all their hair fall out, so you might have to play the part clean-shaven., but gentlemen, here are your scripts, and i beg you to please learn them by tomorrow night. meet me in the duke's forest a mile outside of town. it's best to rehearse there, because if we do it here in the city, we'll be bothered by crowds of people and everyone will know the plot of our play. meanwhile, i'll make a list of props that we'll need for the play. now make sure you show up, all of you. don't leave me in the lurch.
(to himself) malcolm is now the prince of cumberland! to become king myself, i'm either going to have to step over him or give up, because he's in my way. stars, hide your light so no one can see the terrible desires within me. i won't let my eye look at what my hand is doing, but in the end i'm still going to do that thing i'd be horrified to see.
i only worship what's natural, not what's manmade. why should i let myself be tortured by manmade social customs that deprive me of my rights simply because i was born twelve or fourteen months later than my older brother? why do they call me "bastard" and "lowlife" when i'm just as gifted in mind and body as legitimate children? why do they call us bastards "lowlifes"? always "lowlife," "bastard," "lowlife," "lowlife." at least we bastards were conceived in a moment of passionate lust rather than in a dull, tired marriage bed, where half-sleeping parents monotonously churn out a bunch of sissy kids. all right then, legitimate brother edgar, i have to have your lands. our father loves me just as much as the legitimate edgar. what a nice word that is, "legitimate"! well, my legitimate edgar, if this letter works and my plan succeeds, edmund the lowlife will beat the legitimate. look out, i'm on my way up. three cheers for bastards!
we'll be there, and there we'll rehearse courageously and wonderfully, truly obscenely. work hard, know your lines. goodbye.
(to banquo, in the middle of a conversation we haven't heard) you're right, banquo. macbeth is every bit as valiant as you say, and i am satisfied with these praises of him. let's follow after him, now that he has gone ahead to prepare our welcome. he is a man without equal.
kent's been banished just like that? and the king of france gone in a huff? and king lear's abdicated his authority, making his kingship a ceremonial title only? all this so suddenly?, edmund, what's going on? what's the news?
we'll meet at the giant oak tree in the duke's forest.
"the witches met me on the day of my victory in battle, and i have since learned that they have supernatural knowledge. when i tried desperately to question them further, they vanished into thin air. while i stood spellbound, messengers from the king arrived and greeted me as the thane of cawdor, which is precisely how the weird sisters had saluted me before calling me 'the future king!' i thought i should tell you this news, my dearest partner in greatness, so that you could rejoice along with me about the greatness that is promised to us. keep it secret, and farewell."
(pocketing the letter) no news, my lord.
got it? be there, or don't show your face again.
(she looks up from the letter) you are thane of glamis and cawdor, and you're going to be king, just like you were promised. but i worry about whether or not you have what it takes to seize the crown. you are too full of the milk of human kindness to strike aggressively at your first opportunity. you want to be powerful, and you don't lack ambition, but you don't have the mean streak that these things call for. the things you want to do, you want to do like a good man. you don't want to cheat, yet you want what doesn't belong to you. there's something you want, but you're afraid to do what you need to do to get it. you want it to be done for you. hurry home so i can persuade you and talk you out of whatever's keeping you from going after the crown. after all, fate and witchcraft both seem to want you to be king.
why are you hiding that letter?
hello, spirit! where are you going?
what news do you bring?
i don't have any news to report, my lord.
i go over hills and valleys, through bushes and thorns, over parks and fenced-in spaces, through water and fire. i wander everywhere faster than the moon revolves around the earth. i work for titania, the fairy queen, and organize fairy dances for her in the grass. the cowslip flowers are her bodyguards. you'll see that their petals have spots on them, those are rubies, fairy gifts. their sweet smells come from those little freckles. now i have to go find some dewdrops and hang a pearl earring on every cowslip flower. goodbye, you dumb old spirit. i've got to go. the queen and her elves will be here soon.
the king is coming here tonight.
what's that paper you were reading?
the king's having a party here tonight. just make sure the queen doesn't come anywhere near him, because king oberon is extremely angry. he's furious because she stole an adorable boy from an indian king. she's never kidnapped such a darling human child before, and oberon's jealous. he wants the child for himself, to accompany him on his wanderings through the wild forests. but the queen refuses to hand the boy over to oberon. instead, she puts flowers in the boy's hair and makes a fuss over him.
you must be crazy to say that! isn't macbeth with the king, and wouldn't macbeth have told me in advance so i could prepare, if the king were really coming?
it's nothing, my lord.
and now oberon and titania refuse to speak to each other, or meet each other anywhere, neither in the forest nor on the plain, nor by the river nor under the stars. they always argue, and the little fairies get so frightened that they hide in acorn cups and won't come out.
i'm sorry, but it's the truth. macbeth is coming. he sent a messenger ahead of him who arrived here so out of breath that he could barely speak his message.
no? then why did you have to stick it in your pocket in such a hurry? if it were nothing, you wouldn't need to hide it. let's see it. come on, if it's nothing, i won't need glasses to read it.
unless i'm mistaken, you're that mischievous and naughty spirit named robin goodfellow. aren't you the one who goes around scaring the maidens in the village, stealing the cream from the top of the milk, screwing up the flour mills, and frustrating housewives by keeping their milk from turning into butter? aren't you the one who keeps beer from foaming up as it should, and causes people to get lost at night, while you laugh at them? some people call you "hobgoblin" and "sweet puck," and you're nice to them. you do their work for them and give them good luck. that's you, right?
take good care of him. he brings great news.
please, sir, i beg you. it's a letter from my brother that i haven't finished reading yet. but judging from the bit i have read, it's not fit for you to see.
what you say is true. that's me you're talking about, the playful wanderer of the night. i tell jokes to oberon and make him smile. i'll trick a fat, well-fed horse into thinking that i'm a young female horse. sometimes i hide at the bottom of an old woman's drink disguised as an apple. when she takes a sip, i bob up against her lips and make her spill the drink all over her withered old neck. sometimes a wise old woman with a sad story to tell tries to sit down on me, thinking i'm a three-legged stool. but i slip from underneath her and she falls down, crying, "ow, my butt!" and starts coughing, and then everyone laughs and has fun. but step aside, fairy! here comes oberon.
so the messenger is short of breath, like a hoarse raven, as he announces duncan's entrance into my fortress, where he will die. come, you spirits that asist murderous thoughts, make me less like a woman and more like a man, and fill me from head to toe with deadly cruelty! thicken my blood and clog up my veins so i won't feel remorse, so that no human compassion can stop my evil plan or prevent me from accomplishing it! come to my female breast and turn my mother's milk into poisonous acid, you murdering demons, wherever you hide, invisible and waiting to do evil! come, thick night, and cover the world in the darkest smoke of hell, so that my sharp knife can't see the wound it cuts open, and so heaven can't peep through the darkness and cry, "no! stop!"
give me that letter, sir.
and here's my mistress, titania. i wish he'd go away!
great thane of glamis! worthy thane of cawdor! you'll soon be greater than both those titles, once you become king! your letter has transported me from the present moment, when who knows what will happen, and has made me feel like the future is already here.
now i'll offend you whether i give it to you or not. the problem is in what the letter says, as far as i can tell.
how not nice to see you, titania.
my dearest love, duncan is coming here tonight.
(taking the letter) let's see, let's see.
what, are you jealous, oberon?, fairies, let's get out of here. i've sworn i'll never sleep with him or talk to him again.
and when is he leaving?
i hope for my brother's sake that he just wrote it to test my honor.
wait just a minute, you brazen hussy. aren't you supposed to obey me, your lord and husband?
he plans to leave tomorrow.
(reads) "the custom of respecting the elderly makes it hard for the young and healthy to live well, and keeps us without our inheritance until we are so old we can't enjoy our happiness anyway. the power of the elderly is starting to feel like a silly and foolish slavery to me, and they only enjoy that power because we let them have it.
if you're my lord and husband, i must be your lady and wife, so you're supposed to be faithful to me. but i know for a fact that you snuck away from fairyland disguised as a shepherd, and spent all day playing straw pipes and singing love poems to your new girlfriend. the only reason you left india was to come here and see that butch amazon hippolyta. she was your boot-wearing mistress and your warrior lover, and now that she's getting married to theseus, you've come to celebrate their marriage.
that day will never come. your face betrays strange feelings, my lord, and people will be able to read it like a book. in order to deceive them, you must appear the way they expect you to look. greet the king with a welcoming expression in your eyes, your hands, and your words. you should look like an innocent flower, but be like the snake that hides underneath the flower. the king is coming, and he's got to be taken care of. let me handle tonight's preparations, because tonight will change every night and day for the rest of our lives.
come talk to me about this. if our father were dead you'd receive half of his revenue forever, and you'd have my undying love, edgar." hmm, what's this, a conspiracy? "if our father were dead, you'd receive half of his revenue forever", my son edgar? how did he bring himself to write such a thing? how could he have even entertained these thoughts in his heart? how did you get this letter? who delivered it?
how can you stand there shamelessly talking about me and hippolyta, when you know that i know about your love for theseus? weren't you the one who made him desert perigouna in the middle of the night, right after he'd raped her? and weren't you the one who made him cheat on all of his other girlfriends, like aegles, ariadne, and antiopa?
we will speak about this further.
nobody delivered it, my lord. that's what's clever about it. it was tossed into the window of my room.
these are nothing but jealous lies. since the beginning of midsummer, my fairies and i haven't been able to meet anywhere to do our dances in the wind without being disturbed by you and your arguments. we haven't been able to meet on a hill or in a valley, in the forest or a meadow, by a pebbly fountain or a rushing stream, or on the beach by the ocean without you disturbing us. and because you interrupt us so that we can't dance for them, the winds have made fogs rise up out of the sea and fall down on the rivers so that the rivers flood, just to get revenge on you. so all the work that oxen and farmers have done in plowing the fields has been for nothing, because the unripe grain has rotted before it was ripe. sheep pens are empty in the middle of the flooded fields, and the crows get fat from eating the dead bodies of infected sheep. all the fields where people usually play games are filled with mud, and you can't even see the elaborate mazes that people create in the grass, because no one walks in them anymore and they've all grown over. it's not winter here for the human mortals, so they're not protected by the holy hymns and carols that they sing in winter. so the pale, angry moon, who controls the tides, fills the air with diseases. as a consequence of this bad weather and these bad moods the seasons have started to change. cold frosts spread over the red roses, and the icy winter wears a crown of sweet summer flowers as some sick joke. spring, summer, fertile autumn and angry winter have all changed places, and now the confused world doesn't know which is which. and this is all because of our argument. we are responsible for this.
you should project a peaceful mood, because if you look troubled, you will arouse suspicion. leave all the rest to me.
you're sure the handwriting is your brother's?
do something about it, then. you have the power to fix it. why would titania want to argue with her oberon? all i'm asking for is to have that little human boy as part of my crew.
this castle is in a pleasant place. the air is sweet and appeals to my refined senses.
if he'd written nice things, i'd swear yes right away. but as it stands, i wish i could believe it wasn't.
get over it. i won't give up this child for all of fairyland. his mother was one of my worshippers, and we always used to gossip together at night in india, sitting together by the ocean and watching the merchant ships sailing on the ocean. we used to laugh to see the sails fill up with wind so that they looked like they had big, pregnant bellies, as if the wind had gotten them pregnant. she would imitate them, since she was already pregnant with the little boy, and she would go sailing over the land herself to go get me little presents, and come back carrying gifts like she was a ship coming back from a voyage. but since she was a mortal, she died giving birth to that boy, and for her sake i'm raising him and will not give him up.
the fact that this summer bird, the house martin, builds his nests here proves how inviting the breezes are. there isn't a single protrusion in the castle walls where these birds haven't built their hanging nests to sleep and breed. i've noticed that they always like to settle and mate where the air is the nicest.
but it is his handwriting?
how long do you plan to stay here in this forest?
look, here comes our honored hostess! sometimes the love my subjects bring me is inconvenient, but i still accept it as love. in doing so, i'm teaching you to thank me for the incovenience i'm causing you by being here, because it comes from my love to you.
it's his handwriting, my lord, but i hope he didn't mean what he wrote.
maybe until after theseus's wedding day. if you behave yourself and join us in our circle dance and moonlight celebrations, then you can come with us. if not, leave me alone, and i'll stay away from your turf.
everything we're doing for you, even if it were doubled and then doubled again, is nothing compared to the honors you have brought to our family. we gladly welcome you as our guests, with gratitude for both the honors you've given us before and the new honors you've just given us.
has he ever tested out these ideas on you before?
give me that boy and i'll come with you.
where is macbeth, the thane of cawdor? we followed closely after him. i hoped to arrive here before him, but he rides swiftly. and his great love, which is as sharp as his spur, helped him beat us here. fair and noble hostess, we are your guests tonight.
never, my lord. but i've often heard him argue that when sons are at their prime and their fathers are declining, the sons should be their fathers' guardians and manage their fathers' money.
not for your entire fairy kingdom., come, fairies, let's go. we're going to have an out-and-out brawl if i stay any longer.
we are your servants, your highness, and as always our house and everything in it is at your disposal, for after all, we keep it in your trust and we're glad to give you back what's yours.
oh, what a villain! that's just what he said in the letter. evil villain! monstrous, hateful, bestial villain! worse
well, go on your way, then. you won't leave this grove until i've paid you back for this insult. (to robin goodfellow) my dear puck, come here. you remember the time when i was sitting on a cliff, and i heard a mermaid sitting on a dolphin's back sing such a sweet and harmonious song that it calmed the stormy sea and made stars shoot out of the sky so they could hear her better?
give me your hand. bring me to my host, macbeth. i love him dearly, and i shall continue to favor him. whenever you're ready, hostess.
than a beast! go look for him. i'll arrest him. horrid villain! where is he?
yes, i remember.
if this business would really be finished when i did the deed, then it would be best to get it over with quickly. if the assassination of the king could work like a net, sweeping up everything and preventing any consequences, then the murder would be the be-all and end-all of the whole affair, and i would gladly put my soul and the afterlife at risk to do it. but for crimes like these there are still punishments in this world. by committing violent crimes we only teach other people to commit violence, and the violence of our students will come back to plague us teachers. justice, being equal to everyone, forces us to drink from the poisoned cup that we serve to others. the king trusts me in two ways. first of all, i am his kinsman and his subject, so i should always try to protect him. second, i am his host, so i should be closing the door in his murderer's face, not trying to murder him myself. besides, duncan has been such a humble leader, so free of corruption, that his virtuous legacy will speak for him when he dies, as if angels were playing trumpets against the injustice of his murder. pity, like an innocent newborn baby, will ride the wind with winged angels on invisible horses through the air to spread news of the horrible deed to everyone everywhere. people will shed a flood of tears that will drown the wind like a horrible downpour of rain. i can't spur myself to action. the only thing motivating me is ambition, which makes people rush ahead of themselves toward disaster.
i'm not sure, my lord. but it may be a good idea to restrain your rage until you find out exactly what he meant. if you go after him and then find out that you made a mistake, it would damage your reputation and greatly undermine his loyalty to you. i'll bet my life that he only wrote this letter to gauge my love for you, and for no other reason.
that same night, i saw cupid flying from the moon to the earth, with all of his arrows ready. (you couldn't see him, but i could.) he took aim at a beautiful young virgin who was sitting on a throne in the western part of the world, and he shot his arrow of love well enough to have pierced a hundred thousand hearts. but i could see that cupid's fiery arrow was put out by watery, virginal moonbeams, so the royal virgin continued her virginal thoughts without being interrupted by thoughts of love. but i paid attention to where cupid's arrow fell. it fell on a little western flower, which used to be white as milk but now has turned purple from being wounded by the arrow of love. young girls call it "love-in-idleness." bring me that flower. i showed it to you once. if its juice is put on someone's eyelids while they're asleep, that person will fall in love with the next living creature he or she sees. bring me this plant, and get back here before the sea monster has time to swim three miles.
what news do you have?
do you think so?
i could go around the world in forty minutes.
he has almost finished dinner. why did you leave the dining room?
if you agree, i'll hide you somewhere where you can eavesdrop on us talking about it, and hear how he feels with your own ears. you won't have to wait longer than until tonight.
when i have the juice of that flower, i'll trickle some drops of it on titania's eyes while she's sleeping. she'll fall madly in love with the first thing she sees when she wakes up, even if it's a lion, a bear, a wolf, a bull, a monkey, or an ape. and before i make her normal again, i can cure her by treating her with another plant, i'll make her give me that little boy as my page. but who's that coming this way? i'll make myself invisible and listen to their conversation.
has he asked for me?
he can't possibly be such a monster, 
look, i don't love you, so stop following me around. where are lysander and beautiful hermia? lysander i want to stop, but hermia stops my heart from beating. you told me they escaped into this forest. and here i am, going crazy in the middle of the woods because i can't find my hermia. go away, get out of here, and stop following me.
don't you know he has?
and i'm sure he isn't.
you attract me to you, you cruel magnet! but you must not attract iron, because my heart is as true as steel. if you let go of your power to attract me, i won't have any power to follow you.
we can't go on with this plan. the king has just honored me, and i have earned the good opinion of all sorts of people. i want to enjoy these honors while the feeling is fresh and not throw them away so soon.
, toward his own father who loves him so completely. oh, god! edmund, go find him. gain his confidence for me, please. manage him however you think best. i'd give up my rank and fortune to be free from my doubts.
do i ask you to follow me? do i speak to you kindly? don't i tell you in the clearest terms that i do not and cannot love you?
were you drunk when you seemed so hopeful before? have you gone to sleep and woken up green and pale in fear of this idea? from now on this is what i'll think of your love. are you afraid to act the way you desire? will you take the crown you want so badly, or will you live as a coward, always saying "i can't" after you say "i want to"? you're like the poor cat in the old story.
i'll find him right away, sir, and carry out the business as well as i can. then i'll let you know what's happening.
yes, but that makes me love you even more. i'm your little dog, demetrius. the more you beat me, the more i'll love you. treat me like you would treat a dog, kick me, hit me, neglect me, try to lose me. just let me follow behind you, even though i'm not good enough for you. could i ask for a worse place in your heart than to be treated as you would treat a dog? and yet i would consider it an honor to be your dog.
please, stop! i dare to do only what is proper for a man to do. he who dares to do more is not a man at all.
these recent eclipses of the sun and moon don't bode well for us. though science can explain them away, disasters still come after eclipses. love cools off, friendships break up, and brothers become enemies. riots
don't push it. just looking at you makes me sick.
if you weren't a man, then what kind of animal were you when you first told me you wanted to do this? when you dared to do it, that's when you were a man. and if you go one step further by doing what you dared to do before, you'll be that much more the man. the time and place weren't right before, but you would have gone ahead with the murder anyhow. now the time and place are just right, but they're almost too good for you. i have suckled a baby, and i know how sweet it is to love the baby at my breast. but even as the baby was smiling up at me, i would have plucked my nipple out of its mouth and smashed its brains out against a wall if i had sworn to do that the same way you have sworn to do this.
break out, civil war erupts, kings are betrayed, and the bond between father and son snaps. this wicked son of mine confirms the prediction , son against father. the king acts unnaturally, father against child. we've seen the best our age has to offer. conspiracies, fakery, betrayal, and disorder are all that's left until we die. find out what this villainous edgar is thinking, edmund. you won't lose any respect. just do it carefully., and to think that the noble and loyal kent has been banished, for the crime of telling the truth! it's strange, strange.
and i get sick when i can't look at you.
but if we fail, 
this is a classic example of the idiocy of the world: when we're down and out, often because of our own excesses , we put all the blame on the sun, the moon, and the stars, as if they forced us to be bad, or the heavens compelled us to be villainous or stupid. as if we become thieves and traitors according to astrological signs or obey planetary influences to become drunks, liars, and adulterers! as if some universal power pushed us into evil deeds! what a sneaky trick it is for lustful mankind to blame our horniness on some star! my father and mother coupled when the demonic moon was descending, and i was born under the big dipper, so it's inevitable that i'm rude and oversexed. christ! i would have been what i am even if the most virginal star in the heavens had twinkled at my conception. edgar, 
you're risking your reputation by leaving the city and stalking someone who doesn't love you. standing around alone in a deserted area in the middle of the night isn't the best way to protect your virginity.
we, fail? if you get your courage up, we can't fail. when duncan is asleep, the day's hard journey has definitely made him tired, i'll get his two servants so drunk that their memory will go up in smoke through the chimneys of their brains. when they lie asleep like pigs, so drunk they'll be dead to the world, what won't you and i be able to do to the unguarded duncan? and whatever we do, we can lay all the blame on the drunken servants.
and, speak of the devil, here he comes, right on cue. i've got to play the role and sigh like a poor beggar., oh, these eclipses predict such disorder. fa, sol, la, mi.
i rely on your virtue to protect me. and because i can see your shining face, it doesn't feel like nighttime to me. this forest doesn't seem deserted when you're here, because you are all the world to me. so how can anyone say i'm alone, when the whole world is here to look at me?
may you only give birth to male children, because your fearless spirit should create nothing that isn't masculine. once we have covered the two servants with blood, and used their daggers to kill, won't people believe that they were the culprits?
hello, brother edmund. what are you thinking about so seriously?
i'll run away from you and hide in the bushes, and leave you to the mercy of wild animals.
who could think it happened any other way? we'll be grieving loudly when we hear that duncan has died.
i was thinking about what an astrologer predicted the other day. he wrote about what these eclipses mean.
the wildest animal isn't as cruel as you are. run whenever you want to. the story of daphne and apollo will be changed:
now i'm decided, and i will exert every muscle in my body to commit this crime. go now, and pretend to be a friendly hostess. hide with a false pleasant face what you know in your false, evil heart.
are you spending your valuable time on that?
the lustful god apollo runs away from the virginal nymph daphne who pursues him, the dove chases after the griffin, which is usually its predator, and the gentle deer tries to hunt down the tiger, speed is useless when the cowardly person chases and the brave person runs away.
how's the night going, boy?
oh, i assure you the things he writes about are wretched , things like divisions between parents and children, death, famine, broken friendships, political rebellion, treason against the king and noblemen, exiled friends, dissolved armies, adultery, and i don't know what else.
i'm not sticking around to listen to you any longer. leave me alone. or if you follow me, you'd better understand that i'll do something bad to you in the forest.
the moon has set. the clock hasn't struck yet.
how long have you believed in astrology?
yes, you already hurt me in the church, in the town, and in the fields. shame on you, demetrius! your behavior is an insult to all women. we cannot fight for love as men can. we should be pursued and courted. we weren't made to do the pursuing.
the moon sets at twelve, right?
come on. when was the last time you saw my father?
i'll follow you and turn this hell i'm in into a kind of heaven. it would be heavenly to be killed by someone i love so much.
i think it's later than that, sir.
why, last night.
goodbye, nymph. before he leaves this part of the forest, you'll change places: you'll be the one running away, and he'll be in love with you.
here, take my sword. the heavens are being stingy with their light. take this, too. i'm tired and feeling heavy, but i can't sleep. merciful powers, keep away the nightmares that plague me when i rest!
did you speak to him?
do you have the flower? welcome, traveler.
give me my sword. who's there?
yes, we talked for a couple of hours.
yes, here it is.
a friend.
did you leave on good terms? did he express any dissatisfaction with you, either in his words or his face?
please, give it to me. (he takes the flower from robin) i know a place where wild thyme blooms, and oxlips and violets grow. it's covered over with luscious honeysuckle, sweet muskroses and sweetbrier.
you're not asleep yet, sir? the king's in bed. he's been in an unusually good mood and has granted many gifts to your household and servants. this diamond is a present from him to your wife for her boundless hospitality. (he hands macbeth a diamond)
no, none at all.
titania sleeps there sometimes at night, lulled to sleep among the flowers by dances and other delights. snakes shed their skin there, and the shed skin is wide enough to wrap a fairy in. i'll put the juice of this flower on titania's eyes, and fill her with horrible delusions and desires. (he gives robin part of the flower) you take some of it too, and look around in this part of the forest. a sweet athenian lady is in love with a young man who wants nothing to do with her. put some of this flower's juice on his eyes, and make sure to do it in such a way that the next thing he sees will be the lady. you'll be able to tell it's him because he's wearing athenian clothes. do it carefully, so that he'll end up loving her more than she loves him. and then make sure to meet me before the rooster's first crow at dawn.
because we were unprepared for the king's visit, we weren't able to entertain him as well as we would have wanted to.
try to remember how you might have offended him, and try to avoid spending time with him until his anger has cooled a little. right now he's so angry that even if he harmed you physically, he'd still be raging.
don't worry, sir. i'm at your service.
everything's ok. i had a dream last night about the three witches. at least part of what they said about you was true.
some villain has told lies about me.
come, dance in a circle and sing a fairy song, and then go off for a while to do your work. some of you will kill the worms infesting the rosebuds, some of you will fight with bats to get their leathery wings, so we can make coats for my small elves. some of you will keep that loud owl away, the one that hoots and wonders every night at us dainty fairies. sing me to sleep now, and then go off to do your duties and let me rest.
i don't think about them now. but when we have an hour to spare we can talk more about it, if you're willing.
that's what i'm afraid of. i suggest you lay low until his rage cools a little. in the meantime, come home with me, and when the time is right i'll take you to talk to him. please go. here's my key. if you go outside, arm yourself.
(singing) snakes with forked tongues, and porcupines, don't be seen. deadly lizards, don't be mean. don't come near our fairy queen.
whenever you like.
arm myself?
(singing) nightingale, melodiously sing our sweet lullaby. lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby. let no harm or spell or charm come near our lovely lady. say good night with a lullaby.
if you stick with me, when the time comes, there will be something in it for you.
brother, i'm giving you good advice. arm yourself. i'd be a liar if i told you nobody wanted to hurt you. i've told you what i've seen and heard, but i've toned it down a lot. i've spared you you the full extent of the horror that threatens you. now please go.
(singing) spiders with your webs, stay away. you long-legged things, begone!
i'll do whatever you say, as long as i can do it with a clear conscience.
will i hear from you soon?
black beetles, don't come near. worms and snails, don't be bad.
rest easy in the meantime.
i'll help you through this business.
(singing) nightingale, melodiously sing our sweet lullaby. lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby. let no harm or spell or charm come near our lovely lady. say good night with a lullaby.
thank you, sir. you do the same.
a gullible father and a brother who's so innocent that he can't suspect anyone else of wanting to hurt him, these are the two fools i need for my plan to work. i know exactly how to proceed. if i can't have an estate by birthright, then i'll get it by being clever. any trick that works is good for me.
okay, let's go! everything's fine now. one of us will stay and stand guard.
(to the servant) go and tell your mistress to strike the bell when my drink is ready. get yourself to bed.
did my father hit one of my attendants for scolding his fool?
(he squeezes flower juice on titania 's eyelids) whatever you see first when you wake up, think of it as your true love. love him and yearn for him, even if he's a lynx, a cat, a bear, a leopard, or a wild boar. whatever's there when you wake up will be dear to you. wake up when something nasty is nearby.
is this a dagger i see in front of me, with its handle pointing toward my hand? (to the dagger) come, let me hold you. (he grabs at the air in front of him without touching anything) i don't have you but i can still see you. fateful apparition, isn't it possible to touch you as well as see you? or are you nothing more than a dagger created by the mind, a hallucination from my fevered brain? i can still see you, and you look as real as this other dagger that i'm pulling out now. (he draws a dagger) you're leading me toward the place i was going already, and i was planning to use a weapon just like you. my eyesight must either be the one sense that's not working, or else it's the only one that's working right. i can still see you, and i see blood splotches on your blade and handle that weren't there before. (to himself) there's no dagger here. it's the murder i'm about to do that's making me think i see one. now half the world is asleep and being deceived by evil nightmares. witches are offering sacrifices to their goddess hecate. old man murder, having been roused by the howls of his wolf, walks silently to his destination, moving like tarquin tarquin was a roman prince who sneaked into a roman wife's bedroom in the middle of the night and raped her. tarquin , as quiet as a ghost. (speaking to the ground) hard ground, don't listen to the direction of my steps. i don't want you to echo back where i am and break the terrible stillness of this moment, a silence that is so appropriate for what i'm about to do. while i stay here talking, duncan lives. the more i talk, the more my courage cools. 
yes, ma'am.
my love, you look like you're about to faint from wandering in the woods for so long, and to tell you the truth, i've gotten us lost.
i'm going now. the murder is as good as done. the bell is telling me to do it. don't listen to the bell, duncan, because it summons you either to heaven or to hell.
he constantly offends me. every hour he comes out with some horrible new offense that puts us all on edge. i won't stand for it. his knights are getting out of control, and he himself reprimands us about every little detail. when he comes back from hunting, i'm not going to speak to him. tell him i'm sick. and if you're not as attentive in serving him as you used to be, that'll be good. i'll take responsibility for it.
we'll take a rest, if you think it's a good idea, and wait until daylight when things will be easier.
the alcohol that got the servants drunk has made me bold. the same liquor that quenched their thirst has fired me up. listen! quiet! that was the owl that shrieked, with a scary "good night" like the bells they ring before they execute people. macbeth must be killing the king right now. the doors to duncan's chamber are open, and the drunk servants make a mockery of their jobs by snoring instead of protecting the king. i put so many drugs in their drinks that you can't tell if they're alive or dead.
he's coming, ma'am. i hear him.
let's do that, lysander. find something to cushion you while you sleep. i'm going to rest my head on this little slope.
(from offstage) who's there? what is it?
be as lazy and neglectful as you like around him, you and the other servants. i want it to become an issue. if he doesn't like it, he can go live with my sister. i know she feels the same way about him that i do, and she'll stand her ground. that useless old man still thinks he can wield all the powers he's given away. i swear, old fools become like babies again. you can't just flatter them; you also have to discipline them when you see that they're misguided. remember what i've told you.
we can both sleep together on the grass. we'll have one heart, one bed, two bodies, and one faithful vow.
oh no, i'm afraid the servants woke up, and the murder didn't happen. for us to attempt murder and not succeed would ruin us. (she hears a noise.) listen to that! i put the servants' daggers where macbeth would find them. he couldn't have missed them. if duncan hadn't reminded me of my father when i saw him sleeping, i would have killed him myself.
very well, ma'am.
no, lysander. please, for my sake, sleep a little farther away. don't sleep so close to me.
my husband!
and make sure the servants are less friendly to his knights. don't worry about the consequences. tell your men as much. i want this to provoke confrontations, so i can give him a piece of my mind. i'll write to my sister and tell her my plans. now go, set up for dinner.
oh, sweetheart, i didn't mean anything naughty when i said that. when lovers talk to each other, their hearts should understand each other. i just meant that our hearts are joined, so we can almost think of them as one heart. our two bodies are linked together by the promises we've made to each other, so there are two bodies and one faithful vow. so let me sleep next to you. if i lie next to you, i won't lie to you, i'll be faithful and respect you.
i have done the deed. did you hear a noise?
if i can disguise my voice as well as my appearance, then i'll be able to carry out my plan perfectly. i was banished, but hopefully i can serve the very king who condemned me. i love my master, and he'll find me very hard-working.
lysander's got a way with words. i would certainly be rude and shameful if i had implied that you were a liar. but please, darling, sleep a little farther away so we can behave properly. it's only proper for a well-behaved bachelor and a well-behaved girl to be physically separated like this. stay away for now, and good night, my sweet friend. i hope your love for me remains this strong for your entire life!
i heard the owl scream and the crickets cry. didn't you say something?
don't make me wait for dinner even a moment. get it ready immediately.
amen to that. i hope my life ends before my loyalty to you does. i'll sleep over here. sleep well!
when?
(to kent) well now, who are you?
you sleep well too.
just now.
a man, sir.
i've been through the entire forest, but i haven't found any athenian man to use the flower on. (he sees lysander and hermia) wait a second, who's this? he's wearing athenian clothes. this must be the guy who rejected the athenian girl. and here's the girl, sleeping soundly on the damp and dirty ground. pretty girl! she shouldn't lie near this rude and heartless man. (he puts flower juice on lysander 's eyelids) jerk, i throw all the power of this magic charm on your eyes. when you wake up, let love keep you from going back to sleep. wake up when i'm gone, because now i have to go to oberon.
as i came down?
what's your profession? what do you want from me?
stop, demetrius! stop, even if only to kill me.
yes.
i kent interprets "your profession" as "your declaration" rather than "your job." i profess that i'm as good as i seem, i'll faithfully serve a master who trusts me, love those who are honest, talk with those who are wise and don't talk too much. i'm god-fearing, i fight if i must, and i don't eat fish.
i'm telling you, get out of here, and don't follow me around like this.
listen! who's sleeping in the second chamber?
but who are you?
oh, will you leave me alone in the dark? don't.
donalbain.
an honest guy who's as poor as the king.
stay here at your own risk. i'm going on alone.
(looking at his bloody hands) this is a sorry sight.
if you're as poor a subject as he is a king, you definitely are poor. what do you want?
oh, i'm out of breath from this foolish chase. the more i pray, the less i get out of it. hermia is lucky, wherever she is, because she has beautiful eyes. how did her eyes get so bright? not from crying. if that's the case, tears wash my eyes more than hers. no, no, i'm as ugly as a bear, since animals that see me run away in terror. so it's no surprise that demetrius runs away from me as if i were a monster. what evil and deceitful mirror made me think i could rival hermia's starry eyes? (she sees lysander) but who's this here? lysander, on the ground? is he dead or sleeping? i don't see any blood or injuries, lysander, if you're alive, wake up.
that's a stupid thing to say.
to work as a servant.
(waking up) i'd even run through fire if you told me to. radiant, beautiful helena! i feel like mother nature has allowed me to see into your heart, as if by magic. where is demetrius? oh, i'd kill that name with my sword if i could!
one of the servants laughed in his sleep, and one cried, "murder!" and they woke each other up. i stood and listened to them, but then they said their prayers and went back to sleep.
who do you want to work for?
don't say that, lysander. don't say that. why do you care that he loves hermia? what does it matter? hermia still loves you, so be happy.
malcolm and donalbain are asleep in the same room.
you.
happy with hermia? no. i regret all the boring time i wasted with her. i don't love hermia; i love helena. who wouldn't love a dove more than a crow? a man's desires are influenced by his logical mind, and it's simply logical that you're more worthy of love than hermia is.
one servant cried, "god bless us!" and the other replied, "amen," as if they had seen my bloody hands. listening to their frightened voices, i couldn't reply "amen" when they said "god bless us!"
do you know me?
fruits and vegetables don't ripen until the right season of the year. likewise, i'm young, and my sense of reason has just ripened. i can finally see the light. my logic has more control over my desires than it used to, and it's telling me to look into your eyes, where i see every love story ever told.
don't think about it so much.
no, sir, but there's something about your face that makes me want to serve you.
why does everyone always make fun of me? what have i done to deserve this kind of treatment from you? is it not enough, is it not enough, young man, that i'll never be pretty enough to get a kind look from demetrius? do you have to harp on my inadequacy? my god, it's wrong for you to woo me in such a cruel, disdainful way. but goodbye. i have to tell you, i thought you were a much kinder person than this. oh, how awful that a lady who's been rejected by one man should therefore be treated horribly by another one!
but why couldn't i say "amen"? i desperately needed god's blessing, but the word "amen" stuck in my throat.
what do you see in my face?
she doesn't see hermia, hermia, keep sleeping, and don't come near me ever again! eating too many sweets makes people sick to their stomachs, and people always hate the mistakes they made in the past worse than anyone else hates those mistakes. hermia, you're the sweet i've had too much of, and the mistake i used to make, so i hate you more than anyone else does., i'll use all my talents and efforts to serve helen and bring her honor.
we can't think that way about what we did. if we do, it'll drive us crazy.
authority.
(waking up) help me, lysander, help me! get this snake off of my chest. oh, my god! what a terrible dream i just had! lysander, look how i'm shaking from fear. i thought a snake was eating my heart while you sat smiling and watching. lysander!, what, is he gone?, lysander, my lord!, what, is he out of earshot? gone? no answer, nothing? oh, god, where are you? say something if you can hear me. say something, please! i'm almost fainting with fear. nothing? then i guess you're nowhere nearby. i'll find you, or die, right away.
i thought i heard a voice cry, "sleep no more! macbeth is murdering sleep." innocent sleep. sleep that soothes away all our worries. sleep that puts each day to rest. sleep that relieves the weary laborer and heals hurt minds. sleep, the main course in life's feast, and the most nourishing.
what work can you do?
are we all here?
what are you talking about?
i can be discreet in honorable matters, ride a horse, run, tell a good story badly, and deliver a plain message bluntly. i'm good at everything that ordinary men can do. the best thing about me is that i'm hardworking.
right on time. this is the perfect place to rehearse. this clearing will be the stage, and this hawthorn bush will be our dressing room. let's put on our play exactly as we'll perform it for the duke.
the voice kept crying, "sleep no more!" to everyone in the house. "macbeth has murdered sleep, and therefore macbeth will sleep no more."
how old are you?
peter quince, 
who said that? why, my worthy lord, you let yourself become weak when you think about things in this cowardly way. go get some water and wash this bloody evidence from your hands. why did you carry these daggers out of the room? they have to stay there. go take them back and smear the sleeping guards with the blood.
not young enough to fall in love with a woman because she sings well, but not old enough to dote on a woman for any reason. i'm forty-eight.
what is it, jolly bottom?
i can't go back. i'm afraid even to think about what i've done. i can't stand to look at it again.
follow me. you'll work for me. if i still like you after dinner, i won't send you away yet., hey, dinnertime! dinner! where's my fool?, go call my fool and have him come here.
there are things in this comedy of pyramus and thisbe that will never work. first of all, pyramus has to take out a sword to kill himself, which the ladies in the audience won't be able to stand. what should we do about that?
coward! give me the daggers. dead and sleeping people can't hurt you any more than pictures can. only children are afraid of scary pictures. if duncan bleeds i'll paint the servants' faces with his blood. we must make it seem like they're guilty.
you, sir, where's my daughter?
by god, that's a real problem, it's true.
where is that knocking coming from? what's happening to me, that i'm frightened of every noise? (looking at his hands) whose hands are these? ha! they're plucking out my eyes. will all the water in the ocean wash this blood from my hands? no, instead my hands will stain the seas scarlet, turning the green waters red.
i beg your pardon, sir, 
i think we'll have to leave out all the killing, come to think of it.
my hands are as red as yours, but i would be ashamed if my heart were as pale and weak.
what did that guy say? call the numbskull back in here.
not at all! i've got a plan that will fix everything. write me a prologue that i can recite to the audience before the play starts. i'll tell them that we won't hurt anyone with our swords, and that pyramus isn't really dead. and to make it even clearer, we can tell them that i'm playing pyramus but i'm not really pyramus, really, i'm bottom the weaver. that'll keep them from being afraid.
i hear someone knocking at the south entry. let's go back to our bedroom. a little water will wash away the evidence of our guilt. it's so simple! you've lost your resolve.
where's my fool? you'd think everyone was asleep.
all right, we'll have a prologue then. we'll write it in alternating eight- and six-syllable lines, just like in a ballad.
listen! there's more knocking. put on your nightgown, in case someone comes and sees that we're awake. snap out of your daze.
so what's going on? where's that dog?
no, add a couple more syllables. make it eight and eight.
rather than have to think about my crime, i'd prefer to be completely unconscious.
he says your daughter's not feeling well, my lord.
won't the ladies be scared of the lion?
wake duncan with your knocking. i wish you could!
why didn't the jerk come back to me when i called him?
i'm really worried about that.
this is a lot of knocking! come to think of it, if a man were in charge of opening the gates of hell to let people in, he would have to turn the key a lot.
sir, he told me quite bluntly that he didn't feel like it.
sirs, you ought to think to yourself, bringing in, god forbid!, a lion amongst ladies is really terrible. there's no scarier wild bird than the living lion, and we should remember that.
knock, knock, knock! (pretending he's the gatekeeper in hell) who's there, in the devil's name? maybe it's a farmer who killed himself because grain was cheap. (talking to the imaginary farmer) you're here just in time! i hope you brought some handkerchiefs; you're going to sweat a lot here.
didn't feel like it?
so we need another prologue to tell everyone he's not a real lion.
knock, knock! who's there, in the other devil's name? maybe it's some slick, two-faced con man who lied under oath. but he found out that you can't lie to god, and now he's going to hell for perjury. come on in, con man.
my lord, i don't know what's going on, but it seems to me that your highness isn't being treated as politely as before. the servants, the duke, and your daughter all seem to be treating you less kindly.
no, we can just announce the actor's name, and let his face show through the lion costume, and have him say something himself. he should say the following, or something else to the same defect bottom means to say "something to the same effect." defect , "ladies," or "lovely ladies," "i would like to ask you" or "i would like to request of you" or "i would like to beg you" "not to be afraid, and not to tremble with fear. i value your lives as highly as my own. if you thought i was a real lion, i would be risking my life. but no, i am not at all a lion. i am a man, just like other men." and then he should say his name, and tell them plainly that he's snug the carpenter.
knock, knock, knock! who's there? maybe it's an english tailor who liked to skimp on the fabric for people's clothes. but now that tight pants are in fashion he can't get away with it. come on in, tailor. you can heat your iron up in here.
huh! do you really mean that?
all right, that's what we'll do then. but there are two things we still have to figure out. how are we going to bring moonlight into a room? because, you know, pyramus and thisbe meet by moonlight.
knock, knock! never a moment of peace! who are you? ah, this place is too cold to be hell. i won't pretend to be the devil's porter anymore. i was going to let someone from every profession into hell.
please forgive me if i'm mistaken, my lord, but i can't keep quiet when i think you're being insulted.
will the moon be shining on the night we're performing our play?
i'm coming, i'm coming! please, don't forget to leave me a tip.
no, you're just reminding me of something i've also noticed. i've felt neglected recently, but i decided that it was more likely that i was being hypersensitive than that they were intentionally unkind. i'll look into it further. but where's my fool? i haven't seen him for two days.
we need a calendar! look in the almanac. look up moonshine, look up moonshine!
did you go to bed so late, my friend, that you're having a hard time getting up now?
ever since cordelia left for france, sir, the fool has been depressed.
(he takes out a book) yes, the moon will shine that night.
that's right sir, we were drinking until a.m., and drink, sir, makes a man do three things.
let's not talk about it. i've noticed it myself. go and tell my daughter i want to speak with her.
well then, you can leave one of the windows open in the big hall where we'll be performing, and the moon can shine in through the window.
what three things does drink make a man do?
and you, go call my fool.
yes, or else someone will have to come in carrying a bundle of sticks and a lantern and say he's come to disfigure, bottom means "figure" (symbolize), not disfigure. disfigure, or represent, the character of moonshine, because the man in the moon is supposed to carry sticks and a lantern. but there's still another problem: we need to have a wall in the big hall, because according to the story, pyramus and thisbe talked through a little hole in a wall.
drinking turns your nose red, it puts you to sleep, and it makes you urinate. lust it turns on but also turns off. what i mean is, drinking stimulates desire but hinders performance. therefore, too much drink is like a con artist when it comes to your sex drive. it sets you up for a fall. it gets you up but it keeps you from getting off. it persuades you and discourages you. it gives you an erection but doesn't let you keep it, if you see what i'm saying. it makes you dream about erotic experiences, but then it leaves you asleep and needing to pee.
you there, sir, come here please. who am i, sir?
you'll never be able to bring in a wall. what do you think, bottom?
i believe drink did all of this to you last night.
the father of the lady of the house, sir.
someone should play the part of wall. he can have some plaster or clay or limestone or something on him to show the audience he's a wall. he can hold his fingers in a v-shape like this, and pyramus and thisbe can whisper to each other through that little crack.
it did, sir. it got me right in the throat. but i got even with drink. i was too strong for it. although it weakened my legs and made me unsteady, i managed to vomit it out and laid it flat on the ground.
"the father of the lady of the house"? you scoundrel! you lowlife son-of-a-bitch! you dog, you peasant!
if we can do that, everything will be all right. now sit down, everybody, and rehearse your parts, pyramus, you start. when you have said your lines, go hide in that bush., everyone else, go there too when you're not onstage.
is your master awake?
i'm sorry, sir, but i'm not any of those things.
(to himself) who are these country bumpkins swaggering around so close to where the fairy queen is sleeping? what? are they about to put on a play? i'll watch. and i'll act in it, too, if i feel like it.
our knocking woke him up. here he comes.
are you making faces at me, you scoundrel? (he hits oswald)
speak, pyramus., thisbe, come forward.
good morning, noble sir.
i won't be hit, my lord.
(as pyramus) thisbe, flowers with sweet odious smells, 
good morning to both of you.
(tripping oswald) or tripped, you lowlife football football (soccer) was considered a lower-class game. football player?
"odors," "odors."
is the king awake, worthy thane?
(to kent) thank you, sir. you serve me well, and i'll love you for it.
(as pyramus) , odors and smells are like your breath, my dearest thisbe dear. but what's that, a voice! wait here a while. i'll be right back!
not yet.
(to oswald) come on, sir, get up and get out of here! i'll teach you to respect your betters. if you want me to trip you again, then stick around. if not, get going. go on. do you know what's good for you? there you go.
(to himself) that's the strangest pyramus i've ever seen.
he commanded me to wake him up early. i've almost missed the time he requested.
now, my friendly servant, thank you.
am i supposed to talk now?
i'll bring you to him.
(giving kent money) here's a token of my gratitude.
yes, you are. you're supposed to show that you understand that pyramus just went to check on a noise he heard and is coming right back.
i know the burden of hosting him is both an honor and a trouble, but that doesn't mean it's not a trouble just the same.
wait, let me hire him too., here's my fool's cap, a token of my gratitude. (he offers kent his cap)
(as thisbe) most radiant pyramus, you are as white as a lily, and the color of a red rose on a splendid rosebush, a very lively young man and also a lovely jew. you are as reliable as a horse that never gets tired. i'll meet you, pyramus, at ninny's grave.
the work we enjoy is not really work. this is the door.
well hello, my good boy. how are you doing?
that's "ninus's grave," man. and don't say all of that yet. you're supposed to say some of it as a reply to pyramus. you just said all your lines at once, cues and all., pyramus, enter. you missed your cue. it's "never get tired."
i'll wake him, because that's my job.
(to kent) guy, you'd better take my cap.
oh! (as thisbe) as reliable as a horse that never gets tired.
is the king leaving here today?
why, fool?
(as pyramus) if i were handsome, my lovely thisbe, i would still want only you.
he is. he told us to arrange it.
why? for standing up for this unpopular king. no, if you can't adjust to political changes, you'll suffer for it. there, take my fool's cap. this guy here has banished two of his daughters and blessed the third one without intending to. if you work for him, you're a fool and should wear a fool's cap., so how's it going, uncle? i wish i had two fool's caps and two daughters.
help! it's a monster! we're being haunted. run, everyone, run!
the night has been chaotic. the wind blew down through the chimneys where we were sleeping. people are saying they heard cries of grief in the air, strange screams of death, and terrible voices predicting catastrophes that will usher in a woeful new age. the owl made noise all night. some people say that the earth shook as if it had a fever.
why, my boy?
i'll follow you. i'll run you around in circles, through bogs and bushes and woods and thorns. sometimes i'll take the shape of a horse, sometimes i'll take the shape of a hound or a pig or a headless bear. sometimes i'll turn into fire! and i'll neigh like a horse and bark like a hound and grunt like a pig and roar like a bear and burn like a fire at every turn.
it was a rough night.
if i gave them all i own, i'd have two fool's caps for myself. here's mine. ask your daughters for another one.
why are they running away? this is some joke of theirs to scare me.
i'm too young to remember anything like it.
watch out, boy, remember i can whip you.
oh, bottom, you've changed! what have you got on your head?
oh, horror, horror, horror! this is beyond words and beyond belief!
i get whipped like a dog for telling the truth, while lady bitch gets to stand around the fire and stink the place up with her false words.
what do you think i've got on my head? you're acting like an ass, don't you think?
what's the matter?
a constant pain to me!
god bless you, bottom, god bless you. you've been changed. reborn.
the worst thing imaginable has happened. a murderer has broken into god's temple macduff compares duncan's corpse to a church that has been broken into, which confuses his listeners. god's temple and stolen the life out of it.
i'll recite something for you, guy.
i see what they're up to. they want to make an ass of me, to scare me if they can. but i won't leave this spot, no matter what they do. i'll walk up and down and sing a song, so they'll know i'm not afraid. (singing) the blackbird with its black feathers and its orange-and-tan beak, the thrush with its clear voice, the wren with its small, piping chirp, 
what are you talking about? "the life"?
yes, do that.
(waking up) what angel is this who's waking me up from my bed of flowers?
do you mean the king?
listen up, uncle. have more than you show, speak less than you know, lend less than you owe. ride more than you walk, don't believe everything you hear, don't bet everything on one throw of the dice, leave behind your booze and your whore, and stay indoors, and you'll end up with more than two tens to a twenty.
(singing) the finch, the sparrow, and the lark, the gray cuckoo with his simple song that many men hear but they don't dare say no to it, 
go into the bedroom and see for yourself. what's in there will make you freeze with horror. don't ask me to talk about it. go look and then do the talking yourselves.
that makes no sense, fool. it's nothing.
of course they don't say "no"! who'd waste his time talking to such a stupid bird? who'd bother to accuse a bird of lying, cuckoos symbolize cuckolds (men whose wives cheat on them). the cuckoo's song was sometimes imagined as a mocking accusation that the men who hear it are cuckolds. a bird of lying, even if the bird were telling him that his wife was cheating on him?
wake up, wake up! ring the alarm bell. murder and treason! banquo and donalbain, malcolm! wake up! shake off sleep, which looks like death, and look at death itself! get up, get up, and look at this image of doomsday! malcolm! banquo! get up from your beds as if you were rising out of your own graves, and walk like ghosts to come witness this horror. ring the bell.
in that case it's like the words of an unpaid lawyer. you paid me nothing for it. can't you make any use of nothing, uncle?
please sing again, sweet human. i love to listen to your voice, and i love to look at your body. i know this is the first time i've ever seen you, but you're so wonderful that i can't help swearing to you that i love you.
what's going on? why is that terrifying trumpet calling together everyone who's sleeping in the house? speak up and tell me!
why, no, boy. nothing can be made out of nothing.
i don't think you've got much of a reason to love me. but to tell you the truth, reason and love have very little to do with each other these days. it's too bad some mutual friend of theirs doesn't introduce them. ha, ha! no, i'm just kidding.
oh gentle lady, my news isn't fit for your ears. if i repeated it to you, it would kill you as soon as you heard it.
(to kent) please tell him that his income is nothing, now that he's given his lands away. he won't believe a fool.
you're as wise as you are beautiful.
oh banquo, banquo, the king has been murdered!
you're a bitter fool.
no, that's not true. but if i were smart enough to get out of this forest, i'd be wise enough to satisfy myself.
how horrible! what, in our own house?
do you know the difference, my boy, between a bitter fool and a sweet one?
don't bother wishing you could leave this forest, because you're going to stay here whether you want to or not. i'm no ordinary fairy. i rule over the summer, and i love you. so come with me. i'll give you fairies as servants, and they'll bring you jewels from the depths of the ocean, and sing to you while you sleep on a bed of flowers. and i'll turn you into a spirit like us, so you won't die as humans do., come here, peaseblossom, cobweb, moth, and mustardseed!
it would be a terrible event no matter where it happened. dear macduff, i beg you, tell us you were lying and say it isn't so.
no, son. tell me.
ready.
if i had only died an hour before this event i could say i had lived a blessed life. because from this moment on, there is nothing worth living for. everything is a sick joke. the graceful and renowned king is dead. the wine of life has been poured out, and only the dregs remain.
bring here the gentleman who advised you to give away your land. you can stand in his place. the sweet and bitter fool will appear right away. the sweet fool in a fool's costume, that's me. the bitter one is the other one, that's you.lear
me too.
what's wrong?
are you calling me a fool, boy?
me too.
you are, but you don't know it yet. the source from which your royal blood comes has been stopped.
well, you've given away all your other rightful titles. the title of "fool" is the only one left.
and me too.
your royal father is murdered.
this isn't entirely a joke, your highness.
where should we go?
who did it?
no. i wish i could be a complete joker, but so many lords and important men are also playing fools that i can't have a monopoly on it. ladies too, they're always snatching away my role as the biggest fool., uncle, give me an egg, and i'll give you two crowns.
be kind and polite to this gentleman. follow him around. leap and dance for him. feed him apricots and blackberries, with purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries. steal honey from the bumblebees, and make candles out of the bees' wax. light them with the light of glowworms, so my love will have light when he goes to bed and wakes up. pluck off colorful butterfly wings, and use them to fan moonbeams away from his eyes as he sleeps. bow to him, fairies, and curtsy to him.
it seems that the guards who were supposed to be protecting his chamber did it. their hands and faces were all covered with blood. so were their daggers, which we found on their pillows, unwiped. they stared at us in confusion. no one's life should have been entrusted to them.
which two crowns would those be?
hello, mortal!
and yet i still regret the anger that drove me to kill them.
well, when i cut the egg in half and eat the whites, the yolk will be in two parts like two golden crowns. when you cut your own crown and kingdom in half and gave away both parts, you were as foolish as the old man in the old story who carries his donkey on his back instead of letting the donkey carry him. you didn't have much brains inside the bald crown of your head when you gave away the gold crown of your kingdom. if i'm telling the truth like a fool in saying all this, whip the first person who thinks i sound foolish. (he sings) fools have had a hard time this year. they've been displaced by wise men who've grown foolish. these men no longer know how to use their brains, and they don't know how to behave except by foolishly imitating others.
hello!
what did you do that for?
when did you become so fond of singing, boy?
hello!
is it possible to be wise, bewildered, calm, furious, loyal, and neutral all at once? nobody can do that. the violent rage inspired by my love for duncan caused me to act before i could think rationally and tell myself to pause. there was duncan, his white skin all splattered with his precious blood. the gashes where the knives had cut him looked like wounds to nature itself. then right next to him i saw the murderers, dripping with blood, their daggers rudely covered in gore. who could have restrained himself, who loved duncan and had the courage to act on it?
i've been singing ever since you made your daughters into your mothers by giving them all your power. that's when you gave them the spanking paddle and pulled your pants down, (he sings) then your daughters wept for joy, and i sang in sadness, seeing such a king become a child and a fool. please, uncle, hire a teacher who can teach your fool to lie. i want to learn how to lie.
hello!
help me out of here, quickly!
if you lie, boy, we'll have you whipped.
i beg your pardon, sirs., please tell me your name, sir?
take care of the lady.
i'm amazed how similar you and your daughters are. they want to whip me for telling the truth, you want to whip me for lying, and sometimes i'm even whipped for keeping quiet. i'd rather be anything besides a fool. and yet i wouldn't want to be you, uncle. when you gave away pieces of your kingdom, it's as if you cut off pieces on both sides of your brain and left nothing in the middle. here comes the owner of one piece.
cobweb.
(speaking so that only donalbain can hear) why are we keeping quiet? the two of us have the most to say in this matter.
what's going on, daughter? why are you frowning like that? i think you've been frowning too much recently.
i'd like to get to know you better, mr. cobweb. if i cut my finger, i'll use you as a bandage to stop the bleeding., and your name, sir?
(speaking so that only malcolm can hear) what are we going to say here, where danger may be waiting to strike at us from anywhere? let's get out of here. we haven't even begun to weep yet, but there will be time for that later.
(to lear) you were better off when you didn't have to care whether she frowned or not. now you're a big zero, with no digit in front of it to give it value. i'm better than you are, i'm a fool and you're nothing. (to goneril) yes, i promise i'll shut up. that's what you're telling me with that expression on your face, even though you don't say anything. mum, mum, the man who gives away his crust and his crumbs will discover that he needs some crumbs back. (pointing at lear) that guy is an empty pea pod.
peaseblossom.
(speaking so that only donalbain can hear) and the time hasn't come yet for us to turn our deep grief into action.
(to lear) it's not just your fool here who can say whatever he wants, but your whole obnoxious entourage keeps whining and arguing, bursting out in intolerably vicious riots. sir, i thought you could put an end to all this if i told you about it. but judging by what you've said and done recently, i'm worried that you don't mind this chaos, and even approve of it. if that's true, it's shameful. i realize that restraining your knights
please, give my regards to your mother, mrs. peapod, and your father, mr. peapod. good mr. peaseblossom, i'd like to get to know you better too., and you, may i ask what your name is, sir?
take care of the lady.
will damage your reputation with them, and under ordinary circumstances it would be unfortunate to have them see you as an ogre. however, this is an extreme situation, and it's more important to control it than to worry about how you'll look.
mustardseed.
when we're properly dressed for the cold, let's meet and discuss this bloody crime to see if we can figure anything out. right now we're shaken up by fears and doubts. i'm putting myself in god's hands, and with his help i plan to fight against the secret plot that caused this treasonous murder.
you know, uncle, a sparrow once raised a cuckoo in its nest until the cuckoo grew up and bit the sparrow's head off. so the candle went out and now we're all in the dark.
good mr. mustardseed, i know you very well. those cowardly, gigantic sides of beef have been responsible for many of your family members getting eaten as a condiment on beef. i swear to you, many members of your mustard family have made my eyes water before. i look forward to getting to know you better, mr. mustardseed.
so will i.
are you my daughter?
take good care of him. take him to my sleeping area. the moon looks sad to me. when she cries, all the little flowers cry too. they're sad because someone is prevented from having sex, or is having it against her will. keep my lover quiet. bring him to me in silence.
so will we all.
come on, sir. i know you're very wise, and i wish you would use some of that wisdom to snap out of this mood you've been in lately and be your true self again.
i wonder if titania is awake yet, and if she is, i wonder what the first thing she saw was. whatever it is, she must be completely in love with it now.
let's get dressed quickly and then meet in the hall.
even an idiot knows when the normal order has been inverted and the cart is pulling the horse. whoo-hoo, honey, i love you!
ah, here comes my messenger., what's going on, you crazy spirit? what havoc have you wreaked in this part of the forest?
agreed.
does anyone here know who i am? i'm not lear. does lear walk and talk like this? where are his eyes? either his mind is losing its grip or his judgment is screwy., hey, am i awake? i don't think so. who can tell me who i am?
my mistress titania is in love with a monster. while she was sleeping in her bed of flowers, a group of bumbling idiots, rough workmen from athens, got together nearby to rehearse some play they plan to perform on theseus's wedding day. the stupidest one, who played pyramus in their play, finished his scene and went to sit in the bushes to wait for his next cue. i took that opportunity to stick a donkey's head on him. when it was time for him to go back onstage and talk to his thisbe, he came out of the bushes and everyone saw him. his friends ran away as fast as ducks scatter when they hear a hunter's gunshot. one of them was so frightened when he heard my footsteps that he yelled, "murder!" and called for help from athens. they were all so afraid that they completely lost their common sense. they started to become scared of inanimate objects, terrified by the thorns and briars that catch at their clothing and pull off their sleeves and hats. i led them on in this frightened, distracted state, and left sweet
what are you going to do? let's not stay here with them. it's easy for a liar to pretend to feel sorrow when he actually feels none. i'm going to england.
you're lear's shadow.
pyramus there, transformed into someone with a donkey's head. at that exact moment, titania woke up and immediately fell in love with him, an ass.
i'll go to ireland. we'll both be safer if we go separate ways. wherever we go, men will smile at us while hiding daggers. our closest relatives are the ones most likely to murder us.
i'd like to find out who i am, since the obvious signs around me wrongly indicate that i've got daughters.
this is going even better than i planned. but have you put the love juice from the flower on the eyes of that athenian, as i asked you to do?
we haven't yet encountered that danger, and the best thing to do is avoid it entirely. with that in mind, let's get on our horses. we'd better not worry about saying polite good-byes; we should just get away quickly. there's good reason to escape when there's no mercy to be found anymore.
daughters who can make you obey them.
yes, i found him when he was asleep, so that's taken care of too, and the athenian woman was sleeping near him. when he woke up, he must have seen her.
i can remember the past seventy years pretty well, and in all that time i have seen dreadful hours and strange things. but last night's horrors make everything that came before seem like a joke.
(to goneril) what's your name, my dear lady?
(speaking so that only robin can hear) step aside. here's the athenian coming now.
ah yes, old man. you can see the skies. they look like they're upset about what mankind has been doing, and they're threatening the earth with storms. the clock says it's daytime, but dark night is strangling the sun. is it because night is so strong, or because day is so weak, that darkness covers the earth when it's supposed to be light?
this fake astonishment of yours is just like your other pranks. i'm asking you to understand my point of view. since you're old and respected, you should be wise. but you're keeping a hundred knights here who are so disorderly, vulgar, and obnoxious that our noble court is starting to look like a noisy cheap hotel. they're such oversexed gluttons that i feel like we're living in a pub or a whorehouse rather than a respectable palace. it's shameful, and we have to make some changes right away. please, as a favor to me, and if you don't do it for me, i'll do it myself, reduce the number of your knights a little. keep the ones who are older, like you, and who act their age.
(speaking so that only oberon can hear) that's definitely the woman i saw, but it's not the same man.
it's unnatural, just like the murder that has been committed. last tuesday a falcon was circling high in the sky, and it was caught and killed by an ordinary owl that usually goes after mice.
hell and damnation! saddle up my horses. call my knights together. i won't bother you any more, you monstrous bastard. you're not really my daughter, but i still have one daughter left.
why are you so rude to someone who loves you so much? save that kind of harsh language for your worst enemy.
and something else strange happened. duncan's horses, which are beautiful and swift and the best of their breed, suddenly turned wild and broke out of their stalls. refusing to be obedient as usual, they acted like they were at war with mankind.
you hit my servants, and your disorderly mob of knights treat their superiors like servants.
i'm only scolding you now, but i should treat you much worse, because i'm afraid you've given me good reason to curse you. if you killed lysander while he was sleeping, then you're already up to your ankles in blood. you might as well jump right into a bloodbath and kill me, too.
they say the horses ate each other.
you'll be sorry later, but it'll be too late. (to albany) oh, sir, are you here now? you decided to come? answer me, sir. (to attendants) get my horses ready.
he was more faithful to me than the sun is to the daytime. would he have snuck away from me while i was asleep? i'll believe that when i believe that there's a hole through the center of the earth, and the moon has passed all the way through to the other side. the only possibility is that you've murdered him. a murderer should look like you do, so pale and grim.
i saw it with my own eyes. it was an amazing sight. here comes the good macduff.
ingratitude is always hideous, but an ungrateful child is uglier than a sea monster!
that's how someone who's been murdered should look, and that's how i look. you've pierced me through the heart with your cruelty, and yet you, the murderer, look as bright and clear as a star in the sky.
how are things going now?
please, sir, be patient.
what does that have to do with my lysander? where is he? oh, good demetrius, will you find him for me?
can't you see for yourself?
(to goneril) you disgusting vulture, you're a liar! my knights are the finest men who can attend a king, and they meticulously uphold their reputation. oh, how ugly did cordelia's small flaw appear! and now cordelia's small flaw has bent me completely out of shape and sucked all the love out of my heart. oh, lear, lear, lear! (he hits himself on the head) let me beat this portal that let my good sense out and my foolishness in!, go, go, people.
i would rather feed his corpse to my dogs.
does anyone know who committed this horrible crime?
my lord, i have no idea what's upset you, but whatever it is, i had nothing to do with it.
get out, dog! you've driven me to my wit's end. did you kill him, then? from now on i won't even consider you a human being. oh, just tell the truth for once. tell the truth, if only for my sake., would you have even dared to look at him when he was awake? and did you kill him while he was sleeping? oh, how brave of you! a snake could do that as easily as you could. a snake did do it, because no snake ever had a more forked, lying tongue than you have.
the servants macbeth killed.
that may be true, my lord. ah, dear nature, my goddess, listen to me! change your plans if you ever intended for this woman to have children. make her sterile and dry up her womb so that no baby will ever come out of her body and honor her. if she must give birth, make her child a bad seed who will torment her, give her a forehead wrinkled with worry, make her cry until her cheeks are sunken.
you're getting all worked up over a misunderstanding. i didn't kill lysander. ?as far as i know, he's not even dead.
it's too bad he killed them. what good would it have done those men to kill duncan?
let it be a wicked child who mocks the mother who cares for it. make my daughter feel, make her feel how an ungrateful child hurts worse than a snakebite., now let's leave. go!
then please tell me he's all right.
they were paid to betray their master. malcolm and donalbain, the king's two sons, have run away and fled, which makes them the prime suspects.
dear gods in heaven, what's the reason for this?
if i told you that, what would i get out of it?
everything about this is unnatural! what a stupid ambition, causing a son to kill the father who supports him. then it looks like macbeth will become king.
don't even bother to ask the reasons. just let him rant and rave. he's senile.
the privilege of never seeing me again. and now i'm going to leave your despised company. you'll never see me again, whether or not he's dead.
he has already been named king and has left for scone to be crowned.
what, fifty of my knights dismissed all at once? in only two weeks?
i can't go after her when she's in a rage like this. so i'll stay here for a while. sadness gets worse when you haven't had enough sleep. i'll try to sleep a little here. ( demetrius lies down and falls asleep)
where is duncan's body?
what are you talking about, sir?
(to robin) what have you done? you've made a mistake and put the love-juice on someone else, someone who was truly in love. because of your mistake someone's true love must have turned bad, instead of this man's false love being turned into a true love.
it was carried to colmekill to be placed in the tomb of his ancestors, where their bones are kept safe.
i'll tell you. (to goneril) i'm ashamed that you have the power to upset me like this, as though you're worth the tears you're making me shed. damn you! may you feel every pain a father's curse can bring! if i cry again because of you, i'll rip my eyes out of their sockets and throw them and their wet tears down to moisten the earth. has it come to this? then so be it. i have one more daughter who i'm sure is kind. when
in that case, it must be fate. that's the way of the world. for every man who's faithful to his true love, a million end up running after a different lover.
are you going to scone?
she hears what you've done to me, she'll tear up your wolflike face with her fingernails. and then you'll see that despite what you thought, i'll be as powerful as i was before. you'll see, i promise you.
go around the forest, moving faster than the wind, and make sure you find helena of athens., she's lovesick, and her face is pale from all the sighing she's been doing, because sighing is bad for the blood. bring her here with some trick or illusion, and i'll put the charm on his eyes for when she comes.
no, cousin, i'm going to fife.
did you hear that?
i go, i go, look at me go, faster than an arrow from a tartar's the tartars were a people from asia minor famous for their archery tartar's bow.
well, i'll go to scone.
goneril, you know how much i love you, but still i have to say, 
(putting flower juice on demetrius 's eyelids) you purple flower, hit by cupid's arrow, sink into the pupils of this man's eyes. when he sees the girl he should love, make her seem as bright to him as the evening star. young man, when you wake up, if she's nearby, beg her to cure your lovesickness.
i hope things go well there. good-bye! and let's hope things don't get worse.
shush, please. come, sir, no more., oswald, come here! (to fool) and you, sir, you're more of a rascal than a fool. go follow your master.
helena is nearby, boss. the young man who i mistook for this one is there too, begging her to love him. should we watch this ridiculous scene? lord, what fools these mortals are!
farewell, old man.
uncle lear, uncle lear, wait. take your fool with you. a fox you've trapped and such a daughter should both be slaughtered, if my fool's cap is worth a rope to bind them. so the fool follows you.
step aside. the noise they're making will wake up demetrius.
may god's blessing go with you and with all who turn bad into good, and enemies into friends!
my father can't think straight, a hundred knights! just imagine the risk we run in letting him keep a hundred knights around! he could use them to strong-arm us into bowing to every little whim of his, and keep us at his mercy., oswald, where are you?
then the two of them will both pursue one girl. that will be funny enough, and preposterous situations are my favorite thing.
now you have it all: you're the king, the thane of cawdor, and the thane of glamis, just like the weird women promised you. and i suspect you cheated to win these titles. but it was also prophesied that the crown would not go to your descendants, and that my sons and grandsons would be kings instead. if the witches tell the truth, which they did about you, maybe what they said about me will come true too. but shhh! i'll shut up now.
you may be exaggerating the risks.
why do you think i'm making fun of you when i tell you i love you? people don't cry when they're mocking someone.
(indicating banquo) here's our most important guest.
that's better than exaggerating our trust. it's always better to get rid of what you're scared of than to be afraid. i know how his mind works. i've written to my sister telling her everything he's said. if she welcomes him and his hundred knights after i've shown how inappropriately he's behaved, 
look, when i swear that i love you, i cry, and when someone cries while he's making a promise, he's usually telling the truth. how can it seem like i'm making fun of you, when my tears prove that i'm sincere?
if we forgot him, our big celebration wouldn't be complete, and that wouldn't be any good.
here, ma'am.
you get trickier and trickier. you've made the same promises to me and to hermia, they can't both be true! they must both be false. the promises you're making to me belong to hermia. will you abandon her? if you weighed the promises you made to me against the promises you made to her, they'd come out the same, they both weigh nothing. they're lies.
(to banquo) tonight we're having a ceremonial banquet, and i want you to be there.
well, oswald? have you written that letter to my sister yet?
i wasn't thinking clearly when i made those promises to her.
whatever your highness commands me to do, it is always my duty to do it.
yes, ma'am.
and i don't believe you're thinking clearly now, as you break those promises.
are you going riding this afternoon?
take some men and horses and go to her. tell her everything that worries me. add details of your own to back up what i'm saying. now go, and hurry back.
demetrius loves her, and he doesn't love you.
yes, my good lord.
no, no, my husband, i'm not angry that you urge me to deal more gently with my father. but you're showing a lack of wisdom that that is much more noticeable than your tenderness toward him.
(waking up) oh helena, you goddess, you divine and perfect nymph! what can i compare your eyes to? crystal isn't as clear as they are. oh, your lips are as ripe as a pair of tempting cherries touching each other! the pure white of the snow on a mountaintop seems black as a crow's wing next to the whiteness of your hands. oh, let me kiss your beautiful white hand. it'll make me so happy!
we would have liked to have heard your good advice, which has always been serious and helpful, at the council today, but we'll wait until tomorrow. are you riding far?
maybe you know more than i do. but people often screw things up trying to make them better.
damn it! i see you're all determined to gang up on me for a few laughs. if you had any manners at all, you wouldn't treat me like this. can't you just hate me, as i know you do? do you have to get together to humiliate me too? if you were real men, as you pretend to be, you wouldn't treat a lady this way, making vows and promises and praising my beauty when i know you're really both disgusted by me. you're competing for
i'm going far enough that i'll be riding from now until dinner. unless my horse goes faster than expected, i will be back an hour or two after sunset.
no, not at all, 
hermia's love, and now you're competing to see which one of you can make fun of me the most. that's a great idea, a really manly thing to do, making a poor girl cry! no respectable person would offend an innocent girl just to have some fun.
don't miss our feast.
all right, all right. time will tell.
don't be cruel, demetrius. i know you love hermia, and you know i know it. right here, right now, i swear i'm giving up all my claims on her and handing her to you. in exchange, give up your claim to love helena, since i love her and will love her until i die.
my lord, i won't miss it.
(to kent, giving him letters) go ahead of us and deliver these letters to the earl of gloucester. answer my daughter's questions about the letter, but don't tell her anything else you know. if you're not quick enough, i'll get there before you.
nobody's ever gone to so much trouble just to make fun of someone.
we hear that the princes, those murderers, have hidden in england and ireland. they haven't confessed to cruelly murdering their own father, and they've been making up strange lies to tell their hosts. but we can talk more about that tomorrow, when we'll discuss matters of state that concern us both. hurry up and get to your horse. good-bye, until you return tonight. is fleance going with you?
i won't sleep until i've delivered your letter, my lord.
lysander, keep your hermia. i don't want her. if i ever loved her, all that love is gone now. my love for her was temporary. now i'll love helena forever.
yes, my good lord. it's time we hit the road.
if a man's brain were in his feet, wouldn't it be susceptible to frostbite?
helena, it's not true.
i hope your horses are fast and surefooted. and with that, i send you to them. farewell.
yes, boy.
don't insult a deep love that you don't understand, or you'll pay the price. look, here comes the woman you love.
everybody may do as they please until seven o'clock tonight. in order to make your company even more enjoyable, i'm going to keep to myself until suppertime. until then, god be with you!
in that case, cheer up. your brains won't need slippers to protect them from frostbite, since your brains aren't in your feet, if they were you wouldn't take this useless journey to see regan.
it's hard to see clearly in the dark of night, but it's easier to hear well.
(to the servant) you there, let me have a word with you. are those men waiting for me?
ha, ha, ha!
i couldn't see you, lysander, but i heard your voice, and that's how i found you. why did you leave me alone so unkindly?
they're waiting outside the palace gate, my lord.
your other daughter regan will treat you kindly, you'll see. even though she's as similar to goneril as one crabapple is like another, still... i know what i know.
why stay when love tells you to go?
bring them to me.
and what do you know, boy?
but what love could make my lysander leave me?
to be the king is nothing if i'm not safe as the king. i'm very afraid of banquo. there's something noble about him that makes me fear him. he's willing to take risks, and his mind never stops working. he has the wisdom to act bravely but also safely. i'm not afraid of anyone but him. around him, my guardian angel is frightened, just as mark antony's angel supposedly feared octavius caesar. banquo chided the witches when they first called me king, asking them to tell him his own future. then, like prophets, they named him the father to a line of kings. they gave me a crown and a scepter that i can't pass on. someone outside my family will take these things away from me, since no son of mine will take my place as king. if this is true, then i've tortured my conscience and murdered the gracious duncan for banquo's sons. i've ruined my own peace for their benefit. i've handed over my everlasting soul to the devil so that they could be kings. banquo's sons, kings! instead of watching that happen, i will challenge fate to battle and fight to the death. who's there!
i know that regan will taste just like goneril, both of them sour crabapples. do you know why the nose is in the middle of a person's face?
i had to hurry to my love, beautiful helena, who lights up the night better than all those fiery stars. why are you looking for me? didn't you figure out that i left you because i hate you?
now go to the door and stay there until i call for you.
no.
you can't mean what you're saying. it's impossible.
wasn't it just yesterday that we spoke to each other?
why, to keep the eyes on the sides, so that you can see anything that you can't sniff out.
so, she's in on this too! now i see that all three of them have gotten together to play this cruel trick on me. hurtful hermia, you ungrateful girl, have you conspired with these two to provoke me with this horrible teasing? have you forgotten all the talks we've had together, the vows we made to be like sisters to one another, all the hours we spent together, wishing that we never had to say goodbye, have you forgotten? our friendship in our schooldays, our childhood innocence? we used to sit together and sew one flower with our two needles, sewing it on one piece of cloth, sitting on the same cushion, singing one song in the same key, as if our hands, our sides, our voices and our minds were stuck together. we grew together like twin cherries, which seemed to be separate but were also together, two lovely cherries on one stem.
it was yesterday, your highness.
i was wrong to her, 
we seemed to have two separate bodies, but we had one heart. do you want to destroy our old friendship by joining these men to insult your poor friend? it's not friendly, and it's not ladylike. all women would be angry with you for doing it, even though i'm the only one who's hurt by it.
well, did you think about what i said? you should know that it was banquo who made your lives hell for so long, which you always thought was my fault. but i was innocent. i showed you the proof at our last meeting. i explained how you were deceived, how you were thwarted, the things that were used against you, who was working against you, and a lot of other things that would convince even a half-wit or a crazy person to say, "banquo did it!"
do you know how an oyster makes its shell?
i'm completely dumbfounded by what you're saying. i'm not insulting you. it sounds more like you're insulting me.
you explained it all.
no.
come on, confess. didn't you send lysander, as an insult, to follow me around praising my eyes and my face? haven't you made your other love, demetrius, who kicked me with his foot not long ago, call me a goddess and a divine, rare, precious, heavenly creature? why does he talk like that to a girl he can't stand? and why does lysander deny that he loves you, when he loves you so deeply? why would he show me any affection, unless you told him to? why does it matter that i'm not as lucky or lovable as you are and that the love i feel is unrequited? you should pity me for that reason, not hate me.
i did that and more, which brings me to the point of this second meeting. are you so patient and forgiving that you're going to let him off the hook? are you so pious that you would pray for this man and his children, a man who has pushed you toward an early grave and put your family in poverty forever?
me neither. but i know why a snail carries its house on its back.
i don't know what you're talking about.
we are men, my lord.
why?
oh, fine. all right, go ahead, keep up your little game, pretend to be sympathetic, but then nudge each other and wink and make faces at me when i turn my back. keep up your wonderful game. you're doing such a good job on this trick, someone should write a book about it.
yes, you're part of the species called men. just as hounds and greyhounds, mongrels, spaniels, mutts, shaggy lapdogs, swimming dogs, and wolf-dog crossbreeds are all dogs. but if you list the different kinds of dogs according to their qualities, you can distinguish which breeds are fast or slow, which ones are clever, which ones are watchdogs, and which ones hunters. you can classify each dog according to the natural gifts that separate it from all other dogs. it's the same with men. now, if you occupy some place in the list of men that isn't down at the very bottom, tell me. because if that's the case, i will tell you a plan that will get rid of your enemy and bring you closer to me. as long as banquo lives, i am sick. i'll be healthy when he is dead.
so that he always has a roof over his head. he can't give his house away to his daughters, leaving himself without shelter.
if you had any sense of pity, or manners, you wouldn't pretend to fight over me like this. but goodbye. it's partly my own fault, since i followed you here. leaving, or dying, will soon take care of everything.
my lord, i've been so kicked around by the world, and i'm so angry, that i don't even care what i do.
i want to forget what i am. such a kind father!, are my horses ready?
stay, lovely helena. listen to my excuse. my love, my life, my soul, beautiful helena!
i'm the same. i'm so sick of bad luck and trouble that i'd risk my life on any bet, as long as it would either fix my life or end it once and for all.
your attendant asses are getting the horses ready. there's a nice reason why the constellation pleiades has only seven stars in it.
that's a good one.
you both know banquo was your enemy.
because it doesn't have eight?
(to lysander) don't insult her like that, lysander darling.
it's true, my lord.
that's right. you'd make a good fool.
(to lysander) if hermia's begging can't make you stop insulting helena, i can force you to do so.
he's my enemy too, and i hate him so much that every minute he's alive it eats away at my heart. since i'm king, i could simply use my power to get rid of him. but i can't do that, because he and i have friends in common whom i need, so i have to be able to moan and cry over his death in public even though i'll be the one who had him killed. that's why i need your help right now. i have to hide my real plans from the public eye for many important reasons.
i could take back my crown by force, what outrageous ingratitude!
you can't force me any more than hermia can beg me. your threats are no stronger than her whining., helena, i love you. i swear i do. i'll give my life for you, just to prove this guy wrong when he says i don't love you.
we'll do what you want us to, my lord.
if you were my fool, uncle, i'd have you beaten for getting old before your time.
i say that i love you more than he does.
though our lives, 
how's that?
if that's what you say, go fight a duel with me and prove it.
(interrupts him) i can see the determination in your eyes. within the next hour i'll tell you where to go and exactly when to strike. it must be done tonight, away from the palace. always remember that i must be free from suspicion. for the plan to work perfectly, you must kill both banquo and his son, fleance, who keeps him company. getting rid of fleance is as important to me as knocking off banquo. each of you should make up your own mind about whether you're going to do this. i'll come to you soon.
you're not supposed to get old until you're wise.
you're on. let's do it.
we have decided, my lord. we're in.
oh, dear god, don't let me go mad! keep me balanced and sane. i don't want to go mad.
lysander, where are you going with all this?
i'll call for you soon. stay inside.
so, are the horses ready?
(to hermia) get away, you african!
the deal is closed. banquo, if your soul is going to make it to heaven, tonight's the night.
they're ready, my lord.
(to hermia) no, no. he'll act like he's going to break free from you, hermia.
has banquo left the court?
come on, boy.
(to lysander) pretend like you're going to follow me, but then don't come. you're a coward, get out of here!
yes, madam, but he'll be back tonight.
(speaking to the audience) any girl who laughs because i'm going with the king is too foolish to remain a virgin very long.
(to hermia) stop hanging on me, you cat, you thorn. let go of me, or i'll shake you off like a snake.
go tell the king i want to talk to him for a few minutes.
hello, curan.
why have you gotten so rude? what's happened to you, my darling?
no problem, madam.
hello, sir. i just saw your father the lord gloucester and notified him that the duke of cornwall and his wife regan will stay with him here tonight.
your darling? get out, you dark-skinned gypsy! get out, you horrible poison. get out!
if you get what you want and you're still not happy, you've spent everything and gained nothing. it's better to be the person who gets murdered than to be the killer and be tormented with anxiety.
why is that?
are you joking?
what's going on, my lord? why are you keeping to yourself, with only your sad thoughts to keep you company? those thoughts should have died when you killed the men you're thinking about. if you can't fix it, you shouldn't give it a second thought. what's done is done.
i don't know. have you heard the latest news?, i mean the whispered rumors, since that's all they are at this point.
of course he is, and so are you.
we have slashed the snake but not killed it. it will heal and be as good as new, and we'll be threatened by its fangs once again. but the universe can fall apart, and heaven and earth crumble, before i'll eat my meals in fear and spend my nights tossing and turning with these nightmares i've been having. i'd rather be dead than endure this endless mental torture and harrowing sleep deprivation. we killed those men and sent them to rest in peace so that we could gain our own peace. duncan lies in his grave, through with life's troubles, and he's sleeping well. we have already done the worst we can do to him with our treason. after that, nothing can hurt him further, not weapons, poison, rebellion, invasion, or anything else.
no, i haven't. what's going on?
demetrius, i'm ready to fight you as promised.
come on, relax, dear. put on a happy face and look cheerful and agreeable for your guests tonight.
you haven't heard of the war brewing between the dukes of cornwall and albany?
i wish we had a signed legal contract. i can see you don't keep your promises very well. i don't trust you.
that's exactly what i'll do, my love, and i hope you'll do the same. give banquo your special attention. talk to him and look at him in a way that will make him feel important. we're in a dangerous situation, where we have to flatter him and hide our true feelings.
not a word.
what? do you want me to hit hermia, hurt her, kill her? sure, i hate her, but i wouldn't hurt her.
you have to stop talking like this.
you may hear about it soon. goodbye, sir.
(to lysander) can you hurt me any more than by saying you hate me? hate me? why? what's happened to you, my love? am i not hermia? aren't you lysander? i'm as beautiful now as i was a little while ago. you still loved me when we fell asleep, but when you woke up you left me. so you left me, oh, god help me!, for real?
argh! i feel like my mind is full of scorpions, my dear wife. you know that banquo and his son fleance are still alive.
the duke will be here tonight? all the better, in fact it's the best that could happen. his arrival fits perfectly into my plan. my father's ready to arrest my brother, and i have one risky thing to do. fast work and a little luck are all i need., brother, could i have a word with you? come down, brother.
i certainly did, and i never wanted to see you again. so stop hoping and wondering what i mean.
but they can't live forever.
father is on the lookout. get out of here quickly! it has leaked out that you're hiding here. if you leave now, you can take advantage of the darkness and sneak away. you haven't said anything against the duke of cornwall, have you? he's rushing on his way here right now, and regan's with him. have you said anything against cornwall or albany? think about it.
i've spelled it out for you clearly. it's no joke. i hate you and love helena.
that's comforting. they can be killed, it's true. so be cheerful. before the bat flies through the castle, and before the dung beetle makes his little humming noise to tell us it's nighttime, a dreadful deed will be done.
i'm sure of it. i haven't said a word.
oh, no! (to helena) you trickster, you snake! you thief! what, did you sneak in at night and steal my love's heart from him?
what are you going to do?
i hear my father coming. forgive me. i have to pretend to threaten you with my sword. draw your sword too, as if you're defending yourself. be convincing. (loudly) give up! go see my father., bring in some light!(speaking so that only edgar can hear) run, brother. (loudly) torches, bring in the torches! (speaking so that only edgar can hear) goodbye, then.
oh, that's very nice! you ought to be ashamed of yourself! you're going to make me mad enough to answer you? damn you, you faker, you puppet!
it's better you don't know about it until after it's done, when you can applaud it. (to the night) come, night, and blindfold the kindhearted day. use your bloody and invisible hand to tear up banquo's lease on life, which keeps me in fear. (to himself) the sky's getting dark, and the crow is returning home to the woods. the gentle creatures of the day are falling asleep, while night's predators are waking up to look for their prey. (to lady macbeth) you seem surprised at my words, but don't question me yet. bad deeds force you to commit more bad deeds. so please, come with me.
if i had some blood on me it would look like i'd fought more fiercely. (he cuts his own arm) i've seen drunk men do worse than this just fooling around., father, father!, stop, stop!, won't anyone help me?
"puppet"? why "puppet"?, oh, i see where this is going. she's talking about our difference in height. she's paraded in front of him to show off how tall she is. she won him over with her height., does he have such a high opinion of you because i'm so short? is that it? so how short am i, you painted barber pole? tell me. how short am i? i'm not too short to gouge your eyes out with my fingernails.
but who told you to come here and join us?
edmund, where's your wicked brother?
(to lysander and demetrius) please don't let her hurt me, gentlemen, however much you want to tease me. i never was much good with insults. i'm not mean and catty like her. i'm a nice shy girl. please don't let her hit me. maybe you think that because she's shorter than me i can take her.
macbeth.
he was standing here in the dark with his sword pointing at me. he was mumbling some black magic spells, appealing to the moon to help him in his evil plans, 
"shorter!" see, she's doing it again!
we can trust this guy. he was given exactly the same orders we were.
but where is he?
good hermia, please don't act so bitter toward me. i always loved you, hermia, and gave you advice. i never did anything to hurt you, except once, when i told demetrius that you planned to sneak off into this forest. and i only did that because i loved demetrius so much. he followed you. and i followed him because i loved him. but he told me to get lost and threatened to hit me, kick me, even kill me. now just let me go quietly back to athens. i'll carry my mistakes back with me. i won't follow you anymore. please let me go. you see how nave and foolish i've been.
then stay with us. there's still a bit of daylight in the sky. now all the late travellers are hurrying to reach their inns. banquo is almost here.
look, sir, i'm bleeding.
well, get out of here then! what's keeping you?
listen! i hear horses.
where is the villain, edmund?
my stupid heart, which i'm leaving behind here.
(from offstage) hey, give us some light here!
he ran out that way, sir, when he couldn't, 
what, you're leaving it with lysander?
that must be him. the rest of the king's guests are already inside.
follow him, now! go.
no, with demetrius.
you can hear his horses moving around as the servants take them to the stables.
when he couldn't what?
don't be afraid. she can't hurt you, helena.
it's almost a mile to the palace gate, but banquo, like everybody else, usually walks from here to the palace.
when he couldn't persuade me to kill you. i told him that the gods hate men who kill their fathers and unleash all their thunder on them, and that the bond between father and child was sacred. in short, when i told him how firmly opposed i was to his hideous plan, he pulled out his sword and lunged at my defenseless body, cutting my arm. bolstered by righteousness, i prepared to fight, and when he saw my excitement, or perhaps because my shouting scared him, he ran away suddenly.
(to lysander) that's right, hermia won't hurt helena even if you try to help her.
here comes a light! here comes a light!
let him run far away. if he stays in this country he'll be found. and if he's caught, he'll be executed. the duke of cornwall, my master and patron, is arriving tonight. on his authority i'll proclaim that whoever finds edgar and helps bring the murderous coward to
oh, when you get her angry, she's a good fighter, and vicious too. she was a hellcat in school. and she's fierce, even though she's little.
that's him.
justice will be rewarded. whoever helps edgar hide will die.
"little" again? nothing but "little" and "short"!, why are you letting her insult me like this? let me at her!.
prepare yourselves.
after i urged him not to kill you, i saw that he was still determined to do it. enraged, i threatened to expose him. he answered, "you penniless bastard! do you really think that if it came down to my word against yours, anyone would believe you? no. i'd deny whatever evidence you had against me, even if it were in my own handwriting, and turn it all into evidence against you and your plans for treachery. and you must think people are stupid if you believe they wouldn't realize all the motives you have for trying to kill me."
(to hermia) get lost, you dwarf, you tiny little weed, you scrap, you acorn!
it will rain tonight.
oh, how monstrously evil! he said he would deny that he wrote his letter? he cannot truly be my son., listen. the duke's trumpets. i don't know why he's come here. i'll forbid all ships from leaving our harbors. the villain won't escape. the duke will agree with me on that. and i'll send his picture everywhere so that the whole kingdom will know what he looks like., and as for you, my loyal and true son, i'll find some way to make you my heir.
you're doing too much to defend a woman who wants nothing to do with you. leave hermia alone. don't talk about helena. don't take helena's side. if you continue treating hermia so badly, you'll pay for it.
then let the rain come down.
how are you, my friend? ever since i arrived here, just now, i've been hearing strange rumors.
hermia's not holding onto me anymore. follow me if you're brave enough, and we'll fight over helena.
oh, this is treachery! get out of here, good fleance, run, run, run! someday you can get revenge., oh, you bastard!
if they're true, no punishment is harsh enough for the criminal. how are you, my lord?
"follow"? no, i'll walk right next to you, side by side.
who put out the light?
oh, madam, my old heart is broken, broken.
all this fighting is because of you. stay where you are.
wasn't that the best thing to do?
did my father's godson try to kill you? the one whom my father named, your son edgar?
i'm not sticking around here any more. i don't trust you. you might be a better fighter than i am, but my legs are longer and i can run away faster.
there's only one body here. the son ran away.
oh, my lady, i'm ashamed to admit it.
i just can't believe any of this. i don't know what to say.
we failed in half of our mission.
wasn't he friends with all those brawling knights who serve my father?
(to robin) this is all your fault. you make mistakes constantly, or else you cause this kind of trouble on purpose.
well, let's get out of here and tell macbeth what we did accomplish.
i don't know, madam. oh, it's too terrible.
believe me, king of illusions, i made a mistake. didn't you tell me that i'd be able to recognize the man by the athenian clothes he was wearing? so far i've done exactly what i was supposed to do, i put the love potion on an athenian's eyes. and so far i'm pleased with the way things have turned out, since i find all of this commotion very entertaining.
you know your own ranks, so you know where to sit. sit down. from the highest to the lowest of you, i bid you a hearty welcome.
to answer your question, ma'am, yes, he was friendly with those knights.
as you can see, these lovers are looking for a place to fight. hurry up, robin, and make the night dark and cloudy. cover the sky with a low-hanging fog, as dark as hell, and get these overeager rivals so completely lost in the woods that they can't run into each other. imitate lysander's voice and egg demetrius on with insults. then rant for a while in demetrius's voice, and egg lysander on. that way you'll get them away from each other until they're so exhausted that they'll sleep like the dead. ( oberon gives a new flower to robin) when they're asleep, crush some of this flower's juice into lysander's eyes. the flower's juice has the power to erase all the damage that's been done to his eyes, and to make him see normally, the way he used to. when they wake up, all this trouble and conflict will seem like a dream or a meaningless vision. then the lovers will go back to athens, united together until death. while you're busy with that, i'll go see queen titania and ask her once again for the indian boy. and then i'll undo the spell that i cast over her, so she won't be in love with that monster anymore. then everything will be peaceful again.
thanks to your majesty.
then it's no surprise they had a bad influence on him. they probably put him up to killing old man gloucester to get his money. tonight i received a letter from my sister telling me all about them, and warning me not be at home in case they come to stay at my house.
we've got to act fast, my lord of the fairies. night's fading quickly, and in the distance the morning star is shining, warning us that dawn is coming. at dawn, the ghosts that have been wandering around all night go home to the graveyards. the souls of people who weren't buried in holy ground, but instead lie rotting by the side of the road or at the bottom of a river, have already gone back to their wormy graves. they weren't buried in a real graveyard because they committed suicide, and they don't want their shame to be seen in daylight, so they avoid sunlight and stay forever in the darkness of night.
i will walk around and mingle with all of you, playing the humble host. my wife will stay in her royal chair, but at the appropriate time i will have her welcome you all.
and i won't be there either., edmund, i'm told you've acted like a true son to your father.
but we're not like that. we're a different kind of spirit, and we don't have to run away from the sunlight. i like the morning. i often wander around in the woods like a forest ranger until the sun rises in the fiery red sky over the ocean, turning the salty green water to gold. but you should hurry anyway. don't delay. we still have time to get all of this done before daybreak.
say welcome to all of our friends for me, sir, for in my heart they are all welcome.
i just did my duty, sir.
up and down, up and down, i will lead them up and down. the people fear me in the country and the town. goblin, lead them up and down. here comes one of them now.
and they respond to you with their hearts as well. the table is full on both sides. i will sit here in the middle. be free and happy. soon we will toast around the table.
he exposed edgar's murderous plot, and was wounded, as you see there, when trying to apprehend him.
where are you, demetrius, you arrogant bastard? say something.
(approaching the door and speaking to the murderer) there's blood on your face.
are your men searching for him?
(in demetrius's voice) i'm over here, you villain, with my sword out and ready to fight. where are you?
then it must be banquo's.
yes, my lord.
i'm coming.
i'd rather see his blood splattered on your face than flowing through his veins. did you finish him off?
if he's caught, he'll never make trouble for anyone again. feel free to use my authority however you wish in order to apprehend him., as for you, edmund, you've been so loyal and virtuous throughout this whole business. i'd like you to work for me. i need people as trustworthy as you.
(in demetrius's voice) let's go to a flatter area where we can fight more easily.
my lord, his throat is cut. i did that to him.
i'll always be loyal to you, sir.
lysander, say something! you coward, did you run away from me? say something! are you behind some bush? where are you hiding?
you are the best of the cutthroats. but whoever did the same to fleance must also be good. if you cut both their throats, then you are the absolute best.
(to cornwall) thank you, my lord, for your kindness to edmund.
(in lysander's voice) you coward, are you bragging to the stars and telling the bushes that you want a fight, but then you won't come and fight me? come here, you coward! come here, you child! i'll beat you with a stick. it would be shameful to fight you with a sword, the way i would fight with a real man.
most royal sir, fleance has escaped.
you don't know why we came to visit you, 
are you there?
now i'm scared again. otherwise i would have been perfect, as solid as a piece of marble, as firm as a rock, as free as the air itself. but now i'm all tangled up with doubts and fears. but banquo's been taken care of?
yes, and so unexpectedly, at night. there are some important matters we need your advice on, gloucester. my father and my sister have both recently written to me about arguments between them. i realized it would be inconvenient to answer them from home, especially since the king may be on his way there. their messengers are ready, waiting to deliver our response in these matters. so please, old friend, give us some good advice. we need it desperately and immediately.
(in lysander's voice) follow my voice. this isn't a good place to fight.
yes, my good lord. he's lying dead in a ditch, with twenty deep gashes in his head, any one of which would have been enough to kill him.
i'm at your service, madam. both of you are very welcome here.
he's walking ahead of me, and he keeps daring me to follow him. when i reach the place he's calling from, he disappears. this villain is much quicker than i am. i ran after him fast, but he ran away from me faster, so that now here i am in some dark part of the forest where the ground is uneven.
thanks for that. the adult snake lies in the ditch. the young snake that escaped will in time become poisonous and threatening, but for now he has no fangs. get out of here. i'll talk to you again tomorrow.
good morning to you, friend. do you work in this house?
i'll rest here. (he lies down) i hope the pleasant daytime comes soon! as soon as the gray light of early morning appears, i'll find demetrius and get my revenge for this insult.
my royal lord, you're not entertaining the guests. if you don't make your guests know they're welcome, they'll feel like they're paying for their meal. when you just want to eat, it's better to do that at home. when you're eating out with people, you need to have a little more ceremony. otherwise dinner parties would be boring.
yes, i do.
(in lysander's voice) ha, ha, ha! hey, you coward, why aren't you coming?
it's nice of you to remind me. (raising a glass to toast his guests) since good digestion requires a good appetite, and good health requires both of those, here's to good appetites, good digestion, and good health!
where should we stable our horses?
wait for me, if you're not too scared! i know that's why you're running away from me, constantly changing places, you're afraid to stand still and wait for me. you're scared to look me in the eye. where are you now?
why don't you have a seat, your highness?
in the mud.
(in lysander's voice) come here. i'm over here.
we would have all the nobility of scotland gathered under one roof, if only banquo were here. i hope it turns out that he's late out of rudeness, and not because something bad has happened to him.
please, sir, be kind to me and tell me.
no, you're just taunting me. you'll pay for this if i ever see you face-to-face in the daylight. go wherever you want. i'm exhausted; i need to lie down and sleep on this cold ground. but watch out. i'll find you at dawn. (demetrius lies down and sleeps)
his absence means he's broken his promise, sir. if it pleases you, your highness, why don't you sit with us and grace us with your royal company?
i won't be kind to you.
oh, what a long, tedious, exhausting night! i wish it would end. i wish the comforting light of day would shine so i can go back to athens and get away from these people who hate me so much. i hope i'll be able to sleep and escape my troubles for a while. people can sometimes forget their difficulties when they're asleep. (helena lies down and sleeps)
the table's full.
in that case, i don't much care for you either.
only three so far? we're still waiting for one more. two of both kinds makes four. ah, here she comes, angry and sad. cupid is a bad boy for making poor women go crazy like this.
here's an empty seat, sir.
if i could get my hands on you, i'd make you care.
i've never been more exhausted or upset. i'm all wet from the dew and scratched up by thorns, and i can't crawl any farther. i just can't go on. my legs can't hold themselves up. i'll sleep here until morning. if they do fight, i hope lysander is safe! (hermia lies down and sleeps)
where?
why are you talking to me like this? i don't even know you.
sleep well there on the ground. i'll cure you, gentle lover, by putting this medicine on your eyes. (robin puts the nectar of the flower on lysander's eyelids) when you wake you will be truly delighted to see the woman you once loved. and when you wake up, you'll be a walking illustration of the well-known country proverb. "jack will have jill and everything will be all right."
(pointing to where the ghost sits) here, my good lord. what's wrong, your highness?
ah, but i know you.
(to bottom) come over here and sit down on this flowery bed while i caress those lovable cheeks. i'll put roses on your silky, smooth head and kiss your big, beautiful ears, my gentle darling.
(seeing the ghost) which one of you did this?
who am i then?
where's peaseblossom?
what, my good lord?
you're a lowlife, a rascal who eats leftover scraps. you're an ignoble, arrogant, shallow, vulgar, pretentious, conceited, filthy third-rate servant who thinks he's something special. you're a cowardly lawyer-loving bastard; a vain, brown-nosing, prissy scoundrel who'd pimp himself out to advance his career; a bag lady. you're nothing but a lowlife, a beggar, a coward, and a pimp, the son and heir of a mutt bitch. i'll beat you until you whine and cry if you deny the least bit of this.
here.
(to the ghost) you can't say i did it. don't shake your bloody head at me.
what an ogre you are to slander someone you don't know, and who doesn't know you!
scratch my head, peaseblossom. where's monsieur cobweb?
gentlemen, stand up. his highness is not well.
what a shameless jerk you are to pretend you don't know me! it was just two days ago that i tripped you and beat you up in front of the king. draw your sword, scoundrel. it may be nighttime, but there's enough moonlight to fight by. i'll make ground beef out of you. (he draws his sword) draw, you affected, preening son of a bitch! draw your sword!
here.
sit down, worthy friends. my husband is often like this, and he has been since he was a child. please stay seated. this is just a brief fit. in a moment he'll be well again. if you pay too much attention to him you'll make him angry, and that will make his convulsions go on longer. eat your dinner and pay no attention to him. (speaking so that only macbeth can hear) are you a man?
get away from me! i've got nothing to do with you.
monsieur cobweb, sir, get out your weapons and kill me a striped bumblebee on a thistle, and bring me its honey. don't tire yourself out, monsieur. oh, and monsieur, be careful not to break the honey-sac. i'd hate to see you drowned in honey, sir.
yes, and a brave one, who dares to look at something that would frighten the devil.
draw your sword, you jerk! you come here with letters against the king, and you take his conceited daughter's side against his royal highness. draw your sword, scoundrel, or i'll slice your thighs like flank steak. draw your sword! come on!
where's monsieur mustardseed?
oh, that's nonsense! this is just another one of the hallucinations you always get when you're afraid. this is like that floating dagger you said was leading you toward duncan. these outbursts of yours don't even look like real fear. they're more like how you would act if you were a woman telling a scary story by the fireside in front of her grandmother. shame on you! why are you making these faces? when the vision passes, you'll see that you're just looking at a stool.
help! murderer! help!
here.
please, just look over there. look! look! see! (to the ghost) what do you have to say? what do i care? if you can nod, then speak too. if the dead are going to return from their graves, then there's nothing to stop the birds from eating the bodies. so there's no point in our burying people.
fight, peasant. don't run away, scoundrel. stand and fight, you overdressed servant, fight! (he hits oswald)
give me your first, mr. mustardseed. please, stop bowing, good sir.
what, has your foolishness paralyzed you completely?
help! murder, murder!
what would you like me to do?
as sure as i'm standing here, i saw him.
what's going on here? get away from each other.
nothing, good sir, except to help sir cobweb scratch my head. i should go to the barber's, monsieur, because i think i'm getting really hairy around the face. and i'm such a sensitive ass that if my hair even tickles me a little, i need to scratch.
nonsense!
(to edmund) well, kid, let's see you fight. come on, i'll show you how.
would you like to hear some music, my sweet love?
in ancient times, before there were laws to make the land safe and peaceful, a lot of blood was spilled. yes, and since then murders have been committed that are too awful to talk about. it used to be that when you knocked a man's brains out he would just die, and that would be it. but now they rise from the dead with twenty fatal head wounds and push us off our stools. this haunting business is even stranger than murder.
you have weapons? what's going on here?
i have a pretty good ear for music. let's hear someone play the triangle and the sticks.
my worthy lord, your noble friends miss your company.
stop it, i order you. the next person to strike again dies. what's going on here?
or tell me, my sweet love, what you'd like to eat.
i forgot about them. (to the guests) don't be alarmed on my account, my most worthy friends. i have a strange disorder, which no longer shocks those who know me well. (raising his glass to toast the company) come, let's drink a toast: love and health to you all. now i'll sit down. give me some wine. fill up my cup.
these are the messengers from my sister and the king.
actually, i'd like a few pounds of grass. i'd like to munch on some good dry oats. or maybe i've got a hankering for a bundle of hay. there's nothing like good hay, really sweet hay.
i drink to the happiness of everyone at the table, and to our dear friend banquo, whom we miss. i wish he were here! let's drink to everyone here, and to banquo. now, everybody, drink
what are you fighting about? tell me.
i have an adventurous fairy who'll go seek out the squirrel's secret stash and get you some fresh nuts.
hear, hear.
i'm out of breath, sir.
i'd rather have a handful or two of dried peas. but please don't let any of your people wake me up. i really want to sleep now.
(to the ghost) go! and get out of my sight! stay in your grave. there's no marrow in your bones, and your blood is cold. you're staring at me with eyes that have no power to see.
no wonder, with all your exertions, you cowardly rascal. you're not worth being called a man. the only thing manly about you are your clothes. a tailor made you.
go to sleep, and i will wrap my arms around you. fairies, go away. run off in all directions.
good friends, think of this as nothing more than a strange habit. it's nothing else. too bad it's spoiling our pleasure tonight.
that's an odd thing to say. how can a tailor make a person?
i'm putting my arms around you just like the woodbine tendril gently twists itself around the sweet honeysuckle, and like the female ivy curls itself around the branches of the elm tree. oh, how i love you! i'm so crazy about you!
i am as brave as any other man. come at me in the form of a rugged russian bear, an armor-plated rhinoceros, or a tiger from iran. take any shape other than the one you have now and i will never tremble in fear. or come back to life again and challenge me to a duel in some deserted place. if i tremble then, you can call me a little girl. get out of here, you horrible ghost, you hallucination. get out!
definitely a tailor, sir. a sculptor or a painter couldn't have screwed him up as bad as that, even as an apprentice.
welcome, good robin. do you see this sweet sight? now i'm starting to pity titania for being so infatuated. i ran into her recently at the edge of the forest, looking for sweet presents for this hateful idiot, and i scolded her and argued with her. she had put a wreath of fresh, fragrant flowers around his hairy forehead, and the drops of dew that lay in the center of the flowers made the flowers look like they were crying with shame to be decorating the head of that ugly jackass. when i had taunted her as much as i wanted to, and she begged me very nicely to leave her alone, i asked her for the stolen indian child. she said yes right away, and sent a fairy to bring him to my home in fairyland. and now that i have the boy, i'll undo the spell that makes her vision so disgustingly wrong. and, gentle puck, take this transformed ass's head off of the head of that athenian man, so that when he wakes up at the same time as the rest of them do, they can all go back to athens. they'll only remember the events of tonight as a very unpleasant dream. but first i'll release the fairy queen from the spell.
i am a man again. pray you sit still.
but tell me what you're fighting about.
be like you used to be, and see like you used to see. this bud belongs to diana, the goddess of virginity, and it has the power to undo the effects of cupid's flower. now, titania, wake up, my sweet queen.
look, now that it's gone, i'm a man again. please, remain seated.
this old ruffian here, whom i didn't kill because he's so old, 
(waking up) oberon, i've had such a strange dream! i dreamed i was in love with an ass.
you have ruined our good cheer and disrupted the gathering by making a spectacle of yourself.
you useless bastard, you're like the letter "z," a totally unnecessary addition to the alphabet., my lord, please let me grind this lumpy lowlife into a powder and use it to plaster up the bathroom walls., you didn't kill me because i'm so old, you fawning dog?
there's your boyfriend, sleeping right over there.
(to the guests) can things like this happen so suddenly without making us all astonished? you make me feel like i don't know myself, when i see you looking at these terrible things and keeping a straight face, while my face has gone white with fear.
calm down. don't you have any manners, you savage?
how did this happen? oh, i hate looking at his face now!
what things, my lord?
yes, sir, but not when i'm enraged.
be quiet for a while., robin, take off his donkey head., titania, get the fairies to play some music, and make these five people sleep more soundly than humans have ever slept before.
please, don't speak to him. he's getting worse and worse. talk makes him crazy. everybody, please leave right now. don't bother exiting in the order of your rank, but just leave right away.
why are you enraged?
music! play the kind of music that puts people to sleep.
good night. i hope the king recovers soon!
i'm angry that a dishonorable lowlife like this wears a sword like a gentleman. smiling swindlers such as he undo the sacred bonds that unite people together, and only encourage the unreasonable passions of their masters. they foster both rage and apathy. they say "yes" and "no," turning their noses whichever way the wind blows without taking a firm stance on anything. they blindly follow their masters' impulses, like dogs., damn your ugly stinking face! are you laughing at what i say, as if i were a fool? if i had my way with you right now, i'd send you to back to where you came from.
(removing the ass's head from bottom) when you wake up, see things with your own foolish eyes again.
a kind good night to all!
are you insane, old man?
play the music., take my hands, my queen, and we'll lull these people to sleep with our soft dancing. (he dances with titania) now that you and i are friends again, we can dance for duke theseus tomorrow at midnight, and bless his marriage and his marriage bed. these other lovers will get married alongside him, and they'll all be in high spirits.
there's an old saying: the dead will have their revenge. gravestones have been known to move, and trees to speak, to bring guilty men to justice. the craftiest murderers have been exposed by the mystical signs made by crows and magpies. how late at night is it?
(to kent) what did you start quarreling over? just tell us.
listen, fairy king. i can hear the lark singing. morning's here.
it's almost morning. you can't tell whether it's day or night.
i couldn't hate that jerk over there any more than i do.
in that case, my queen, let's travel silently and solemnly across the globe to where it's still night, circling the earth faster than the moon does.
what do you think about the fact that macduff refuses to come to me when i command him?
why are you calling him a jerk? what did he do to you?
while we're walking, you can tell me how i ended up sleeping on the ground with these humans last night.
did you send for him, sir?
i don't like his face.
one of you go find the forest ranger. since we're done with the may day rites and it's still so early in the morning, my love will have a chance to hear the beautiful music of my hunting dogs barking as they chase their prey. unleash the dogs in the western valley. let them go. now go find the forest ranger.
i've heard about this indirectly, but i will send for him. in every one of the lords' households i have a servant paid to spy for me. tomorrow, while it's still early, i will go see the witches. they will tell me more, because i'm determined to know the worst about what's going to happen. my own safety is the only important thing now. i have walked so far into this river of blood that even if i stopped now, it would be as hard to go back to being good as it is to keep killing people. i have some schemes in my head that i'm planning to put into action. i have to do these things before i have a chance to think about them.
but maybe you don't like mine, or his, or hers either.
my beautiful queen, we'll go up the mountain and listen to the hounds as their barking echoes in the cliffs and sounds like music.
you haven't slept.
i'm used to telling the truth, sir, and i have to say that i've seen better faces than those i see here.
i was with the heroes hercules and cadmus once, when their spartan hunting dogs cornered a bear. i'd never heard such impressive barking before.
yes, let's go to sleep. my strange self-delusions just come from inexperience. we're still just beginners when it comes to crime.
this is a guy who's been praised for his honest bluntness, and who now insolently pretends to be plainspoken and twists the natural meanings of words. no flattery for him, no sir! he's honest, he's got to speak the truth. if people take what he says, fine. if not, he's got truth on his side! i know his type. he's sneaky behind all his so-called bluntness, sneakier than twenty brown-nosing bootlickers who only tell you what you want to hear.
the forests, the skies, the mountains, everything around us seemed to echo the barks of the hounds. i'd never heard such raucous music, such pleasant thunder.
what's wrong, hecate? you look angry.
dearest, kindest, most honorable sir, may i say, with your esteemed approval, which is lit up by the illuminating radiance of the sun-god phoebus, that, 
my dogs are bred from spartan hounds. they have the same folds of flesh around their mouths, the same sandy-colored fur, and hanging ears that brush the morning dew off the grass. they have crooked knees and folds of skin under their necks, just like the spartan hounds. they're not very fast in the chase, but their barking sounds like bells ringing. each bark is perfectly in tune with the others, like notes on a scale. no one, anywhere, has ever gone hunting with a more musical pack of dogs. judge for yourself when you hear them. (he sees the four lovers sleeping) but wait a minute! who are these women?
don't i have a reason to be angry, you disobedient hags? how dare you give macbeth riddles and prophecies about his future without telling me? i am your boss and the source of your powers. i am the one who secretly decides what evil things happen, but you never called me to join in and show off my own powers. and what's worse, you've done all this for a man who behaves like a spoiled brat, angry and hateful. like all spoiled sons, he chases after what he wants and doesn't care about you. but you can make it up to me. go away now and in the morning meet me in the pit by the river in hell. macbeth will go there to learn his destiny. you bring your cauldrons, your spells, your charms, and everything else. i'm about to fly away. i'll spend tonight working to make something horrible happen. i have a lot to do before noon. an important droplet is hanging from the corner of the moon. i'll catch it before it falls to the ground. when i work it over with magic spells, the drop will produce magical spirits that will trick macbeth with illusions.
what do you mean by that?
my lord, that's my daughter asleep on the ground over there, and this is lysander here, and this is demetrius, and this is helena, old nedar's daughter. i don't understand why they're all here together.
he will be fooled into thinking he is greater than fate, he will mock death, and he will think he is above wisdom, grace, and fear. as you all know, overconfidence is man's greatest enemy.
i tried to stop speaking plainly, since you dislike plain speech so much. sir, i know i'm not a flatterer. the guy who tricked you with plain language was just a plain crook, which i'm not, however much i may displease you by not being one.
they probably woke up early to celebrate may day and came here for my celebration when they heard i'd be here. but tell me, egeus. isn't today the day when hermia has to tell us her decision about whether she'll marry demetrius?
listen! i'm being called. look, my little spirit is sitting in a foggy cloud waiting for me.
(to oswald) how did you offend him?
it is, my lord.
come on, let's hurry. she'll be back again soon.
i never offended him at all. recently, the king hit me because of a misunderstanding. this man took sides with the king and tripped me. when i was down on the ground he insulted me, and then started acting tough to seem courageous in front of the king. the king praised him, even though i had never offered any resistance at all. now he pulled out his sword on me again, still riled up from our first encounter.
go tell the hunters to blow their horns and wake them up.
what i've already said shows you we think alike, so you can draw your own conclusions. all i'm saying is that strange things have been going on. macbeth pitied duncan, after duncan was dead. and banquo went out walking too late at night. if you like, we can say that fleance must have killed him, because fleance fled the scene of the crime. clearly, men should not go out walking too late! and who can help thinking how monstrous it was for malcolm and donalbain to kill their gracious father? such a heinous crime, how it saddened macbeth lennox speaks sarcastically throughout this speech, making it clear that he thinks macbeth is guilty of the murders. macbeth ! wasn't it loyal of him to kill those two servants right away, while they were still drunk and asleep? that was the right thing to do, wasn't it? yes, and it was the wise thing, too, because we all would have been outraged to hear those two deny their crime. considering all this, i think macbeth has handled things well. if he had duncan's sons in prison, which i hope won't happen, they would find out how awful the punishment is for those who kill their fathers, and so would fleance. but enough of that. i hear that macduff is out of favor with the king because he speaks his mind too plainly, and because he failed to show up at macbeth's feast. can you tell me where he's hiding himself?
these cowards manage to make fools of brave men.
good morning, my friends. valentine's day is over.
duncan's son malcolm, whose birthright and throne macbeth has stolen, lives in the english court. there, the saintly king edward treats malcolm so well that despite malcolm's misfortunes, he's not deprived of respect. macduff went there to ask king edward for help. he wants edward to help him form an alliance with the people of northumberland and their lord, siward. macduff hopes that with their help, and with the help of god above, he may once again put food on our tables, bring peace back to our nights, free our feasts and banquets from violent murders, allow us to pay proper homage to our king, and receive honors freely. those are the things we pine for now. macbeth has heard this news and he is so angry that he's preparing for war.
bring out the stocks the "stocks" consisted of a wooden frame in which you could lock a criminal's ankles so that he or she couldn't move. stocks !, we'll teach you, you stubborn old bastard, you arrogant show-off.
are you lovebirds only starting to pair up now?
did he tell macduff to return to scotland?
sir, i'm too old to be taught anything. don't put me in the stocks. i serve the king, who sent me here. if you put me in the stocks you'll insult him both as a king and as a man.
forgive us, my lord.
he did, but macduff told the messenger, "no way." the messenger scowled and rudely turned his back on macduff, as if to say, "you'll regret the day you gave me this answer."
bring out the stocks! i swear on my life and honor, he'll sit here in the stocks until noon.
please, all of you, stand up.
that might well keep macduff away from scotland. some holy angel should go to the court of england and give macduff a message. he should return quickly to free our country, which is suffering under a tyrant!
only until noon, my lord? no, the whole day, and all night too.
(to lysander and demetrius) i know you two are enemies. has the world really become so gentle and peaceful that people who hate each other have started to trust each other and sleep beside each other without being afraid?
i'll send my prayers with him.
ma'am, you wouldn't treat me like this if i were your father's dog.
my lord, what i say may be a little confused, since i'm half asleep and half awake. i swear, at the moment i really couldn't tell you how i ended up here. but i think, i want to tell you the truth, and now that i think about it, i think this is true, i came here with hermia. we were planning to leave athens to escape the athenian law and, 
the tawny cat has meowed three times.
but since you're his scoundrel servant, i will.
(to theseus) enough, enough, my lord. you've heard enough evidence! i insist that the law punish him, they were going to run away, demetrius, they were running away to defeat us, robbing you of your wife and me of my fatherly right to decide who my son-in-law will be.
three times. and the hedgehog has whined once.
this guy is exactly the kind of person your sister warned us about., come on, bring in the stocks, now!
(to theseus) my lord, the beautiful helena told me about their secret plan to escape into this forest. i was furious and followed them here, and the lovely helena was so in love with me that she followed me.
my spirit friend, harpier, is yelling, "it's time, it's time!"
i beg you not to do this, my lord. he's done wrong, and his master the king will punish him for it. but the kind
i'm not sure how it happened, but somehow, something made my love for hermia melt away like snow. my past love for hermia now seems like a memory of some cheap toy i used to love as a child. now the only person i love, and believe in, and want to look at, is helena. i was engaged to her before i ever met hermia. then i hated her for a time, as a sick person hates the food he usually loves. but now i have my natural taste back, like a sick person when he recovers. now i want helena, i love her, i long for her, and i will always be true to her.
dance around the cauldron and throw in the poisoned entrails. (holding up a toad) you'll go in first, a toad that sat under a cold rock for a month, oozing poison from its pores.
of punishment you propose is more suited to petty shoplifters than to royal attendants. the king will be offended to find out that his messenger is so badly treated.
you pretty lovers are lucky you met me here. we'll talk more about this later., egeus, i'm overriding your wishes. these couples will be married along with me and hippolyta in the temple later today., and now, since the morning is almost over, we'll give up on the idea of hunting. come with us to athens. we three couples will celebrate with a sumptuous feast. come, hippolyta.
double, double toil and trouble, fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
i'll take responsibility for that.
what exactly just happened? the events of last night seem small and hard to see clearly, like far-off mountains that look like clouds in the distance.
(holding something up) we'll boil you in the cauldron next, a slice of swamp snake. all the rest of you in too: a newt's eye, a frog's tongue, fur from a bat, a dog's tongue, the forked tongue of an adder, the stinger of a burrowing worm, a lizard's leg, an owl's wing. (speaking to the ingredients) make a charm to cause powerful trouble, and boil and bubble like a broth of hell.
my sister would be much more offended to have her trusted messenger abused and assaulted just for carrying out her orders., put his legs in the stocks.
yes, it's like my eyes are out of focus, and i'm seeing everything double.
double, double toil and trouble, fire burn and cauldron bubble.
(to gloucester) let's go, my lord.
me too.
here come some more ingredients: the scale of a dragon, a wolf's tooth, a witch's mummified flesh, the gullet and stomach of a ravenous shark, a root of hemlock that was dug up in the dark, a jew's liver, a goat's bile, some twigs of yew that were broken off during a lunar eclipse, a turk's nose, a tartar's lips, the finger of a baby that was strangled as a prostitute gave birth to it in a ditch. (to the ingredients) make this potion thick and gluey. (to the other witches) now let's add a tiger's entrails to the mix.
i'm sorry, my friend. the duke always gets it his way, and everyone knows you can't budge him once he's made up his mind. i'll try talking to him again.
i won demetrius so easily, as if he were a precious diamond i just found lying around. it's mine because i found it, but i feel like someone else could easily come and claim it was hers.
double, double toil and trouble, fire burn and cauldron bubble.
please don't, sir. i've been up for a long time and have done a lot of traveling recently. this punishment will be a good chance to catch up on my sleep. the rest of the time i'll whistle to entertain myself. even good men have bad luck. have a good morning.
are you sure we're awake? it seems to me like we're still sleeping, still dreaming. do you remember seeing the duke here? did he tell us to follow him?
we'll cool the mixture with baboon blood. after that the charm is finished.
it's wrong for the duke to do this. the king will be angry with him.
yes, he did. and my father was here too.
well done! i admire your efforts, and all of you will share the rewards. now come sing around the cauldron like a ring of elves and fairies, enchanting everything you put in.
oh, good king lear, you're proving that, just as they say, everything goes from good to bad. (he takes out a letter) rise and shine, sun, so i can read this letter. only those who are truly miserable see miracles. i know this letter is from cordelia, who knows that i'm serving the king in disguise. (looking at the letter) she says that she will have time, now that she's away from the monstrous conditions here, to find a way to fix things. i'm exhausted. i've been awake too long. this fatigue gives me an excuse to shut my eyes so i can't see myself humiliated in the stocks. good night, lady luck. smile and spin your wheel of fortune again. (he sleeps)
and hippolyta.
i can tell that something wicked is coming by the tingling in my thumbs. doors, open up for whoever is knocking!
i heard myself declared an outlaw and escaped capture by hiding in the trunk of a hollow tree. every town and port is crawling with henchmen on the lookout, waiting to capture me. but i'll survive while i can. i've decided to disguise myself as the lowliest and rattiest beggar that mankind has ever seen. i'll smear my face with filth, put on a loincloth, make my hair matted and tangled, and face the bad weather wearing almost nothing. i've seen beggars out of insane asylums who stick pins and nails into their numb arms. they pray or roar lunatic curses, horrifying farmers and villagers into giving them alms. "poor crazy tom!" they call themselves. well, at least that's something. as edgar, i'm nothing at all.
and he told us to follow him to the temple.
what's going on here, you secret, evil, midnight hags? what are you doing?
it's strange that regan and her husband left their house without sending back my messenger.
well, then, we're awake. let's follow him. we can tell one another our dreams along the way.
something there isn't a word for.
according to what i heard, they had no travel plans as of last night.
(waking up) tell me when my cue comes, and i'll say my line. my next cue is "most handsome pyramus." hey! peter quince? flute the bellows-repairman? snout the handyman? starveling? my god, they've all run away and left me sleeping here? what a weird dream i had., you can't even describe such a weird dream. you'd be an ass if you even tried to explain it. i thought i was, no, nobody can even describe what i was. i thought i was, i thought i had, but a person would be an idiot to try to say what i thought i had. no eye has ever heard, no ear has ever seen, no hand has tasted, or tongue felt, or heart described what my dream was like. i'll get peter quince to write this dream down as a ballad.
i don't know how you know the things you do, but i insist that you answer my questions. i command you in the name of whatever dark powers you serve. i don't care if you unleash violent winds that tear down churches, make the foamy waves overwhelm ships and send sailors to their deaths, flatten crops and trees, make castles fall down on their inhabitants' heads, make palaces and pyramids collapse, and mix up everything in nature. tell me what i want to know.
(to lear) hail, noble master!
i'll call it "bottom's dream" because it's so deep that it has no bottom. and i'll sing it for the duke in the intermission of a play. or maybe, to make it even more lovely, i'll sing it when the heroine dies.
speak.
what's this? are you sitting around in this humiliation to amuse yourself?
have you sent anyone to bottom's house? has he come home yet?
demand.
no, my lord.
no one's heard from him. i'm sure he's been kidnapped.
we'll answer.
ha, ha! that's a nasty garter belt. you tie up horses by their heads, dogs and bears by their necks, monkeys by their waists, and humans by their legs. when a person's prone to wanderlust, he has to wear wooden socks, like a chastity belt around his ankles.
if he doesn't show up, the play is ruined. it won't go on. will it?
would you rather hear these things from our mouths or from our master's?
(to kent) who could have misunderstood your assigment so completely as to lock you up like this?
no, it would be impossible. he's the only person in athens who can play pyramus.
call them. let me see them.
your daughter and son-in-law.
definitely. he's quite simply the smartest working-man in athens.
pour in the blood of a sow who has eaten her nine offspring. take the sweat of a murderer on the gallows and throw it into the flame.
no.
yes, and the best looking too. and his voice is the paramour of sweetness.
come, high or low spirits. show yourself and what you do.
yes.
you mean "paragon." a "paramour" paramour = lover "paramour" is something bad.
tell me, you unknown power, 
i'm telling you "no."
the duke's leaving the temple. two or three more lords and ladies have been married too. if we'd been able to put on our play, we would have had it made.
he can read your thoughts. listen, but don't speak.
and i'm telling you "yes."
oh that great, funny guy, bottom! he would have gotten a pension of six pence a day for his whole life. six pence a day would've been forced on him. i'll be damned if the duke wouldn't have given him six pence a day for playing pyramus.
macbeth! macbeth! macbeth! beware macduff. beware the thane of fife. let me go. enough.
no, no, they wouldn't.
and he would have deserved it too. pyramus is worth six pence a day, a pension of six pence a day would be a lot of money for a working class man. six pence a day, or it's worth nothing!
whatever you are, thanks for your advice. you have guessed exactly what i feared. but one word more, 
yes, they have.
where are my guys? where are my good fellows?
he will not be commanded by you. here's another, stronger than the first.
by the god jupiter above, i swear "no."
bottom! oh, how wonderful to see you! oh, what a relief!
macbeth! macbeth! macbeth!
by jupiter's wife juno, i swear "yes."
my friends, i've got some amazing things to tell you, but don't ask me to tell you what. i swear by my athenian citizenship that i won't tell you anything. i'll tell you everything exactly as it happened.
if i had three ears i'd listen with all three.
they wouldn't dare. they couldn't, they wouldn't. it's worse than murder to humiliate a king's messenger like this. tell me as quickly and clearly as you can what you did to deserve this punishment, or what made them think they could inflict it on you.
tell us, bottom.
be violent, bold, and firm. laugh at the power of other men, because nobody born from a woman will ever harm macbeth.
my lord, when i arrived at their home i gave them your letter. before i had a chance to get up from my respectful kneeling position, goneril's messenger arrived, stinky, sweaty, and out of breath. he interrupted me, spouted out greetings from her, and delivered her letter, which they opened immediately. after reading it, they gathered their entourage together and got on their horses to go. they glared at me and ordered me to follow them and wait for their answer. after we arrived here, i ran into that other messenger who made them give me the cold shoulder, the very same guy who was so rude to you, king. i admit it was foolish to draw my sword on him, but i had to act like a man. he woke up the whole house with his loud and cowardly screams. that's why your daughter and son-in-law are punishing me shamefully.
no, you won't get a word out of me. all i'll tell you is that the duke has had dinner already. now it's time to get your costumes together. find some good strings for tying on your false beards, and grab new ribbons to decorate your shoes. meet me at the palace as soon as possible. look over your lines again. our play's going to be performed for the duke! so make sure thisbe's wearing clean underwear, and make sure whoever's playing the lion doesn't cut his nails, because he needs them long to look like lion's claws. and no one eat any onions or garlic. if we have sweet-smelling breath, i'm sure they'll say "it's a sweet play." now no more talking. get busy, go!
the second apparition descends.
this story bodes more stormy weather. fathers who wear rags make their children neglect them. but fathers who are rich make their children kind. lady luck is a fickle whore and never gives the poor a break. but despite all this, your daughters will give you a lot of money, or do i mean pain?, in the coming year.
these lovers are saying some strange things, theseus.
then i don't need to kill macduff. i have no reason to fear him. but even so, i'll make doubly sure. i'll guarantee my own fate by having you killed, macduff. that way i can conquer my own fear and sleep easy at night.
i'm getting hysterical. i feel my stomach squeezing up against my heart. calm down, you belong lower down!, where is this daughter of mine?
yes, strange, and totally made up too. i'll never believe any of these old legends or fairy tales. lovers and madmen hallucinate about things that sane people just can't understand. lunatics, lovers, and poets all are ruled by their overactive imaginations. some people think they see devils and monsters everywhere, and they're lunatics. lovers are just as crazy, and think a dark-skinned gypsy is the most gorgeous woman in the world. poets are always looking around like they're having a fit, confusing the mundane with the otherworldly, and describing things in their writing that simply don't exist. all these people have such strong imaginations that, when they feel happy, they assume a god or some other supernatural being is bringing that happiness to them. or if they're afraid of something at night, they look at the shrubbery and imagine it's a wild bear!
what is this spirit that looks like the son of a king and wears a crown on his young head?
inside, sir, with the earl.
but the story that these lovers are telling, and the fact that they all saw and heard exactly the same things, make me think there's more going on here than imaginary fantasies. their story is bizarre and astounding, but it's solid and consistent.
listen but don't speak to it.
don't follow me. stay here.
here come the lovers, laughing happily., i wish you joy, my friends! i hope the days ahead are full of joy for you.
be brave like the lion and proud. don't even worry about who hates you, who resents you, and who conspires against you. macbeth will never be defeated until birnam wood marches to fight you at dunsinane hill.
you didn't do anything else to earn this punishment?
we wish you even more joy, and hope joy comes to you in your royal walks, at your table, and in your royal bed!
that will never happen. who can command the forest and make the trees pull their roots out of the earth? these were sweet omens! good! my murders will never come back to threaten me until the forest of birnam gets up and moves, and i will be king for my entire natural life. but my heart is still throbbing to know one thing. tell me, if your dark powers can see this far: will banquo's sons ever reign in this kingdom?
nothing. tell me, why did the king arrive with such a small entourage?
now, what kind of entertainment do we have to fill up the long three hours between dinner and bedtime? where is our entertainment director? what performances have been prepared? aren't there any plays for us to enjoy while we wait in torture for bedtime to come? let me see philostrate.
don't try to find out more.
if they'd put you in the stocks for asking that question, you would've deserved it.
here i am, theseus.
i demand to be satisfied. if you refuse, let an eternal curse fall on you. let me know. why is that cauldron sinking? and what is that music?
why, fool?
tell us what entertainment you've prepared for the evening. which plays, what music? how will we pass the time without some entertainment?
show.
you need to learn what ants know well about winter, there's no point in slaving away if there's no hope for profit. serving the king will get you nowhere. everyone can see that, and even blind men can smell the stench of his misery now. when you see a huge wheel rolling down a hill, you shouldn't try to hold on to it or it'll break your neck.
(giving theseus a piece of paper) here's a list of all of the acts that have been prepared. choose which one you want to see first.
show.
but if you see a wheel going uphill, latch on for the ride. and when a wise man gives you better advice than i just did, give me my advice back again. i only want idiots following my advice, the advice of a fool. the gentleman who serves you only for profit and is only superficially loyal to you will take off when it starts to rain and leave you alone in the storm. but i'll linger. the fool will stay. and let the wise man run away. the servant who runs away is a fool. but this fool is no scoundrel, by god.
(reading) "the battle between hercules and the centaurs, to be sung by an athenian eunuch, accompanied by a harp." no, we won't see that. i've already told that story to hippolyta, while praising my cousin hercules. what else? "the riot of the drunk bacchanals who rip the singer orpheus to shreds." that's an old show, and i saw it the last time i came back from conquering
show.
where did you learn that song, fool?
thebes. "the nine muses mourning the death of learning and scholarship." that's some sharp, critical satire, and it's not appropriate for a wedding. "a tedious short drama about young pyramus and his love thisbe, a very sad and tragic comedy." a sad comedy? short but still tedious? that's like hot ice and strange snow. how can this drama be so many contradictory things?
show him and make him grieve. come like shadows and depart in the same way!
not in the stocks, fool.
it's a play about ten words long, which is the shortest play i've ever heard of. but in my opinion, it's about ten words too long. that's why it's tedious. in the entire play, not one word is well-written, and not one of the actors is right for his part. it's tragic because pyramus kills himself. i have to admit that when i saw his suicide during rehearsal, i had tears in my eyes, but they were tears of laughter.
you look too much like the ghost of banquo. go away! (to the first) your crown hurts my eyes. (to the second) your blond hair, which looks like another crown underneath the one you're wearing, looks just like the first king's hair. now i see a third king who looks just like the second. filthy hags! why are you showing me this? a fourth! my eyes are bulging out of their sockets! will this line stretch on forever? another one! and a seventh! i don't want to see any more. and yet an eighth appears, holding a mirror in which i see many more men. and some are carrying double balls and triple scepters, meaning they're kings of more than one country! horrible sight! now i see it is true, they are banquo's descendants. banquo, with his blood-clotted hair, is smiling at me and pointing to them as his.
how can they refuse to speak with me? how can they say that they're sick or exhausted or that they have traveled all night!? they're playing with me. these are tricks. this is rebellion. go ask them again and make them see me this time.
who are the actors?
what? is this true?
my dear lord, you know how passionately stubborn the duke is. he never changes his mind.
rough workmen from athens who never spent much time thinking. now they've worn out their out-of-shape brains to put on this play for your wedding.
yes, this is true, but why do you stand there so dumbfounded? come, sisters, let's cheer him up and show him our talents. i will charm the air to produce music while you all dance around like crazy, so this king will say we did our duty and entertained him.
hell! damn it all to hell! "passionately"? what "passion"? gloucester, gloucester, i want to speak with the duke of cornwall and his wife.
so let's see it.
where are they? gone? let this evil hour be marked forever in the calendar as cursed. (calls to someone offstage) you outside, come in!
my lord, i informed them as much.
no, my noble lord. this play isn't right for you. i've seen the whole thing, and it's completely worthless, unless you think their bad acting and their misremembered lines, which they memorized so painfully, are funny.
what does your grace want?
"informed them"? do you understand what i'm saying, man?
i'll watch this play. nothing can really be bad when it's created by simple people who try hard. come on, bring them in. and sit down, ladies.
did you see the weird sisters?
yes, my lord.
i don't like seeing poor people overburdened or looking bad when they're trying to do something good.
no, my lord.
the king wants to speak with cornwall. the father wants to speak with his daughter. he orders them, he begs them. did you inform them of that? this is unbelievable! "passionate"? the "passionate" duke? tell the hot-headed duke that i... but no, not yet. maybe he's not feeling well. when we're ill we can't carry out our duties as well as when we're healthy. when our bodies are out of order, our minds can't function properly. i'll hold off, and subdue my impulsive temper, which makes me judge a sick man as if he were well. (he notices kent again) a curse on my royal power! why should he sit here like this? the fact that they punished him convinces me that regan and the duke are avoiding me on purpose. i want my servant released. go tell the duke and his wife i'll speak to them right now, at once. tell them to come here and hear me out, or else i'll beat a drum at their bedroom door until they can't sleep any more.
you won't see anything like that, sweetheart.
didn't they pass by you?
i just want everything to be all right between you.
he just said that they're no good at acting.
no, indeed, my lord.
oh, my heart, my heart is rising into my throat! stay down, heart.
then we're even kinder people for thanking them for something that they're not good at. we'll entertain ourselves by accepting their mistakes. when poor dutiful people can't do certain things well, generous people can consider the effort they put into it rather than the effect that they produce. in my travels, great scholars have come up to me, meaning to greet me with well-rehearsed welcoming speeches, and i have seen them tremble and turn pale, and pause inappropriately in the middle of their sentences, and botch their well-rehearsed tones of voice because they're so nervous, and then break off abruptly at the end, without actually welcoming me. trust me, my sweet, i figured out that they were trying to welcome me even though they were silent, and that message was as clear from someone who was modest and nervously dutiful as it is from someone who is loud and audacious and eloquent. therefore, love and tongue-tied simplicity can say the most even when they're saying the least, in my opinion.
the air on which they ride is infected. damn all those who trust them! i heard the galloping of horses. who was it that came here?
that's right, uncle, talk to your heart, like the housewife the point of the story is that the housewife acts too late. she should have killed the eels before putting them into the pie. housewife who yelled at the eels she was putting in her pie. she hit 'em on the head with a stick and shouted, "down, you naughty things, down!" that was the woman whose brother wanted to be nice to his horse horses won't eat greasy hay, so buttering hay is another example of foolishness. horse , and buttered its hay.
your grace, the person who is going to deliver the prologue is ready.
two or three men, my lord, who brought the message that macduff has fled to england.
good morning to you both.
let him come forward.
fled to england?
hail to your majesty.
if we happen to offend you, it's because we want to. we don't want you to think we came here to offend you, except that we want to offend you with our good intentions. our plan to show off our little bit of talent will wind up getting us executed. please keep in mind we're only here out of spite. we don't come here with the intention of making you happy. we're absolutely not here to delight you. the actors are ready to come out and make you sorry. by watching their show, you'll find out everything you're likely to know. if quince had read this speech with the proper punctuation, it would mean "if we happen to offend you, we hope you know that we didn't come here intending to offend you, but with the good intention of showing off our little bit of skill. that's all we want to do. please keep in mind that we came here only to please you. our true intention is to delight you. we didn't come here to make you sorry. the actors are ready..."
yes, my good lord.
i'm glad to see your highness.
this guy doesn't pay much attention to punctuation.
time, you thwart my dreadful plans. unless a person does something the second he thinks of it, he'll never get a chance to do it. from now on, as soon as i decide to do something i'm going to act immediately. in fact, i'll start following up my thoughts with actions right now. i'll raid macduff's castle, seize the town of fife, and kill his wife, his children, and anyone else unfortunate enough to stand in line for his inheritance. no more foolish talk. i will do this deed before i lose my sense of purpose. but no more spooky visions!, where are the messengers? come, bring me to them.
i believe you are, regan. you know why i think so? because if you weren't glad, i'd divorce your dead mother, because i'd know she cheated on me. any true daughter of mine would definitely be glad to see me. (to kent) oh, are you free? we'll talk about it later.
he rode that prologue like a wild horse. he didn't know how to stop it. the moral of this story is that it's not enough to speak; you have to speak grammatically.
what did he do that made him flee this land?
my dear regan, your sister's not worth anything. oh, regan, she's torn me apart with unkindness, like a vulture, right here. (points to his heart) i can hardly speak. you'll never believe how monstrously, oh, regan!
yes, he performed his prologue like a child plays a recorder, he can make sounds, but they're out of control.
you have to be patient, madam.
calm down, sir, please. i hope there's been a misunderstanding. it's more likely that you don't know how to appreciate her than that she'd ever fail in her duties as a daughter.
his speech was like a tangled chain. it went on and on and was a total mess. who's next?
he had no patience. he was crazy to run away. even if you're not a traitor, you're going to look like one if you run away.
how do you mean?
(delivered by quince) ladies and gentlemen, perhaps you are wondering what is going on. well, keep wondering, until the truth makes everything clear. this man is pyramus, if you want to know. this beautiful lady is definitely thisbe. this man with the limestone and cement is portraying wall, that horrible wall that kept these lovers apart. they are content to whisper through wall's little hole, the poor souls, and no one should be surprised. this man, with his lantern, dog, and thornbush, portrays moonshine, because, if you want to know, the lovers were not ashamed to meet each other by moonshine at ninus's tomb in order to carry on their courtship. this grisly beast, which is called "lion," scared away, or rather frightened, the faithful thisbe when she arrived at the meeting place at night. as she ran away from him, she dropped her cloak, which the horrible lion stained with his bloody mouth. soon pyramus comes along, a tall and handsome young man, and finds his faithful thisbe's cloak to be dead. at this point, he takes his sword, his bloody blameful blade, and bravely breaks open his boiling bloody breast. and thisbe, hiding in the shade of the mulberry bushes, took his dagger and killed herself. for the rest of the story, let lion, moonshine, wall, and the two lovers talk more about it, since they're standing here.
you don't know whether it was wisdom or fear that made him flee.
i can't believe my sister would neglect her obligations in any way. if she restrained your rowdy knights, she had such a good reason that you can't blame her for it.
i wonder if the lion's going to talk.
how could it be wisdom! to leave his wife, his children, his house, and his titles in a place so unsafe that he himself flees it! he doesn't love us. he lacks the natural instinct to protect his family. even the fragile wren, the smallest of birds, will fight against the owl when it threatens her young ones in the nest. his running away has everything to do with fear and nothing to do with love. and since it's so unreasonable for him to run away, it has nothing to do with wisdom either.
i curse her.
it wouldn't surprise me, my lord. if these asses can speak, a lion should be able to.
my dearest relative, i'm begging you, pull yourself together. as for your husband, he is noble, wise, and judicious, and he understands what the times require. it's not safe for me to say much more than this, but times are bad when people get denounced as traitors and don't even know why. in times like these, we believe frightening rumors but we don't even know what we're afraid of. it's like being tossed around on the ocean in every direction, and finally getting nowhere. i'll say good-bye now. it won't be long before i'm back. when things are at their worst they have to stop, or else improve to the way things were before. my young cousin, i put my blessing upon you.
sir, you're old. your life is stretched to its limit. you should let others take care of you and submit to people who know better than you do what's good for you. please go back to goneril's house. admit you were wrong.
(played by snout) at this point i, snout, play a wall. but not just any wall. i want you to understand that i'm pretending to be a kind of wall that has a little hole in it. the lovers pyramus and thisbe often whispered very secretly through that hole. this clay, this cement, and this stone that i'm carrying around show that i'm that wall. it's the truth. and this is the crack, right side and left side (points with two fingers), through which the frightened lovers will be whispering.
he has a father, and yet he is fatherless.
apologize? do you think this kind of thing is appropriate for the royal family? (he kneels) "dear daughter, i admit i'm old. old people are useless. i'm begging you, on my knees, to give me food, clothes, and a bed."
can you imagine cement and stone talking better?
i have to go. if i stay longer, i'll embarrass you and disgrace myself by crying. i'm leaving now.
no more, please. these are ugly antics. go back to my sister's.
it's the smartest partition i've ever heard speak, my lord.
young man, your father's dead. what are you going to do now? how are you going to live?
(getting up) never, regan. she's sent away half my knights, glared at me, and aimed her venomous insults straight at my heart. she and her ingratitude can go to hell! i hope she gets sick and becomes lame!
pyramus is coming up to the wall. be quiet!
i will live the way birds do, mother.
shush, sir, please!
(played by bottom) oh, grim-looking night! oh, night that is so black in color! oh night, which is always there when it is not day! oh night! oh night! so sad, sad, sad,
what? are you going to start eating worms and flies?
i hope lightning strikes her in the eyes! i hope poisonous swampy fog covers her face and ruins her complexion!
i'm afraid my thisbe has forgotten her promise!, and you, oh wall, oh sweet, oh lovely wall, you stand between her father's property and mine, you wall, oh wall, oh sweet and lovely wall. show me your hole to stick my eye up against!
i mean i will live on whatever i get, like birds do.
oh, dear gods! that's how you'll talk about me when you're in this mood.
thank you, you're such a polite wall. god bless you for doing this. but what's this i see? i don't see any thisbe. oh wicked wall, through which i don't see any happiness! damn your stones for disappointing me like this!
you'd be a pitiful bird. you wouldn't know enough to be afraid of traps.
no, regan. i'll never curse you. you're so gentle, you'd never be harsh like her. her eyes are vicious, but yours are comforting. you'd never deny me my pleasures, downsize my entourage, insult me thoughtlessly, reduce my allowance, or lock me out of the house. you know better than she does how important the duties of a child to a parent are, and the responsibilities that come from gratitude. you haven't forgotten the half of a kingdom i gave you.
since the wall is conscious, it should curse back at him.
why should i be afraid of them, mother? if i'm a pitiful bird, like you say, hunters won't want me. no matter what you say, my father is not dead.
sir, let's get to the point.
(out of character) no, actually, sir, he shouldn't say anything. it's not his turn, it's thisbe's. "disappointing me like this" is thisbe's cue. she's supposed to enter now, and i'll see her through the wall. you'll see, it'll happen exactly like i say. here she comes.
yes, he is dead. what are you going to do for a father?
who put my messenger in the stocks?
(played by flute) oh wall, you've often heard me moaning because you keep me separated from my handsome pyramus! my cherry lips have often kissed your bricks, which are stuck together with cement.
maybe you should ask, what will you do for a husband?
what's that trumpet?
i see a voice! i'll go to the hole to see if i can hear my thisbe's face. thisbe?
oh, i can buy twenty husbands at any market.
i know it. it's my sister's. she'll be here soon, just like her letter said. (to oswald) has my sister arrived?
you are my love, my love, i think.
if so, you'd be buying them to sell again.
this is a lowlife who basks in the reflection of the fading glory of the woman he works for., get out of my sight, scoundrel!
i'm your love, no matter what you think. and i'm still faithful to you, just like the famous limander bottom means the mythical greek hero leander. who loved hero. limander .
you talk like a child, but you're very smart anyway.
what do you mean, your highness?
and i'll be as faithful to you as helen of troy this is funny not only because leander loved hero rather than helen, but also because helen was famous for being unfaithful to her husband. helen of troy , until the day i die.
was my father a traitor, mother?
who put my servant in the stocks? regan, i hope you didn't know anything about that., ah, who's this? dear gods, if you love old men like me, if you believe in obedience, if you yourselves are old, then please send me down some help! (to goneril) aren't you ashamed to look at me after the way you've treated me in my old age?, oh, regan, are you taking her by the hand?
not even shafalus was as faithful to his lover procrus as i am to you.
yes, he was.
why shouldn't she take my hand, father? how exactly have i offended you? just because a senile man with poor judgment calls something an insult doesn't necessarily mean it is one.
me too, i'm as faithful as shafalus to procrus they mean to say cephulus and procris, two steadfast lovers in greek mythology. shafalus to procrus .
what is a traitor?
oh, how can the sides of my body hold in my grieving heart?, how did my messenger wind up in the stocks?
oh, kiss me through the hole in this nasty wall.
someone who makes a promise and breaks it.
i sent him there, sir, but his crimes deserved a worse punishment.
but i'm only kissing the wall's hole, not your lips at all.
and is everyone who swears and lies a traitor?
you! you did it?
will you meet me right away at ninny's grave?
everyone who does so is a traitor and should be hanged.
please, father, since you're weak, act like it. get rid of half your knights and go back to spend the rest of your month with my sister. afterward, you can stay with me. right now i'm away from home and i can't provide you with proper care.
neither death nor life will stop me from coming.
and should everyone who makes promises and breaks them be hanged?
go back with her? send away fifty of my knights? no. i'd rather renounce living in a house, and wander in the open air in the hardships of poverty, as a friend of the wolf and the owl. go back with her? i might as well go before the king of france, who took my youngest daughter without a dowry, kneel before his throne, and beg him to give me a tiny pension to stay alive. go back with her? i'd rather be a slave or a packhorse for this hateful stablehand here. (he points to oswald)
i, wall, have done my part. now that i'm done, wall can go away.
everyone.
as you wish, sir.
the lovers should've waited around a little longer, the wall between them is down now.
who should hang them?
i beg you, daughter, don't make me crazy. i won't bother you. we'll never see each other again. but you're still my child, my flesh and blood, or rather you're a disease in my flesh, a disease i still have to call my own. you're a pustule, a sore, a tumor digesting my bloodline. but i'll stop rebuking you. you'll feel shame when the time is right, and i don't urge you to be ashamed now. i won't beg the gods to punish you, or caution you to fear their judgment. become a better
what can you do? that's what happens with talking walls.
the honest men.
person when you're ready, if you're inclined. i'll wait patiently. meanwhile i'll stay with regan with my hundred knights.
this is the silliest thing i've ever seen.
then the liars are fools, for there are enough liars in the world to beat up the honest men and hang them.
it's not quite that simple. i wasn't expecting you, and i'm not ready to receive you. please hear what goneril is saying. we're trying to be reasonable while you're so upset, and we understand that you're old, and... but goneril knows what she's doing.
the best plays are still only illusions, and the worst are just as good, if you just use your imagination to fill them in.
(laughing) heaven help you for saying that, boy! (sad again) but what will you do without a father?
do you mean what you've just said?
in that case it's your imagination that's interesting, not the play.
if he were dead, you'd be weeping for him. if you aren't weeping, it's a good sign that i'll soon have a new father.
yes, i do. isn't fifty knights enough for you? why would you need more than that? or even that many. fifty knights are expensive to maintain, and there's always a risk they'll rebel. how could so many people, under two masters, get along under one roof? it would be hard, almost impossible.
if we imagine these guys as they imagine themselves, then they're first-class actors. look, here come two noble animals, a man and a lion.
silly babbler, how you talk!
why couldn't you be attended by my servants, or by regan's?
(played by snug) you, ladies, whose gentle hearts make you afraid of the smallest monstrous mouse that crawls around on the floor, might quake and tremble now when the wild lion roars in his most violent rage. you should know that i, snug the carpenter, am not a fierce lion or a lioness, because if i were a lion and i showed up here to cause trouble, i'd be taking my life in my hands.
bless you, fair lady! you don't know me, but i know you're an important person. i'm afraid something dangerous is coming toward you. if you'll take a simple man's advice, don't be here when it arrives. go away and take your children. i feel bad for scaring you like this, but it would be much worse for me to let you come to harm. and harm is getting close! heaven keep you safe!
yes, why not, my lord? then if they're negligent, we could control them. now that i think about the danger of these knights, if you come to stay with me, please bring no more than twenty-five of them with you. i won't lodge any more than that under my roof.
ah, it's a sensitive animal, with a good conscience.
where should i go? i haven't done anything wrong. but i have to remember that i'm here on earth, where doing evil is often praised, and doing good is sometimes a stupid and dangerous mistake. so then why should i offer this womanish defense that i'm innocent?
i gave you everything, 
he's the best actor i've ever seen play a lion.
who are these men?
and it was about time too.
he's as brave as a fox.
where is your husband?
i made you de facto rulers of my kingdom on condition that i could keep a hundred knights of my own. why should i now have to make do with only twenty-five? regan, is that what you said?
true. and as wise as a goose.
i hope he's not anywhere so disreputable that thugs like you can find him.
yes, i'll say it again, my lord. no more than twenty-five.
oh, that's not true, my lord. he's not brave enough to be wise.
he's a traitor.
bad people start to look better in comparison with worse people. not being the worst daughter deserves some praise, i guess. (to goneril) i'll go stay with you, then. your fifty is twice her twenty-five, so you must love me twice as much as she does.
he's not wise enough to be brave. anyway, he is what he is. let's listen to the moon.
you're lying, you shaggy-haired villain!
hear me out, my lord. why do you need twenty-five knights, or ten, or even five, when you're staying in a house with a staff of double that at your service?
this lantern represents the horned moon horned moon = crescent moon horned moon , 
what's that, you runt? (stabbing him) young son of a traitor!
why do you need even one?
he should have worn the horns on his head. cuckolds (husbands whose wives cheat on them) were imagined as having horns. horns on his head.
he has killed me, mother. run away, i beg you!
oh, don't ask me why i "need" them! even the poorest beggars have some meager possessions they don't really "need." if you allow people no more than what they absolutely need to survive, then a human life is no better than an animal's. you're a well-dressed lady. if you dressed only to stay warm, you wouldn't need these gorgeous clothes you're wearing, which don't keep you warm at all. if you want to talk about true needs, what i really need is patience. oh, gods, give me patience! you see me here, gods, a grieving old man, as wretched in his grief as he is in his old age. if you're the ones setting my daughters against me, don't let me be foolish enough to take it lying down. give me noble anger, and don't let any womanly tears fall down my
he's not a crescent moon, so his horns must be invisible inside the circle.
let's seek out some shady place where we can sit down alone and cry our hearts out.
man's cheeks. no, you monstrous hags, i'll get revenge on you both that will make the whole world... i will do such things, i don't know what i'll do exactly, but it'll be devastating. you expect me to cry? well, i won't.
this lantern represents the moon. i myself am playing the man in the moon, 
instead of crying, let's keep hold of our swords and defend our fallen homeland like honorable men. each day new widows howl, new orphans cry, and new sorrows slap heaven in the face, until it sounds like heaven itself feels scotland's anguish and screams in pain.
i have a good reason to cry, but my heart will splinter into a hundred thousand pieces before i let myself cry., oh, fool, i'll go mad!
well then, that's the biggest mistake of all. the man should be inside the lantern. how else is he the "man in the moon"?
i will avenge whatever i believe is wrong. and i'll believe whatever i'm sure is true. and i'll put right whatever i can when the time comes. what you just said may perhaps be true. this tyrant, whose mere name is so awful it hurts us to say it, was once considered an honest man. you were one of his favorites. he hasn't done anything to harm you yet. i'm inexperienced, but maybe you're planning to win macbeth's favor by betraying me to him. it would be smart to offer someone poor and innocent like me as a sacrificial lamb to satisfy an angry god like macbeth.
let's go inside. there's going to be a storm.
he can't go in there because of the candle. it's too hot.
i am not treacherous.
this is a small house. there's no room for the old man and his followers.
i'm tired of this moon. i wish he'd wax or wane off the stage.
but macbeth is. even someone with a good and virtuous nature might give way to a royal command. but i beg your pardon. my fears can't actually make you evil. angels are still bright even though lucifer, the brightest angel, fell from heaven. even though everything evil wants to look good, good still has to look good too.
it's his fault that he's all worked up like this. he has to pay the price for his foolish actions.
it seems like he's waning, but out of politeness we'll have to wait and see.
i have lost my hope of convincing you to fight against macbeth.
i'll be happy to keep him in my house, but not a single knight.
go ahead, moon.
maybe you lost your hopes about me where i found my doubts about you. why did you leave your wife and child vulnerable, the most precious things in your life, those strong bonds of love? how could you leave them behind? but i beg you, don't interpret my suspicions as slander against you. you must understand that i want to protect myself. you may really be honest, no matter what i think.
that's what i intend to do too. where is gloucester?
all i wanted to tell you is that the lantern is the moon, i'm the man in the moon, this thornbush is my thornbush, and this dog is my dog.
bleed, bleed, poor country! great tyrant, go ahead and build yourself up, because good people are afraid to stand up to you. enjoy everything you stole, because your title is safe! farewell, lord. i wouldn't be the villain you think i am even if i were offered all of macbeth's kingdom and the riches of the east too.
he followed the old man. here he comes back.
well, all of these should be in the lantern, because they're all in the moon. but be quiet, here comes thisbe.
don't be offended. i don't completely distrust you. i do think scotland is sinking under macbeth's oppression. our country weeps, it bleeds, and each day a fresh cut is added to her wounds. i also think there would be many people willing to fight for me. the english have promised me thousands of troops. but even so, when i have macbeth's head under my foot, or stuck on the end of my sword, then my poor country will be plagued by worse evil than it was before. it will suffer worse and in more ways than ever under the reign of the king who follows macbeth.
the king is enraged.
this is old ninny's tomb. but where is my love?
who are you talking about?
where's he going?
(roaring) hey!
i'm talking about myself. i know i have so many vices that when people see all of them exposed, evil macbeth will seem as pure as snow in comparison, and poor scotland will call him a sweet lamb when they compare him to me and my infinite evils.
he has called for his horse, but i don't know where he's headed.
good roaring, lion!
even in hell you couldn't find a devil worse than macbeth.
it's best just to let him go. he won't listen to anyone's advice.
good running, thisbe!
i admit that he's murderous, lecherous, greedy, lying, deceitful, violent, malicious, and guilty of every sin that has a name. but there is no end, absolutely none, to my sexual desires. your wives, your daughters, your old women, and your young maids together could not satisfy my lust. my desire would overpower all restraints and anyone who stood in my way. it would be better for macbeth to rule than someone like me.
(to gloucester) my lord, don't try to persuade him to stay.
good shining, moon!, really, the moon shines very well.
endless greed and lust in a man's nature is a kind of tyranny. it has caused the downfall of many kings. but don't be afraid to take the crown that belongs to you. you can find a way to satisfy your desires in secret, while still appearing virtuous. you can deceive everyone. there are more than enough willing women around. your lust can't possibly be so strong that you'd use up all the women willing to give themselves to the king once they find out he wants them.
ah, but it's getting dark, and the winds are strong and stormy. there's hardly a bush for miles around. he'll have no shelter.
that's good, lion! shake it around like a cat with a mouse.
along with being full of lust, i'm also incredibly greedy. if i became king, i would steal the nobles' lands, taking jewels from one guy and houses from another. the more i had, the greedier i would grow, until i'd invent false quarrels with my good and loyal subjects, destroying them so i could get my hands on their wealth.
oh, sir, impetuous people learn their lessons from the consequences of their foolish actions. lock the doors. his attendants are desperate, violent men. i'm afraid of what they might encourage him to do, considering the state he's in.
and then pyramus showed up.
the greed you're talking about is worse than lust because you won't outgrow it. greed has been the downfall of many kings. but don't be afraid. scotland has enough treasures to satisfy you out of your own royal coffers. these bad qualities are bearable when balanced against your good sides.
lock the doors, my lord. it's a wild night. regan gives good advice. come in out of the storm.
so the lion disappeared.
but i don't have any good sides. i don't have a trace of the qualities a king needs, such as justice, truth, moderation, stability, generosity, perseverance, mercy, humility, devotion, patience, courage, and bravery. instead, i overflow with every variation of all the different vices. no, if i had power i would take world peace and throw it down to hell.
who's there, aside from this foul weather?
sweet moon, i thank you for your sunny beams. i thank you, moon, for shining now so bright, because by the light of your gracious, golden, glittering gleams, i hope to be able to see my faithful thisbe., but wait. oh no! but, look, poor me, what a terrible tragedy is here! eyes, do you see? how can it be? oh, dainty duck! oh, dear! your cloak so good, what, stained with blood? come, terrible furies, and punish whoever has hurt her! oh, fate, come and cut the thread of my life. conquer, crush, conclude, and kill!
oh scotland, scotland!
someone whose mood is as foul as the weather, very troubled.
you could get sad watching this actor's passionate lament, if one of your good friends happened to die right at the same time.
if someone like me is fit to be king, let me know. i really am exactly as i have described myself to you.
i know you. where's the king?
damned if i don't feel sorry for him.
(to malcolm) fit to be king? you're not fit to live!, oh miserable nation, ruled by a usurping, murderous tyrant, when will you see peaceful days again? the man who has a legal right to the throne is, by his own admission, a cursed man and a disgrace to the royal family., your royal father duncan was a virtuous king. your mother spent more time on her knees in prayer than she did standing up, and she lived a life of absolute piety. good-bye. the evils you have described inside yourself have driven me out of scotland forever. oh my heart, your hope is dead!
struggling with the wind and rain. he's shouting at the wind to blow the earth into the sea, or make the sea flood the earth, he wants to see the world return to primal chaos. he keeps tearing out his white hair, which the blindly raging winds catch up and blow away into nothingness. small but brave in his surroundings, he's trying to stand up against the wind and rain blowing back and forth. he's running bareheaded, calling for the end of the world, out there on a night like this, when even savage animals ravenous with hunger crawl under cover and hide.
oh, mother nature, why did you create lions? a mean and awful lion has deflowered bottom means "devoured," since "deflowered" would mean that the lion had taken thisbe's virginity. deflowered my darling, who is, no, no, who was the most beautiful lady who ever lived, or loved, or liked, or looked. come on, tears, pour over me! come on out, sword, and wound pyramus in the chest, yes, right here on the left side where his heart is. (pyramus stabs himself)
macduff, this passionate outburst, which proves your integrity, has removed my doubts about you and made me realize that you really are trustworthy and honorable. that devil macbeth has tried many times to trick me and lure me into his power, and prudence prevents me from believing people too quickly. but with god as my witness, i will let myself be guided by you, and i take back my confession. i take back all the bad things i said about myself, because none of those flaws are really part of my character. i'm still a virgin. i have never told a lie. i barely care about what i already own, let alone feel jealous of another's possessions. i have never broken a promise. i wouldn't betray the devil himself. i love truth as much as i love life. the lies i told about my character are actually the first false words i have ever spoken. the person who i really am is ready to serve you and our poor country.
but who's with him?
and so i'm dying. here i go, here i go. okay, now i'm dead. my soul has fled to the sky. my tongue shall see no more, it's time for the moon to go away.
indeed, before you arrived here, old siward, with ten thousand soldiers already prepared for battle, was making his way here. now we will fight macbeth together, and may the chances of our success be as great as the justice of our cause! why are you silent?
nobody but the fool, who's trying to soothe the wounds in the king's heart with jokes.
now die, die, die, die, die. (pyramus dies)
it's hard to make sense of such different stories.
sir, i know you, and i trust you enough to share something very important with you. there's a feud between albany and cornwall, although they've been clever enough to hide it thus far. like other powerful rulers, they have servants who are actually french spies in disguise. these spies have noticed something, perhaps in the squabbles between albany and cornwall, or in the tough line both of them have taken against the good old king, or perhaps in some deeper matter at the root of both of these problems, the point is that the king of france has sent troops into our divided kingdom. some french agents are already at work in our main ports and are on the verge of declaring open war. now this is where you come in. if you trust me enough to hurry to dover, you'll earn the gratitude of many people when you fairly report the monstrous and maddening extent of the king's suffering. i'm a nobleman, and i know what i'm doing in assigning this job to you.
is someone throwing dice? i guess it's "die," not dice, since there's only one of him.
well, we'll speak more soon. (to the doctor) is king edward coming out?
let's discuss it some more.
actually he's a die with no dots, since he's nothing, he's dead.
yes, sir. a crowd of sick people is waiting for him to heal them. their illness confounds the most advanced techniques of modern medicine, but when he touches them, they heal immediately because of the power granted to him by heaven.
(giving the gentleman a purse and a ring) no, there's no need. to assure you that i am a nobleman in disguise, here is some money. if you see cordelia, as i'm sure you will, show her this ring. she'll tell you who i am. damn this storm! i'll go find the king.
with a doctor's help he might recover and become an ass again.
thank you, doctor.
let me shake your hand. do you have anything else to tell me?
if moonshine's gone before thisbe comes back, how will she be able to see in the dark to find her lover dead?
what disease is he talking about?
only a few more words, but they're the most important. let me go this way, and you go that way. when one of us finds the king, he'll call out to the other one.
she'll see him by starlight. here she comes. her moaning and groaning will end the play.
it's called the evil. edward's healing touch is a miracle that i have seen him perform many times during my stay in england. how he receives these gifts from heaven, only he can say. but he cures people with strange conditions, all swollen, plagued by ulcers, and pitiful to look at, patients who are beyond the help of surgery, by placing a gold coin around their necks and saying holy prayers over them.
blow, winds! blow until your cheeks crack! rage on, blow! let tornadoes spew water until the steeples of our churches and the weathervanes are all drowned. let quick sulfurous lightning, strong enough to split enormous trees, singe the white hair on my head. let thunder flatten the spherical world, crack open all the molds from which nature forms human beings, and spill all the seeds from which ungrateful humans grow!
i don't think a ridiculous pyramus like that one deserves much moaning. i hope she keeps it short.
they say that he bequeaths this ability to heal to his royal descendants. along with this strange power, he also has the gift of prophecy and various other abilities. all of these signs mark him as a man graced by god.
oh, uncle, it's better to smile and flatter indoors where it's dry than get soaked out here. please, uncle, let's go in and ask your daughters to forgive you. this storm has no pity for either wise men or fools.
i can't decide whether pyramus or thisbe is better. god help us if he's a better man. but god help us if she's a better woman.
who's that coming over here?
let thunder rumble! let lightning spit fire! let the rain spray! the rain, the wind, the thunder and lightning are not my daughters. nature, i don't accuse your weather of unkindness. i never gave you a kingdom or raised you as my child, and you don't owe me any obedience. so go ahead and have your terrifying fun. here i am, your slave, a poor, sick, weak, hated old man. but i can still accuse you of kowtowing, taking my daughters' side against me, ancient as i am. oh, it's foul!
look, she's spotted him with those sweet eyes of hers.
by his dress i can tell he's my countryman, but i don't recognize him.
anyone who has a house to cover his head has a good head on his shoulders. the guy who finds a place to put his penis before he has a house of his own will wind up dirt poor and covered with lice
and now she'll start moaning, of course, 
my noble kinsman, welcome.
with a crowd of slut daughters to add to the slut wife. the man who kicks away the person he should love will bring himself pain and sleepless nights. for there never was a pretty woman who didn't like to preen in the mirror.
are you asleep, my love? what, are you dead, my dove? oh, pyramus, get up! speak, speak. can't you talk? dead, dead? the dirt of a grave must cover your sweet eyes! your lily-white lips, your cherry-red nose, and your buttercup-yellow cheeks are gone, gone forever. lovers, moan and weep. his eyes were as green as leeks. oh, fate, come, come to me, with hands as pale as milk. soak your hands in blood and gore, since you have cut the thread of his life with scissors. tongue, do not speak. come, trusty sword. come, blade, drench my breast with blood. (she stabs herself) goodbye, friends! this is how thisbe comes to an end. goodbye, goodbye, goodbye. (thisbe dies)
i recognize him now. may god alter the circumstances that keep us apart!
no, i'll be patient. i won't say a word.
moonshine and lion are left to bury the dead.
hello, sir.
who's there?
yes, and wall too.
is scotland the same as when i left it?
a wise man and a fool.
(out of character) no, i assure you. the wall that kept their fathers apart has been taken down. would you like to see the epilogue or hear a country dance between two of us?
alas, our poor country! it's too frightened to look at itself. scotland is no longer the land where we were born; it's the land where we'll die. where no one ever smiles except for the fool who knows nothing. where sighs, groans, and shrieks rip through the air but no one notices. where violent sorrow is a common emotion. when the funeral bells ring, people no longer ask who died. good men die before the flowers in their caps wilt. they die before they even fall sick.
(to lear) ah, sir, you're here? even creatures of the night aren't out tonight in this storm. the angry skies terrify the animals that usually prowl in the dark, making them stay in their caves. never in my life have i heard such horrible blasts of thunder, such a roaring downpour, such groaning winds. it's too trying and terrifying for humans to bear.
no epilogue, please. your play doesn't need to be excused afterward with an epilogue. never apologize, when the actors are all dead, no one can be blamed. as a matter of fact, if the playwright had played pyramus and hanged himself with thisbe's belt, it would have been a very good tragedy. it's a good tragedy, very well done. but come on, let's see you do your dance. forget your epilogue.
oh, your report is too poetic, but it sounds so true!
let the gods who stirred up this dreadful storm bring their enemies to light. any wretched person who has committed secret crimes and escaped justice should tremble in fear now. better hide now, you murderers, you perjurers, you incest-practicing people who pretend to be virtuous. tremble and shake, villain, for secretly plotting against human lives. let all your bottled-up crimes come flooding out at last, as you beg for
the clock has chimed midnight. lovers, it's time to go to bed. it's almost fairy time. i'm afraid we're going to oversleep in the morning as late as we've stayed up tonight.this blatantly stupid play helped us kill the time until bed. dear friends, let's go to bed. we'll continue this celebration for two weeks, with nightly parties and new fun.
what is the most recent news?
mercy from the gods who summon these terrifying winds and thunderbolts. other people have sinned against me more than i have sinned against them.
now the hungry lion roars and the wolf howls at the moon. the farmer snores, exhausted from his work. the charred logs glow in the fireplace, and the owl's hoot makes the sick man think about his own death. now is the time of night when graves open wide and release spirits to glide over the graveyard paths.
even news an hour old is old news. every minute another awful thing happens.
why, you're not even wearing a hat? my lord, there's a hut nearby. it will give you some protection from this storm. rest there while i go back to the unfriendly house where your sisters are staying, and ask them for help. they are harder than the stones the house is made of. just now, when i asked them if they knew where you were, they wouldn't let me in. but i'll go back and force them to be polite.
and we fairies, who run away from the sun just like the goddess of the night, following darkness like a dream, are getting antsy. but i'm here to make sure that not even a mouse disturbs this blessed house. i've been sent to clean house a bit before the fairies come.
how is my wife?
i'm starting to lose my mind. (to the fool) come on, my boy. how are you? are you cold? i'm cold myself. (to kent) where's this hut, man? odd how when you're desperate, even shoddy things like this hut can seem precious. show me where that hut is. poor fool, part of me still feels sorry for you.
let the dying fire shine a glimmering light throughout the house. i want every elf and fairy to hop lightly, like a bird on a twig, and to sing and dance this song along with me.
she's well.
(singing) the stupid man, hey-hoy, the wind and the rain, must take what he can get, since the rain comes every day.
first rehearse your song from memory, and make sure each note is pretty. we'll all join hands and sing, and bless this place with our fairy grace.
and all my children?
that's true, my good boy., come on, take us to that hut.
(singing) now, until morning, each fairy should walk through this house. titania and i will go to the royal marriage bed to bless it, and the children conceived in that bed will always have good luck. each of the three couples will always be faithful and in love, and their children will have no deformities.
they're well too.
this would be a great night to satisfy a whore's lust. i'll recite a prophecy before i go. one day, when priests don't practice what they preach, when brewers dilute their beer with water, when noblemen teach their tailors how to sew, when instead of heretics being burned at the stake, lovers are burned by syphilis, when every law case is tried fairly, when no gentleman is in debt, when no one slanders anyone else, and thieves don't snatch wallets in crowds, when moneylenders count their gold in the open air, and pimps and whores build fine churches, then the kingdom of england will come to ruin. and whoever lives to see that day will walk with his feet. this is the prophecy that the wizard merlin according to legend, merlin was the wizard at the court of king arthur and the round table and predicted the end of the world in rhymes that are similar to the fool's prophecy. however, king lear takes place centuries before the time the mythical merlin is supposed to have existed. merlin will make one day. i'm a little ahead of my time in saying it now.
they won't have moles, or harelips, or scars, or abnormal markings, or anything else that might alarm someone if their baby was born with it. use this blessed dew from the fields to bless each room in the palace with sweet peace. and the blessed owner will always be safe. run along. don't stay long. meet me at dawn.
macbeth hasn't attacked them?
oh, oh, edmund, i don't like this monstrous business. when asked the duke and duchess of cornwall if i could take pity on the king and shelter him from the storm, they took my house away from me and ordered me never to talk about him, lobby for him, or support him in any way.
if we actors have offended you, just think of it this way and everything will be all right, you were asleep when you saw these visions, and this silly and pathetic story was no more real than a dream. ladies and gentlemen, don't get upset with me. if you forgive us, we'll make everything all right. i'm an honest puck, and i swear that if we're lucky enough not to get hissed at, we'll make it up to you soon. if not, then i'm a liar. so good night to everyone. give me some applause, if we're friends, and robin will make everything up to you.
they were at peace lady macduff and the children are "well" and "at peace" in the sense that they're dead. at peace when i left them.
that's uncivilized and unnatural!
don't be stingy with your words. what's the news?
oh, be quiet. there's a feud between the two dukes. and there's something even worse than that. i got a letter tonight. it's dangerous to talk about it. i've locked it up in my room. the humiliation that the king is suffering now will be revenged thoroughly. armed forces have already landed. we have to take the king's side. i'll look for him and secretly help him. you go and talk to the duke so he won't notice i'm helping the king. if he asks to see me, tell him i'm sick and went to bed. even if i have to die, as they threaten, i have to help the king. strange things are about to happen, edmund. please be careful.
if it's true that music makes people more in love, keep playing. give me too much of it, so i'll get sick of it and stop loving. play that part again! it sounded sad. oh, it sounded like a sweet breeze blowing gently over a bank of violets, taking their scent with it. that's enough. stop. it doesn't sound as sweet as it did before. oh, love is so restless! it makes you want everything, but it makes you sick of things a minute later, no matter how good they are. love is so vivid and fantastical that nothing compares to it.
while i was coming here to tell you my sad news, i heard rumors that many good men are arming themselves to rebel against macbeth. when i saw macbeth's army on the move, i knew the rumors must be true. now is the time when we need your help. your presence in scotland would inspire people to fight. even the women would fight to rid themselves of macbeth's oppression.
i'll tell the duke right away that you're going to see the king, which is forbidden. and i'll tell him about the letter too. you'll get what you deserve, and i'll be rewarded with everything you lose, in other words, all your lands. the young generation rises while the old one falls.
do you want to go hunting, my lord?
let them be comforted, i'm returning to scotland. gracious king edward has sent us noble siward and ten thousand soldiers. there is no soldier more experienced or successful than siward in the entire christian world.
here's the hut, my lord. please go inside. the night's too rough for humans to bear.
hunting what, curio?
i wish i could repay this happy news with good news of my own. but i have some news that should be howled in a barren desert where nobody can hear it.
leave me for a bit.
the hart hart = male deer hart .
what is this news about? does it affect all of us? or just one of us?
my lord, here is the entrance.
that's what i'm doing, only it's my heart that's being hunted. oh, when i first saw olivia, it seemed like she made the air around her sweeter and purer. in that instant i was transformed into a hart, and my desire for her has hounded me like a pack of vicious dogs.
no decent man can keep from sharing in the sorrow, but my news affects you alone.
will you break my heart?
what's going on? what have you heard from her?
if it's for me, don't keep it from me. let me have it now.
i'd rather break my own heart. now please go in.
i'm sorry, but they wouldn't let me in. but i got the following answer from her handmaid. olivia's not going to show her face for the next seven years, not even to the sky itself. instead, she'll go around veiled like a nun, and once a day she'll water her room with tears. she's doing this out of love for her dead brother, whom she wants to keep fresh in her memory forever.
i hope you won't hate me forever after i say these things, because i will soon fill your ears with the most dreadful news you have ever heard.
you think it's a big deal that this fierce storm is soaking me to the skin. it's a big deal to you. but whenever you feel a larger pain, the smaller one disappears. you would run away from a bear, but if the only way to run was into the stormy ocean, you'd turn around and confront the bear. when your mind is at peace, your body is sensitive to the elements. but this storm in my mind keeps me from feeling anything except what's tormenting me, how ungrateful my children are! isn't their ingratitude like the mouth biting the hand that feeds it? but i'll punish them thoroughly. no, i won't cry any more. imagine them locking me out on a night like this! but let it rain; i'll survive. on a night like this! oh, regan, goneril, your kind old father whose generous heart gave you everything, oh, if i think about that i'll go mad. i want to avoid that. no more of these thoughts.
oh, if she loves her brother this much, think how she'll love me when i finally win her over and make her forget all her other attachments! her mind and heart will be ruled by one man alone, me! take me to the garden. i need a beautiful place to sit and think about love.
i think i can guess what you're about to say.
my lord, please go inside here.
what country is this, friends?
your castle was attacked. your wife and children were savagely slaughtered. if i told you how they were killed, it would cause you so much pain that it would kill you too, and add your body to the pile of murdered corpses.
go inside yourself. make yourself comfortable. this storm protects me from thoughts that would hurt me more. but i'll go in. (to fool) you go in first, boy. oh, you suffering homeless people, no, you go in. i'll pray first, then i'll sleep.
this is illyria, lady.
merciful heaven! (to macduff) come on, man, don't keep your grief hidden. put your sorrow into words. the grief you keep inside you will whisper in your heart until it breaks.
poor homeless creatures suffering this storm, wherever you are, how will you survive a night like this with no roof over your heads, no fat on your sides to keep you warm, and only rags for clothes? when i was king i didn't do enough to help you. powerful men, take your medicine by learning about hardship. go out and feel what the impoverished feel. then you can give them your extra wealth and make the world more fair.
and what am i supposed to do in illyria? my brother is in heaven. or maybe there's a chance he didn't drown., what do you think, sailors?
they killed my children too?
(from inside) the water in here is nine feet deep! poor tom!
it was a total fluke that you yourself were saved.
they killed your wife, your children, your servants, anyone they could find.
don't come in here, uncle! there's a spirit in here! help me, help me!
oh, my poor brother! but maybe by some fluke he was saved too.
and i had to be away! my wife was killed too?
give me your hand. who's there?
it's possible, ma'am. don't give up yet. when our ship was wrecked and you and a few other survivors were clinging onto our lifeboat, i saw your brother tie himself to a big mast floating in the sea. he was acting resourcefully and courageously in a dangerous situation. for as long as i could see him, he stayed afloat on the waves like arion arion was a greek poet who was saved from drowning by a dolphin. arion on the dolphin's back.
i said she was.
a ghost, a ghost! he says his name's poor tom.
(giving him money) thank you for saying that, here's some money to express my gratitude. since i survived, it's easier for me to imagine he survived too, and what you say gives me a reason to hope for the best. do you know this area we're in?
take comfort. let's cure this awful grief by taking revenge on macbeth.
who are you, moaning in the hut like that? come out.
yes, ma'am, i know it well. i was born and raised less than three hours from here.
he doesn't have children. all my pretty little children? did you say all? oh, that bird from hell! all of them? what, all my children and their mother dead in one fell swoop?
go away! the devil's after me! the cold wind blows through the hawthorn trees. ha! get into your cold beds and warm yourselves up.
who's the ruler here?
fight it like a man.
did you give everything to your two daughters and end up like this?
a duke who is noble in name and character.
i will. but i also have to feel it like a man. i can't help remembering the things that were most precious to me. did heaven watch the slaughter and not send down any help? sinful macduff, they were killed because of you! as wicked as i am, they were slaughtered because of me, not because of anything they did. may god give their souls rest.
whoever gave a thing to poor tom? the devil has chased him through fires, across rivers and whirlpools, and over swamps. the devil has put knives under tom's pillow and hangman's ropes in his church pew, encouraging him to kill himself. the devil has put rat poison next to poor tom's oatmeal and made him gallop his horse over narrow bridges, chasing his own shadow as if it were a traitor. bless your five senses! tom's chilly. oh do-de, do-de, do-de. god protect you from tornadoes, evil stars, and diseases! take pity on poor tom, who is persecuted by the devil. i can almost catch him. there!... and over there!... and over there!
what's his name?
let this anger sharpen your sword. transform your grief into anger. don't block the feelings in your heart; let them loose as rage.
have his daughters made him crazy like this?, couldn't you have kept something for yourself? did you have to give them everything?
orsino.
i could go on weeping like a woman and bragging about how i will avenge them! but gentle heavens, don't keep me waiting. bring me face to face with macbeth, that devil of scotland. put him within the reach of my sword, and if he escapes, may heaven forgive him as well!
no, he kept a blanket to cover himself with. if he hadn't, we'd all be embarrassed to look at him.
orsino. i've heard my father mention him. when i first heard about him, he was still a bachelor.
now you sound like a man. come on, let's go see king edward. the army is ready. all we have to do now is say goodbye to the king. macbeth is ripe for the picking. we'll be acting as god's agents. cheer up as much as you can. a new day will come at last.
then may your daughters be cursed with all the horrible fates that await sinners!
he's still a bachelor, or at least he was a month ago, when i left. but there was a rumor, you know, people always gossip about royalty, that he was in love with the beautiful olivia.
i've stayed up with you for two nights now, and i haven't seen any evidence of what you were talking about. when was the last time you saw her sleepwalking?
he doesn't have any daughters, sir.
who's she?
since macbeth went to war, i have seen her rise from her bed, put on her nightgown, unlock her closet, take out some paper, fold it, write on it, read it, seal it up, and then return to bed, remaining asleep the entire time.
like hell! nothing but cruel daughters could have degraded him like this. is it fashionable now for neglected fathers to get so little pity? that's a fair punishment! i'm the one who fathered those bloodsucking daughters.
a virtuous young woman, the daughter of a count who died last year. her brother had custody of her for a while, but then he died too. they say she's totally sworn off men now, in memory of her brother.
it's unnatural to be asleep and act as if you're awake. when she is like this, besides walking and performing various activities, have you heard her say anything?
pillicock "pillicock" = penis; "pillicock hill" = vulva pillicock sat on pillicock hill. la, la, la, la!
i wish i could work for that lady! it'd be a good way to hide from the world until the time was right to identify myself.
she says something, sir, but i will not repeat it to you.
this stormy night will turn us all into fools and madmen.
that would be hard to do. she won't allow anyone in to see her, not even the duke's messengers.
you can tell me. you really should.
beware of the devil. obey your parents, keep your word, don't swear, don't sleep with another man's wife, and don't covet flashy clothes. tom's chilly.
you seem to be a good person, captain, and although people who look beautiful are often corrupt inside, i believe that you have a beautiful mind to go with your good looks and manners. please, and i'll pay you plenty for this, help me conceal my identity, and find me the right disguise so i can look the way i want. i want to be this duke's servant. you'll introduce me to him as a eunuch. you won't be wasting your time, because i really can sing and talk to him about many different kinds of music, so he'll be happy to have me in his service. only time will tell what will happen after that, just please keep quiet about what i'm trying to do.
i will not confess it to you nor to anyone else, because there was no one else to witness her speech.
what were you before this?
i won't say a word. you can be a eunuch, but i'll be mute. i swear on my life i won't tell your secret.
look, here she comes! this is exactly how she always looks, and, i swear it, she is fast asleep. watch her. keep hidden.
i used to be an honorable devoted servant who curled his hair, wore his mistress's glove in his hat as a token of her affection, and slept with his mistress whenever she wanted. i swore oaths with every other word out of my mouth, and broke the oaths shamelessly. i used to dream of having sex and wake up to do it. i loved wine and gambling, and had more women than a turkish sultan keeps in his harem. i was disloyal and violent. i eavesdropped. i was as lazy as a hog, as sneaky as a fox, as greedy as a wolf, as mad as a dog, and as ruthless as a lion. don't ever let a woman know what you're thinking. stay away from whores, don't chase skirts, don't borrow money, and resist the devil. the cold wind's still blowing through the hawthorn tree. (speaking to an imaginary horse) dauphin, my boy, stop that., let the horse go by.
thank you. show me the way.
how did she get that candle?
you'd be better off dead than facing the storm as naked as you are. is this all a human being is? look at him. (to edgar) you are not indebted to animals for your clothes since don't wear silk, leather, or wool, not even perfume perfume can be made from the secretions of a civet cat. perfume . ha! the three of us are sophisticated compared to you. you're the real thing. the human being unburdened by the trappings of civilization is no more than a poor, naked, two-legged animal like you. off with these clothes borrowed from animals! let me unbutton this. (he tears at his clothes)
what's wrong with my niece? why is she reacting so strangely to her brother's death? grief is bad for people's health.
it stands by her bedside. she always has to have a light next to her. those are her orders.
please calm down, uncle. this is a nasty night to go swimming. on a night like this a campfire in an empty field would be like the heart of a dirty old man, a tiny spark in a cold body. look, here comes a walking fire.
for god's sake, sir toby, you've got to come home earlier at night. my lady olivia, your niece, disapproves of your late-night partying.
you see, her eyes are open.
this is the devil flibbertigibbet. he gets up at nightfall and wanders around till dawn. he can make your eyes squint and film over and give you a harelip. he rots ripened wheat and hurts the poor creatures of the earth. saint withold crossed the field three times, he met a she-demon and her nine kids, he told her to promise to stop doing harm. and go away, witch, go away.
well, she can get used to it.
yes, but they don't see anything.
how are you, your highness?
yes, but you need to keep yourself within the limits of order and decency.
what's she doing now? look how she rubs her hands.
(pointing at gloucester) who's that?
keep myself? the only thing i'm keeping myself in is the clothes i'm wearing. they're good enough to drink in, and so are these boots. if they aren't, they can go hang themselves by their own laces!
she often does that. she looks like she's washing her hands. i've seen her do that before for as long as fifteen minutes.
who are you? what do you want?
you're going to destroy yourself with all this drinking. lady olivia said so yesterday. she also mentioned some stupid knight you brought in one night as a possible husband for her.
there's still a spot here.
who are you? what are your names?
who, sir andrew aguecheek?
listen! she's talking. i'll write down what she says, so i'll remember it better.
poor tom, who eats frogs, toads, tadpoles, lizards, and newts. when the devil tells me to, i eat cow dung for salads, i swallow old rats and dead dogs, i drink pond scum. in every village i'm whipped and put in the stocks, punished and imprisoned. but i used to be a respectable servant, with three suits and six shirts. once i had a horse to ride and a sword to wear, but now poor tom's been eating rats and mice for seven long years. beware of the devil who follows me around. calm down, smulkin, you fiend!
yes, that's the one.
(rubbing her hands) come out, damned spot! out, i command you! one, two. ok, it's time to do it now., hell is murky!, nonsense, my lord, nonsense! you are a soldier, and yet you are afraid? why should we be scared, when no one can lay the guilt upon us?, but who would have thought the old man would have had so much blood in him?
(to lear) don't you have anyone more respectable with you, your highness?
he's as tall "tall" could be used as slang for "brave." tall as a man in illyria.
did you hear that?
oh, the devil is quite a gentleman. he's called modo and mahu.
what does his height have to do with anything?
the thane of fife had a wife. where is she now?, what, will my hands never be clean?, no more of that, my lord, no more of that. you'll ruin everything by acting startled like this.
(to lear) my lord, our children have become so beastly that they hate their own parents.
why, he has an income of three thousand ducats a year.
now look what you've done. you've heard something you shouldn't have.
poor tom's chilly.
i bet he'll spend his whole inheritance in a year. he's a fool and a spendthrift.
she said something she shouldn't have said, i'm sure of that. heaven knows what secrets she's keeping.
come back to my house with me. i couldn't bear to obey all of your daughters' harsh orders. they commanded me to lock my doors and leave you out in this merciless storm, but i've come out here to find you and take you where there's warmth and food.
you shouldn't talk about him like that! he plays the violin and speaks three or four languages word for word without a dictionary. he has all of nature's best gifts.
i still have the smell of blood on my hand. all the perfumes of arabia couldn't make my little hand smell better. oh, oh, oh!
first let me talk with this philosopher here., (to edgar) what causes thunder?
right, he's a natural-born idiot. besides being a fool, he's argumentative. if he didn't have the coward's gift for backing down from a fight, they say he'd be dead by now.
what a heavy sigh! her heart is carrying a heavy weight.
(to lear) sir, please take him up on his offer and go back with him.
anyone who says that is a lying piece of garbage. who said that?
i wouldn't want a heart like hers even if you made me queen.
i want to chat a bit with this wise greek in shakespeare's time the greeks were associated with wisdom and education, especially in philosophy. important greek works in philosophy and the sciences had been recently rediscovered after centuries of oblivion. greek man., what kind of philosophy do you study?
the same people who say he gets drunk with you every night.
well, well, well.
how to keep the devil away and kill rats.
we only drink toasts to my niece. i'll drink to her as long as there's a hole in my throat and booze in illyria. anyone who refuses to drink to my niece until his brain spins around like a merry-go-round is scum. but speak of the devil, here comes sir andrew agueface.
i hope what she's saying is well, sir!
let me ask you something in private.
sir toby belch! how are you, sir toby belch?
this disease is beyond my medical skills. but i have known people who sleepwalked and weren't guilty of anything.
(speaking so that only gloucester can hear) ask him again to return with you, my lord. he's beginning to lose his mind.
sweet sir andrew!
wash your hands. put on your nightgown. don't look so frightened. i tell you again, banquo is buried. he cannot come out of his grave.
can you blame him?
(to maria) and hello to you, my little wench.
is this true?
his daughters want to kill him. ah, good old kent said this would happen, that poor, banished man. you say the king is losing his mind. let me tell you, my friend, i'm almost insane myself. i had a son, whom i've legally disowned. he tried to kill me recently, very recently. i loved him, as much as any father ever loved his son. to tell you the truth, i'm crazed with grief.
hello, sir.
to bed, to bed! there's a knocking at the gate. come, come, come, come, give me your hand. what's done cannot be undone. to bed, to bed, to bed!
what a storm! (to lear) your highness, please, i'm begging you, 
chat her up, sir andrew. chat her up.
will she go to bed now?
excuse me, sir., (to edgar) noble philosopher, come talk to me.
what?
yes, right away.
tom's chilly.
this is my niece's maid.
evil rumors are going around. unnatural acts will cause supernatural sleepwalking and sleeptalking were considered supernatural events in shakespeares time. supernatural things to happen. people with guilty and deranged minds will confess their secrets to their pillows as they sleep. this woman needs a priest more than a doctor. god forgive us all! (to the waiting- gentlewoman) look after her. remove anything she might hurt herself with. watch her constantly. and now, good-night. she has bewildered my mind and amazed my eyes. i have an opinion, but i don't dare to say it out loud.
get into the hut, man. stay warm.
my dear miss chat-her-up, i look forward to getting to know you better.
good night, good doctor.
come on, let's all go inside.
my name is mary, sir.
the english army is near, led by malcolm, his uncle siward, and the good macduff. they burn for revenge. the wrongs they have suffered would make dead men rise up and fight.
this way, my lord.
miss mary chat-her-up, 
we'll meet them near birnam wood. they are coming that way.
(pointing to edgar) i'll go with him. i want to stay with my philosopher.
no, you've got it wrong. when i said "chat her up," i wasn't saying her name. i was telling you to go after her, woo her, confront her.
does anyone know if donalbain is with his brother?
(to gloucester) my lord, calm him down. let him take that guy inside too.
good heavens, i'd never do that with people watching. is that really what you meant?
he is definitely not there, sir. i have a list of all the important men. siward's son is there, as well as many boys too young to have beards who will become men by joining in this battle.
all right, bring him along.
goodbye, gentlemen. (she starts to exit)
what is the tyrant macbeth doing?
(to edgar) boy, come along with us.
she's leaving. if you let her go this easily, sir andrew, you don't deserve to ever use your sword again.
he is fortifying his castle at dunsinane with heavy defenses. some say he's insane. those who hate him less call it brave anger. one thing is certain: he's out of control.
come on, my dear greek philosopher.
if you leave like this, my dear, i won't ever use my sword again. i'm not just talking nonsense to you, i mean everything i say. do you think you've got a couple of fools on your hands here?
now macbeth feels the blood of his murdered enemies sticking to his hands. now, rebel armies punish him every minute for his treachery. the soldiers he commands are only following orders. they don't fight because they love macbeth. now he seems too small to be a great king, like a midget trying to wear the robes of a giant.
hush, don't talk.
i'm not holding your hand, sir.
who can blame him for acting crazy, when inside he condemns himself for everything he's done?
the young knight roland came to the dark tower. he said, "fee, fie, fo, fum, i smell the blood of an englishman."
but you will. here's my hand. (he offers her his hand)
well, let's keep marching and give our loyalty to someone who truly deserves it. we're going to meet malcolm, the doctor who will cure our sick country. we'll pour out our own blood to help him.
i'll get my revenge before i leave this house.
(taking his hand) a girl's got a right to her opinions. take your hand to a bar and put a drink in it.
however much blood we need to give to water the royal flower and drown the weeds, to make malcolm king and get rid of macbeth. let's proceed on our march to birnam.
i'm afraid to think how i'll be criticized for letting my natural affection for my father give way to my loyalty to you.
why, sweetheart? is there a hidden meaning in this?
don't bring me any more reports. i don't care if all the thanes desert me. until birnam wood gets up and moves to dunsinane, i won't be affected by fear. what's the boy malcolm? wasn't he born from a woman? the spirits that know the future have told me this: "don't be afraid, macbeth. no man born from a woman will ever defeat you." so get out of here, disloyal thanes, and join the weak and decadent english! my mind and courage will never falter with doubt or shake with fear.
now i realize your brother tried to kill your father not just because your brother is an evil man, but because your father deserved it by being wicked himself.
you're not holding a glass. your hand is dry maria implies that he's old and dried-up. dry , sir.
may the devil turn you black, you white-faced fool! why do you look like a frightened goose?
how unlucky am i, having to apologize for doing the right thing! (giving cornwall a letter) this is the letter he was talking about, and it confirms he was a spy for france. oh god, i wish he had never betrayed us, or that i hadn't been the one to discover his treason.
well, i hope so. i'm not such an idiot that i can't keep my hands dry. but i don't get it, what's the joke?
there are ten thousand, 
come with me to see the duchess.
just a bit of my dry humor, sir.
geese, you idiot?
if this letter's right, you've got a lot to deal with.
are you always so funny?
soldiers, sir.
right or not, it's made you the earl of gloucester. go find your father and let him know we're going to arrest him.
yes, i've got a handful of jokes. but oops, when i let go of your hand, i let go of the biggest joke of all.
go pinch your cheeks and bring some color back into your face, you cowardly boy. what soldiers, fool? curse you! that pale face of yours will frighten the others as well. what soldiers, milk-face?
(to himself) if i catch my father helping the king, he'll seem even more guily. (to cornwall) i'll do what i must loyally, even though it pains me to take action against my father.
sir, you need a drink. when has anyone ever put you down like that.
the english army, sir.
i put my trust in you. you'll see that i'm a better father to you than gloucester.
never. i've only been that far down when i've drunk myself under the table. sometimes i think i'm no smarter than average. i eat a lot of red meat, and maybe that makes me stupid.
get out of my sight.
it's better here than outside. be happy about it. i'll do what i can to make you even more comfortable. i won't be gone long.
absolutely.
seyton!, i'm sick at heart when i see, seyton, come here!, this battle will either secure my reign forever or else topple me from the throne. i have lived long enough. the course of my life is beginning to wither and fall away, like a yellowing leaf in autumn. the things that should go along with old age, like honor, love, obedience, and loyal friends, i cannot hope to have. instead, i have passionate but quietly whispered curses, people who honor me with their words but not in their hearts, and lingering life, which my heart would gladly end, though i can't bring myself to do it. seyton!
he can't bear his grief and so he's losing his mind. may god reward you for your kindness!
if i really believed that, i'd give up red meat totally. by the way, i'm going home tomorrow, sir toby.
what do you want?
the devil frateretto is telling me that the diabolical roman emperor nero nero was a first-century a.d. roman emperor who, according to legend, played the fiddle while rome burned. nero likes to go fishing in hell. pray to the gods, you fool, and beware the foul devil.
pourquoi pourquoi means "why" in french. pourquoi , my friend?
is there more news?
here's a riddle, uncle. is the lunatic a gentleman or an ordinary guy?
what does "pourquoi" mean? does it mean i will or i won't? oh, i wish i'd spent as much time learning languages as i spent on fencing, dancing, and bear-baiting bear-baiting, in which a bear was tied to a stake and attacked by dogs, was a popular entertainment in shakespeare's time. bear-baiting ! if only i'd taken school more seriously!
all the rumors have been confirmed.
he's a king, a king!
you'd have a great hairstyle if you had.
i'll fight until they hack the flesh off my bones. give me my armor.
no, he's an ordinary guy who 's got a gentleman for a son, since someone would have to be crazy to let his son become a gentleman before he's achieved that distinction himself.
why, would that have fixed my hair?
you don't need it yet.
i see regan and goneril in hell, a thousand hissing devils with sizzling red pitchforks come up to them!
oh, no question, it won't style itself.
i'll put it on anyway. send out more cavalry. scour the whole country and hang anyone spreading fear. give me my armor. (to the doctor) how is my wife, doctor?
the nasty devil's biting my butt.
but my hair looks good anyway, doesn't it?
she is not sick, my lord, but she is troubled with endless visions that keep her from sleeping.
you've got to be crazy to trust a wolf that pretends to be tame, a horse that seems healthy, a teenager in love, or a whore who swears she'll be faithful.
it looks great. it hangs like an old worn-out mop. some woman should give you syphilis so you go bald.
cure her of that. can't you treat a diseased mind? take away her memory of sorrow? use some drug to erase the troubling thoughts from her brain and ease her heart?
i'll do it. i'll put them on trial lear begins a mock trial of goneril and regan. trial right now. (to edgar) come sit here, our able judge. (to fool) and you sit here, wise sir., now, you she-foxes, 
listen, i'm going home tomorrow, sir toby. your niece is refusing to see anyone, and even if she saw me, ten to one she'd want nothing to do with me. that duke who lives nearby is courting her.
for that kind of relief, the patient must heal herself.
there he is, standing and glaring at me!, hey, lady, can't you see how the judge is? (sings) come over the stream to me, dear bessy, 
she's not interested in the duke. she doesn't want to marry anyone of higher social rank than her, or anyone richer, older, or smarter. i've heard her say that. so cheer up, there's still hope for you, man.
medicine is for the dogs. i won't have anything to do with it. (to seyton) come, put my armor on me. give me my lance. seyton, send out the soldiers. (to the doctor) doctor, the thanes are running away from me. (to seyton) come on, sir, hurry. (to the doctor) can you figure out what's wrong with my country? if you can diagnose its disease by examining its urine, and bring it back to health, i will praise you to the ends of the earth, where the sound will echo back so you can hear the applause again., (to seyton) pull it off, i tell you. (to the doctor) what drug would purge the english from this country? have you heard of any?
(sings) she's getting her period, and she won't tell you why she won't come see you.
all right, i'll stay another month. ah, i'm an odd kind of guy. sometimes all i want to do is see plays and go out dancing.
yes, my good lord. your preparation for war sounds like something.
the devil sings like a nightingale to haunt poor tom. the demon hoppedance is in tom's belly, crying for some fish to eat. stop whining, devil. i've got no food to give you.
are you good at those kinds of things?
(to seyton) bring the armor and follow me. i will not be afraid of death and destruction until birnam forest picks itself up and moves to dunsinane.
(to lear) how are you, sir? please don't stand there in a daze. wouldn't you like to lie down on the pillows?
yes, as good as any man in illyria, except for the ones who are better at it than i am. i'm not as good as someone who's been dancing for years.
(to himself) i wish i were far away from dunsinane. you couldn't pay me to come back here.
no, i want to see their trial first. let's have the evidence. (to edgar) take your place, honorable judge. (to fool) and you, his fellow justice of the peace, sit next to him. (to kent) you can also be a judge. sit down as well.
how good are you at those fast dances?
kinsmen, i hope the time is coming when people will be safe in their own bedrooms.
let's give a fair verdict.
believe me, i can cut a caper cut a caper = dance cut a caper .
we don't doubt it.
(sings) are you asleep or awake, happy shepherd? your sheep are running around the cornfield. but if you blow your cute little horn, your sheep will be fine. purr! the devil-cat is gray.
and i can cut some meat to go with your capers caper = a condiment capers .
what's the name of this forest behind us?
let's put goneril on trial first. there she is. i hereby swear before this honored assembly that she kicked her father when he was down.
and i can do that fancy backward step as well as any man in illyria.
birnam wood.
come here, ma'am. is your name goneril?
why do you hide these things? why do you keep these talents behind a curtain? are they likely to get dusty? why don't you go off to church dancing one way, and come home dancing another way? if i had your talents, i'd be dancing a jig every time i walked down the street. i wouldn't even pee without dancing a waltz. what are you thinking? is this the kind of world where we hide our accomplishments? you're a born dancer. look how shapely your legs are.
tell every soldier to break off a branch and hold it in front of him. that way we can conceal how many of us there are, and macbeth's spies will give him inaccurate reports.
she can't deny it.
that's true. they're strong, and they look pretty good in brown tights. should we throw a little dance party?
we'll do it.
i'm so sorry, ma'am, i thought you were a good person, a well-made chair instead of a crude stool.
why not? weren't we both born under taurus?
we have no news except that the overconfident macbeth is still in dunsinane and will allow us to lay siege to the castle.
and here's regan, whose grotesque face betrays her twisted heart. stop her! guards, guards, use your weapons. fire! the courtroom is in chaos. you corrupt judge, why did you let her escape?
taurus! that governs the torso and heart, doesn't it?
he wants us to lay siege. wherever his soldiers have an opportunity to leave him, they do, whatever rank they are. no one fights with him except men who are forced to, and their hearts aren't in it.
bless your heart.
no, the legs and thighs. let me see you dance. (sir andrew dances) ha, higher! ha, ha, excellent!
we shouldn't make any judgments until we achieve our goal. let's go fight like hardworking soldiers.
(to lear) how sorrowful! sir, where's the self-control you used to be so proud of?
if the duke keeps treating you so well, cesario, you'll go far. he's only known you for three days, but he's already treating you like a close friend.
soon we'll find out what's really ours and what isn't. it's easy for us to get our hopes up just sitting around thinking about it, but the only way this is really going to be settled is by violence. so let's move our armies forward.
(to himself) i feel so sorry for him that my tears are starting to ruin my disguise.
when you wonder whether he'll keep treating me well, it makes me think his mood might change, or else i'll mess up somehow. do his feelings toward people change suddenly?
hang our flags on the outer walls. everyone keeps yelling, "here they come!" our castle is strong enough to laugh off their seige. they can sit out there until they die of hunger and disease. if it weren't for the fact that so many of our soldiers revolted and joined them, we could have met them out in front of the castle, man to man, and beaten them back to england.
look at the three little dogs, tray, blanch, and sweetheart, all barking at me.
no, not at all.
what's that noise?
tom will chase them off., go away, you mongrels! whether you bite to kill, mastiff, greyhound, or ugly mutt,
thanks for telling me. here comes the duke now.
it's women crying, my good lord.
hound or spaniel, bitch or dog, whether your tail is short or curly, tom will make you cry and wail. with one little toss of his head, he can scare you off for good. whether your mouth is black or white, do-dee, dee-dee da. stop! run off, go visit fairs and festivals! poor tom, your cup is empty.
has anyone seen cesario?
i've almost forgotten what fear feels like. there was a time when i would have been terrified by a shriek in the night, and the hair on my skin would have stood up when i heard a ghost story. but now i've had my fill of real horrors. horrible things are so familiar that they can't startle me.
now let them dissect regan and her hard heart. is there any natural cause for hardening of the heart? (to edgar) sir, you can serve me as one of my hundred knights. but i don't like your style of clothes. i'm sure you'll tell me they're fabulous, but i think you should change them anyway.
i'm right here, my lord, at your service.
what was that cry for?
please lie down and rest a while, my lord.
(to viola and attendants) we'll need some privacy for a little while. (to viola) cesario, i want a word with you. you know everything about me. i've told you all the secrets of my soul. so please go to her house; if they don't let you in, plant yourself outside her door and tell them you won't leave until they let you see her.
the queen is dead, my lord.
be quiet, be quiet. draw the curtains, just like that. we'll have supper in the morning. that's right. (he falls asleep)
but my lord, i'm sure that if she's as depressed as people say, she'll never let me in.
she would have died later anyway. that news was bound to come someday. tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow. the days creep slowly along until the end of time. and every day that's already happened has taken fools that much closer to their deaths. out, out, brief candle. life is nothing more than an illusion. it's like a poor actor who struts and worries for his hour on the stage and then is never heard from again. life is a story told by an idiot, full of noise and emotional disturbance but devoid of meaning.
and i'll go to bed at noon.
be loud and obnoxious. do whatever it takes, just get the job done.
you've come to tell me something. tell me quickly.
(to kent) come here, my friend. where's my master the king?
well, all right, let's say hypothetically that i do get a chance to speak with her, my lord. what do i do then?
my gracious lord, i should tell you what i saw, but i don't know how to say it.
he's here, sir, but please don't bother him. he's out of his right mind.
tell her how passionately i love her. overwhelm her with examples of how faithful i am. the best thing would be to act out my feelings for her. she'll pay more attention to a young guy like you than to an older, more serious man.
just say it.
please get him, my friend, i beg you. i've overheard people plotting to kill him. i have a carriage ready. put
i don't think so, my lord.
as i was standing watch on the hill, i looked toward birnam, and i thought i saw the forest begin to move.
him inside and take him to dover, where you'll find people who'll welcome and protect him. carry your master out. if you waste even half an hour, he'll be killed, along with you and everyone else helping him. bring him here, carry him and follow me. i'll quickly take you to where you can find supplies.
my boy, it's true. anyone who says you're a man must not notice how young you are. your lips are as smooth and red as the goddess diana's. your soft voice is like a young girl's, high and clear, and the rest of you is pretty feminine too. i know you're the right person for this job. (to curio and attendants) four or five of you go along with him, or you can all go if you like. i'm most comfortable when i'm alone. (to viola) if you succeed at this assignment, i'll reward you well. my whole fortune will be yours.
liar and slave!
lear's suffering has finally put him to sleep. (to the sleeping lear) this rest might have calmed your shattered nerves. it will be difficult for you to get better now that rest is impossible. (to fool) come on, help me carry your master. you can't stay here.
i'll do my best to make this lady love you., (to herself) but what a tough task!, i have to go matchmaking for the man i want to marry myself!
punish me if it's not true. three miles from here you can see it coming, a moving forest.
come on, come on.
no. either tell me where you've been, or i won't make any excuses for you to lady olivia. lady olivia will have you executed for not showing up.
if you're lying, i'll hang you alive from the nearest tree until you die of hunger. if what you say is true, you can do the same to me. (to himself) my confidence is failing. i'm starting to doubt the lies the devil told me, which sounded like truth. "don't worry until birnam wood comes to dunsinane." and now a wood is coming to dunsinane. prepare for battle, and go! if what this messenger says is true, it's no use running away or staying here. i'm starting to grow tired of living, and i'd like to see the world plunged into chaos. ring the alarms! blow, wind! come, ruin! at least we'll die with our armor on.
when we see that our betters have the same problems we do, we can almost forget our own misery. the person who suffers alone suffers the most. companions in sorrow alleviate our grief. my troubles seem so easy to bear now that i see the king collapsing under a similar sorrow. his children have done the same to him as my father has to me. let's go, tom. we'll pay attention to the political situation, and you'll be able to reveal your true identity when you're proven innocent. whatever else happens tonight, i hope the king escapes safely! lurk out of sight.
so let her execute me. anyone who's executed doesn't have to be afraid of anything he sees.
we're close enough now. throw down these branches and show them who you really are. uncle siward, you and your son will lead the first battle. brave macduff and i will do the rest, according to our battle plan.
(to goneril) hurry to your husband. show him this letter. the french army has landed., find the traitor gloucester.
how do you know?
good luck. if we meet macbeth's army tonight, let us be beaten if we cannot fight.
hang him immediately.
well, he'll be dead, so he won't see anything.
blow all the trumpets. they loudly announce the news of blood and death.
gouge out his eyes!
that's a lame answer. by the way, i know where you get all your brave talk about not being afraid of anything.
they have me tied to a stake. i can't run away. i have to stand and fight, like a bear in shakespeare's time, bears were tied to stakes and attacked by dogs for the amusement of audiences. bear .where's the man who wasn't born from a woman? he's the only one i'm afraid of, nobody else.
leave him to my wrath., edmund, go with my sister-in-law. you shouldn't have to see the punishment we inflict on your father. tell the duke of albany to prepare for war immediately. we will do the same. we'll keep the lines of communication open between us. (to goneril) goodbye, my dear sister-in-law. (to edmund) goodbye, lord gloucester.
where, good miss mary?
what's your name?
hello. where's the king?
from soldiers. but you'll never see the front lines. it's easy for you to talk about bravery, working as a fool in this palace.
you'll be afraid to hear it.
lord gloucester has helped him leave. thirty-five or thirty-six of his knights met him at the gate, and together with some others they've set off for dover, where they claim to have powerful friends.
well, we all have our special gifts. some people are born wise; those of us who were meant to be fools should do what they do best.
no i won't, even if you were one of the worst demons in hell.
prepare the horses for your lady.
but still, she's going to kill you for being gone so long. or at least fire you. and wouldn't that be as bad for you as being killed?
my name's macbeth.
goodbye, my sweet lord., goodbye, my sister.
sometimes getting killed is a good way to avoid getting married. and as for being fired, it's summer, so it won't be that bad to be homeless.
the devil himself couldn't say a name i hate more.
goodbye, edmund.
you've made up your mind, then?
no, nor could the devil's name be more frightening.
go find the traitor gloucester. tie him up like a thief and bring him here to me.
no, but i've made up my mind on two points.
you lie, you disgusting tyrant. i'll prove with my sword that i'm not scared of you.
i can't condemn him to death without a formal trial, but i'm powerful enough that i can still do something to express my anger. some men may blame me for doing this, but they won't be able to do anything about it., who's there? is that the traitor?
ah yes, the two points where your suspenders are attached to your buttons. if one breaks, the other will hold, but if both points break, your pants will fall down.
you were born from a woman. swords don't frighten me. i laugh at any weapon used by a man who was born from a woman.
ungrateful traitor! that's him.
clever, very clever. well, go along now. you'd be the funniest person in illyria... if sir toby ever stopped drinking.
the noise is coming from over there. tyrant, show your face! if someone other than me kills you, the ghosts of my wife and children will haunt me forever. i can't be bothered to fight these lame soldiers who only fight for money. i'll either fight you, macbeth, or else i'll put down my sword unused. you must be over there. by the great noise, it sounds like one of the highest-ranking men is being announced. i hope i find him! i ask for nothing more than that.
tie up his withered old arms.
shut up, you troublemaker, no more of that. here comes my lady. if you know what's good for you, you'll think up some good excuse for being away so long.
come this way, my lord. the castle has been surrendered without a fight. macbeth's soldiers are fighting on both sides. our noblemen are battling bravely. the victory is almost yours, and it seems like there's not much left to do.
what are you doing? my friends, remember that you're my guests here. don't play any nasty tricks on me.
(to himself) please, let me think of something funny to say now! smart people who think they're witty often turn out to be fools, but i know i'm not witty, so i might pass for smart. what did that philosopher quinapalus quinapalus is a made-up name quinapalus say? ah yes, "a witty fool's better than a foolish wit."
our enemies fight as if they're trying not to hurt us.
tie him up, i tell you.
greetings to you, madam!
sir, enter the castle.
tie him up harder., you filthy traitor!
get that fool out of here.
why should i commit suicide like one of the ancient romans? as long as i see enemies of mine alive, i would rather see my sword wound them than me.
i'm not a traitor, unfair lady.
didn't you hear her, guys? get the lady out of here.
turn around, you dog from hell, turn around!
tie him to this chair., you'll see, criminal, 
oh, go away, you're a boring fool. i don't want to have anything to do with you anymore. besides, you've gotten unreliable.
you are the only man i have avoided. but go away now. i'm already guilty of killing your whole family.
by the gods, it's disgraceful for you to pull my beard.
madam, those are two character flaws that a little booze and some common sense can fix. if you hand a drink to a sober fool, he won't be thirsty anymore. if you tell a bad man to mend his wicked ways, and he does, he won't be bad anymore. if he cannot, let the tailor mend him. anything that's mended is only patched up. a good person who does something wrong is only patched up with sin. and a sinner who does something good is only patched up with goodness. if this logic works, that's great. if not, what can you do about it? since the only real betrayed husband in the world is the one deserted by lady luck, because we're all married to her, beauty is a flower. the lady gave orders to take away the fool, so i'm telling you again, take her away.
i have nothing to say to you. my sword will talk for me. you are too evil for words!
as old and white-haired as you are, and you're such a traitor?
i told them to take you away.
you're wasting your time trying to wound me. you might as well try to stab the air with your sword. go fight someone who can be harmed. i lead a charmed life, which can't be ended by anyone born from a woman.
wicked woman, these white hairs you're pulling off my chin will come to life and accuse you of wrong-doing. you are my guests. this is no way to treat a host who has welcomed you into his house. what do you think you're doing?
oh, what a big mistake! madam, you can't judge a book by its cover. i mean, i may look like a fool, but my mind's sharp. please let me prove you're a fool.
you can forget about your charm. the evil spirit you serve can tell you that i was not born. they cut me out of my mother's womb before she could bear me naturally.
tell us about the letters that you got from france.
can you do that?
curse you for telling me this. you've fightened away my courage. i don't believe those evil creatures anymore. they tricked me with their wordgames, raising my hopes and then destroying them. i won't fight you.
get to the point, since we already know the truth.
easily, madam.
then surrender, coward, and we'll put you in a freakshow, just like they do with deformed animals. we'll put a picture of you on a sign, right above the words "come see the tyrant!"
and what's your connection with the traitors who landed in our kingdom recently?
then go ahead and prove it.
i'm not going to surrender and have to kiss the ground in front of malcolm, or be taunted by the common people. even though birnam wood really did come to dunsinane, and i'm fighting a man not of woman born, i'll fight to the end. i'll put up my shield and battle you. come on, let's go at it, macduff, and damn the first man who cries, 'stop! enough!'
the ones you've sent our lunatic king to. tell us.
i'll have to ask you some questions, madam. please answer, my good little student.
i wish all of our friends could have survived this battle.
i got a letter that made some guesses about what was going on, without any proof. it came from a neutral party, not from someone opposed to you.
i'm listening to you only because i've got nothing better to do.
in every battle, some people will always be killed, but judging from the men i see around us, our great victory didn't cost us very much.
how clever of you.
my dear madam, why are you in mourning?
macduff is missing, and so is your noble son.
clever lies.
my dear fool, because my brother died.
my lord, your son has paid the soldier's price: death. he only lived long enough to become a man, and as soon as he proved that he was a man by fighting like one, he died.
where have you sent the king?
i think his soul's in hell, my lady.
so he's dead?
to dover.
i know his soul's in heaven, fool.
yes, and he's been carried off the field. your grief should not be equal to his worth, because then your sorrow would never end.
why dover? weren't you ordered, on penalty of, 
then you're a fool for being sad that your brother's soul is in heaven. take away this fool, gentlemen.
were his wounds on his front side?
why dover?, let him answer that question first.
what do you think of this fool, malvolio? isn't he getting funnier?
yes, on his front.
i'm backed into a corner with nowhere to run.
yes, and he'll keep getting funnier till he dies. old age always makes people act funny, even wise people, but fools more than anybody.
well then, he's god's soldier now! if i had as many sons as i have hairs on my head, i couldn't hope that any of them would die more honorably than he did. and that's all there is to it.
why dover?
i hope you go senile soon, sir, so you can become a more foolish fool! sir toby would bet a fortune that i'm not smart, but he wouldn't bet two cents that you're not a fool.
he is worth more mourning than that, and i will mourn for him.
because i didn't want to watch while you gouged out his poor old eyes with your cruel fingernails, or while your vicious sister sank her fangs into his sacred flesh. you left him out in the storm in the black night, bareheaded, a storm so terrible that if it had happened at sea, the waters would have risen up and extinguished the fire burning in the stars. and the poor old man just wept, mixing his tears with the rain. if wolves had been howling outside your gate at the heart of that storm, you would've told your doorman to let them in, despite all the cruelties you inflict on the world. but soon i'll see the gods punish you for your lack of respect to your father.
what do you say to that, malvolio?
he is worth no more than that. they tell me he died well, and settled his scores. with that, i hope god is with him! here comes better news.
you won't be seeing anything., hold his chair still, men., i'm going to put my foot on his eyes.
i'm surprised you enjoy the company of this stupid troublemaker. the other day i saw him defeated in a
hail, king! because that's what you are now. look, here i have macbeth's cursed head. we are free from his tyranny. i see that you have the kingdom's noblemen around you, and they're thinking the same thing as me. i want them to join me in this loud cheer, hail, king of scotland!
oh, help me, anyone who wants to live long!
battle of wits by an ordinary jester with no more brains than a rock. look at him, he's at a loss for words already. unless he's got somebody laughing at him, he can't think of anything to say. i swear, anyone smart who laughs at these courts jesters is nothing but a jester's apprentice.
hail, king of scotland!
oh, so cruel! oh dear gods!
malvolio, your vanity is damaging your good taste. if you were generous, innocent, and good-natured, you wouldn't get so upset by what the fool says. you'd think of his wisecracks as harmless little firecrackers, not hurtful bullets. a court jester isn't really criticizing people, even if he does nothing but make fun of them all day long. and a wise person doesn't make fun of people, even if all he does is criticize them.
it won't be long before i reward each of you as he deserves. my thanes and kinsmen, i name you all earls, the first earls that scotland has ever had. we have a lot to do at the dawn of this new era. we must call home all of our exiled friends who fled from the grip of macbeth's tyranny, and we must bring to justice all the evil ministers of this dead butcher and his demon-like queen, who, rumor has it, committed suicide. this, and whatever else we are called to do by god, we will do at the right time and in the right place. so i thank you all, and i invite each and every one of you to come watch me be crowned king of scotland at scone.
now he's a little crooked. gouge out the other eye too.
you speak so highly of fools! i hope the god of deception rewards you by making you a wonderful liar.
if you see vengeance, 
madam, there's a young gentleman at the gate who really wants to speak to you.
open your ears! for who could possibly block them when loud rumor speaks? i make the wind my horse, and ride it from the orient in the east to the place where the sun sets in the west, describing the events taking place in the world. i continually tell lies and i tell them in every language, stuffing men's ears with falsehoods. i say that things are peaceful when, in reality, concealed hatred is at work, hidden behind smiles of good will. and who but rumor, who besides me, can make armies prepare anxious defenses, when in fact the world is uneasy for other reasons and there's no war coming at all? rumor is like a flute. guesswork, suspicion, and speculation are the breath that makes it sound, and it's so easy to play that even the common masses, that dim monster with innumerable heads, forever clamoring and wavering, can play it. but why should i describe myself in such detail to the one group of people who knows exactly what falsehood is all about: a theater audience? why am i here? king henry has won the war, and at shrewsbury, he ended the rebellion against him by defeating hotspur and his allies, quenching the fire of revolt with the rebels' own blood. but what am i doing, telling you the truth up front? my job is to spread word that hotspur in his fury killed prince hal, and that douglas killed the king. i've spread this rumor through all the peasant
stop, my lord! i've served you since childhood, but i've never done you a better service than telling you to stop.
was he sent by count orsino?
villages from shrewsbury to the place where i now stand: in front of the worm-eaten, dilapidated castle of northumberland, hotspur's father, who lies within and pretends to be sick. the messengers are coming hot and heavy, and every single one of them will report nothing but what he's heard from me. straight from rumor, they bring pretty tales of false comfort, which are far worse than truthful news of misfortune.
what's this, you dog?
i don't know, madam. he's a good-looking young man, and there are a lot of people with him.
hello? who's the doorman around here?
i am willing to fight you if i must. what do you mean by all this?
who's talking to him now?
(to the porter) where's the earl?
my peasant, acting like this?
sir toby, madam, your relative.
who shall i say you are?
come on then. over my dead body.
send toby away, please. he talks nothing but nonsense.
tell the earl that the lord bardolph is here to see him.
(to another servant) give me your sword., a lowly peasant defying his lord like this? she takes a sword and stabs the first servant from behind, killing him.
go out and talk to this visitor, malvolio. if he's got a message from the count, tell him i'm sick, or not home. tell him anything you want, as long as you make him go away.
his lordship is out walking in the orchard. if you don't mind, knock at the orchard gate and he'll answer it himself.
i am dying!, my lord, you still have one eye left to see cornwall punished. oh!(he dies)
now you see how your fooling gets boring, and people don't like it.
here comes the earl.
we'll just have to stop him from seeing ever again. out, vile jelly, pop out of your eye sockets!
madam, you've spoken so highly of us fools, you'd think your oldest son was going into that line of work. i hope god crams his skull full of brains, because here comes one of your relatives who's pretty weak in the head.
what's the news, lord bardolph? every minute, new violence erupts; it is a wild time. conflict is like a horse, fed with too much rich food: it has broken out uncontrollably, and tramples everyone who stands before it.
(he gouges out gloucester's other eye) where's your sparkle now?
i swear, he's half drunk already. who's that at the gate, uncle?
noble earl, i have reliable news from shrewsbury.
nothing but darkness and horror. where's my son edmund? edmund, let your love for me ignite your bloodlust to avenge this horrible crime!
a gentleman.
good news, god willing.
wrong, evil traitor. you're appealing to a son who hates you. he was the one who revealed your treason to us. he's too good to have any compassion for you.
a gentleman? what gentleman?
as good as one could wish for. the king has been wounded and is near death. and, thanks to your son's luck, prince harry has been killed. douglas killed both lords blunt. prince john of lancaster, westmoreland, and stafford fled the battlefield. and your son captured that hulking sir john falstaff, prince harry's fattened pig. oh, there hasn't been a battle so well fought or a victory so well won since the days of julius caesar! it brings honor to our times.
what a fool i've been! this means i've mistreated edgar. dear god, forgive me. let him be well!
there's some gentleman out there., (belching) damn these pickled herring! they upset my stomach. how's it going, fool?
how do you know all this? did you see the battlefield? did you come from shrewsbury?
kick him out of the gate. he can sniff his way to dover.
good sir toby!
i talked with someone, my lord, who was coming from there. he was a gentleman, with good breeding and a good reputation. he swore that all this was the truth.
(to cornwall) what is it, my lord? why do you look like that?
uncle, uncle, how are you already so brain-dead so early in the day?
here comes my servant, travers. i sent him last tuesday to find out what was happening.
i'm wounded. follow me, madam., throw the blind traitor outside. and throw this dead peasant into the manure pit., regan, i'm bleeding. it's a bad time for such an injury. give me your arm.
brain-dead! nonsense. i defy brain-death! i told you, someone's at the gate.
sir, i passed him on my way here. he doesn't know anything more than what i told him.
if our criminal master gets off free, i won't care what happens to me anymore.
yes, but who is he?
now travers, what good news do you have?
if she lives a long and happy life, then all women may as well turn into monsters.
let him be the devil if he wants to, i don't care. god will protect me. what do i care who it is?
sir, lord many critics believe that the "sir john umfrevile" in shakespeare's text is a textual error, an accidental leftover from an early draft, and that travers is actually referring to bardolph. lord bardolph told me happy news and i turned around, to come back here. but he had a faster horse, so he passed me and got here first. another man came after him, riding hard. he was nearly exhausted from going so fast, and he stopped to give his bleeding horse a break. he asked me for directions to chester, and i demanded to hear news from shrewsbury. he said that the rebels had been beaten, and that harry percy's spur was cold. then he took off on his horse, leaned forward in his saddle, and jammed his heels into the animal's side so hard that they almost disappeared. he rode so fast he seemed to be devouring the highway. he didn't stay around to answer any of my questions.
let's follow the old earl, and get that crazy tom to take him wherever he wants to go. as a wandering lunatic, he can do whatever he wants.
tell me what a drunk is like, fool.
what? say that again: he said that harry percy's spur was cold? hotspur is now "coldspur?" that the rebels had bad luck?
go ahead. i'll get some cloth and egg whites to bandage his bleeding face. heaven help him!
he's a fool, a madman, and a drowned man. the first drink makes him a fool, the second makes him crazy, and the third drowns him.
my lord, i'll tell you what, if your son hasn't won, on my honor, i'll exchange all my land for a lace to tie stockings with; don't even say such a thing.
still, i'm better off now, as a beggar who is openly hated, than when i was flattered to my face hated in secret. the lowliest and most dejected creatures live without fear and still harbor hope. the worst kind of change is when good fortune turns sour. at the bottom, any change is for the better. so i welcome this wind freely. i've sunk as far down as i can go, so i've got nothing more to fear from the weather.
go find the coroner and tell him to perform an inquest on my uncle, because he's in the third degree of drunkenness, he's drowned. go take care of him.
but why would that gentleman who rode past travers describe such examples of loss?
but who is this? my father, led by a poor peasant? oh, life is full of surprises! we age and die because they wear us out.
he's still only in the crazy phase. the fool will go take care of the madman.
who, him? he was some insignificant nobody who stole the horse he was riding and, i bet my life, was just talking nonsense. look, here comes another messenger.
(to gloucester) my good lord, i've rented land from you and your father for eighty years.
madam, that young man out there says he's got to speak to you. i told him you were sick. he claimed he knew that, and that's why he's come to speak with you. i told him you were asleep. he claimed to know that already too, and said that's the reason he's come to speak with you. what can i say to him, lady? he's got an answer for everything.
yes. and the look on his face is like the title page of a book: it hints at the tragic story within. his brow is lined with furrows, like a beach after a wild flood. morton, did you come from shrewsbury?
away, get out of here. leave me, my friend. there's nothing you can do to help me now, and being with me puts your life in danger.
tell him he's not going to speak with me.
i ran from shrewsbury, my noble lord. death was there, frightening our side with his ugliest mask.
but you can't see where you're going, sir.
i told him that. he says he'll stand at your door like a signpost or a bench until he speaks with you.
how are my son and my brother? you're trembling, and the paleness of your face is more likely to convey your news than your tongue. this is like that old story about the burning of troy. a man like you, faint, lifeless, dull, deadly-looking, sad, woke king priam in the dead of night to tell him that half the city of troy had been burned down. but priam saw the fire before this man could speak, and i can see my percy's death before you report it. you're going to tell me, "your son did such-and-such; your brother did this; the noble douglas fought like so." you'll stuff my greedy ears with stories of their bold deeds. but in the end, you'll stop my ears forever with a sigh that blows away all your words of praise. you will end your story by saying, "your brother, your son, everyone-dead."
i don't have anywhere to go, so i don't need to see. when i could see, i didn't always see clearly. i made
what kind of man is he?
douglas is alive, and so is your brother, for now. but as for your son, my lord, 
mistakes, i stumbled and fell. it's often the case that having something makes us spoiled, while not having it turns out to be advantageous. so may it be with my eyesight. oh, my dear son edgar, how enraged i was at you when i was deceived. if i live long enough to touch you again, that would be as good as having my eyesight back.
just a man, like any other.
why, he is dead. my suspicion is so quick to speak! when a man fears something, and doesn't want to know the truth, he can still tell when that thing has happened; by instinct, he can read it in another man's eyes. but speak, morton. tell me, who am an earl, that i have
who's that? who's there?
but what's he like?
no talent for prophecy. i'll take it as a pleasant insult, and i'll pay you richly for doing me that wrong.
(to himself) oh, gods! who can ever say, "this is as bad as it can get"? i'm worse off now than ever before.
he's very rude. he insists he'll speak with you whether you want him to or not.
you are too great a man to be slandered by me. your instinct is correct; your fears are true.
(to gloucester) it's poor crazy tom.
what does he look like? how old is he?
but despite all this, don't say that percy's dead. i can see a strange sort of confession in your eyes. you shake your head; you're afraid to tell the truth, or you think it would be sinful. if he's been killed, say so. the man who reports a death doesn't offend with that report. to lie about the dead is a sin, but it is no sin to say that a dead man is not alive. it's a losing situation, being the first man to bring unwelcome news. that man's voice sounds forever like a sad bell, and it will always be remembered for tolling the death of a friend.
(to himself) and my life could still be worse. if you have the presence of mind to say, "this is the worst," then it's not the worst yet.
not old enough to be a man, but not young enough to be a boy. he's like a bud before it becomes a pea pod, or like a little green apple before it gets big and ripe. he's somewhere between boy and man. he's very handsome and speaks well, but he's very young. he looks like he just recently stopped breastfeeding.
my lord, i cannot believe your son is dead.
(to edgar) where are you going, man?
show him in. call in my maid.
i'm sorry that i must force you to believe this, when i wish to god that i hadn't seen it myself. but i saw him, in his bloody state, with my own eyes. he was barely able to fight back, exhausted and out of breath. harry monmouth's swift fury beat the unflinching percy down to the ground, and once he was there, percy never rose again. to be brief, percy's spirit inspired the entire army, down to the dullest peasant. when the news got out that he had been killed, it took the fire and courage away from even the bravest soldiers. percy's metal steeled the whole army; when they learned that he had been blunted, they bent and warped like dull, heavy lead. and just as a heavy object gains momentum once it's pushed into motion, our army, made heavy by
is it a beggar?
maria, our lady wants you.
hotspur's death, suddenly started moving fast, faster than arrows flying toward a target, but they flew toward safety, not toward the battle. soon, worcester, that furious scotsman, was captured. the warlike douglas, who killed three enemies disguised as king henry, began to lose courage: he ran away as well, lending his authority to the shameful retreat. but running in fear, he stumbled and was captured. the bottom line is that king henry has won. he's sent a speedy force after you, sir, led by young john of lancaster and westmoreland. that is the whole story.
yes, he's both crazy and a beggar.
give me my veil. come, put it over my face. (olivia puts on her veil) we're going to hear orsino's pleas again.
there will be time to mourn for this. sometimes poison can be a kind of medicine: this news, which would have made me sick had i been well, has, because i am sick, made me well. a dying man, his joints weakened by fever, dangling like useless hinges and crumpling under the man's own weight, will sometimes be stuck with a fit of impatience, causing him to burst out of his caretaker's arms. my limbs are like that now; once weakened by grief, they're now enraged by grief, and are three times as powerful as they were before. away from me, you unmanly crutch! chain mail armor will cover my hands now. away from me, you invalid's cap! you are too fanciful a helmet for this head which is now the target of kings, grown arrogant with their victories. wrap my head in iron, and then attack me with the roughest things that destiny and hatred will dare to bring upon me in my rage. let the sky come crashing down! let the ocean overflow the shores! let law and order die! and let the world no longer be a stage for a long, drawn-out struggle: let the spirit of
well, he can't be completely crazy, or he wouldn't be able to beg. last night during the storm i saw a man who was both poor and crazy. he made me think that men are as weak and insignificant as worms. i was reminded of my son, even though i despised my son at that time. now i know better. the gods play around with us as cruelly as schoolboys who pull the wings off flies.
which one of you is the lady of the house?
cain, who committed the first murder against his brother abel, live in every heart. if every heart is a murderer's heart, this violent play will end, and darkness will shroud the corpses.
(to himself) what's going on? i hate pretending i'm a wandering beggar when all i want to do now is comfort my poor father., bless you, master.
you can speak to me. i represent her. what do you want?
this extreme passion is bad for you, sir.
is that the naked guy?
what stunning, exquisite, and unmatchable beauty, but please, tell me if you're the lady of the house, because i've never seen her. i'd hate to waste my speech on the wrong person, because it's very well written and i spent a lot of time and energy memorizing it. beautiful ladies, please don't treat me badly. i'm very sensitive, and even the smallest bit of rudeness hurts my feelings.
gentle earl, don't abandon your wisdom. all your allies are depending on you and your well-being. if you allow yourself to indulge in this kind of stormy emotion, your health will deteriorate even further. before you said, "let's raise an army," you calculated how the war might end, and you thought carefully about the likeliness of a victory. you knew from the beginning that, once the fighting started, your son might die. you knew that he was treading dangerously, as if on the edge of a precipice: you knew he was more likely to fall over than make it across. you were warned that your son was made of flesh and blood, and that it was possible he'd get hurt. you were warned that his temper and hot-headedness would push him into the most dangerous situations. but you still said, "go forward." none of this consideration, even though it was clearly understood, could stop the stubborn course of events. so what happened here? what has been the result of this brave undertaking? only this: precisely what was likely to happen in the first place.
yes, my lord.
where do you come from, sir?
we all knew that we were venturing into dangerous waters. we knew the odds were ten to one that we would come out alive, and yet we ventured forward anyway. the potential reward of winning outweighed the fear of our probable loss.
(to the old man) then please go. if you're willing to do me a favor, as an old friend, then catch up to us a mile or two further on the way to dover, and bring some clothes for this poor beggar. i'll ask him to be my guide.
i'm sorry, but i memorized what i'm supposed to say here today, and that question isn't part of the speech i learned. please, my lady, just confirm that you're the lady of the house so i can get on with my speech.
we lost this time, but let's try again. come, we'll all go for it, body and soul.
but sir, he's crazy.
are you an actor?
it is the appropriate time. good sir, i hear for certain, and i tell you truthfully, that the archbishop of york has raised a powerful army. he motivates his men with both his earthly and his spiritual powers. my lord, your son commanded only his soldiers' bodies. the word "rebellion" frightened them, separating their bodies from their hearts. it caused them to fight timidly, hesitantly, as though they were taking medicine: their weapons seemed to be on our side, but their spirits and souls were frozen, like fish in an icy pond. but now, the archbishop turns our rebellion into a religious cause. everyone believes he's a righteous and holy man, and they follow him not only in body but also in mind. he enhances his cause by preaching about the blood of good king richard, which was spilled at pomfret castle. the archbishop claims that he derives his authority from heaven; tells the men that the whole country is bleeding, gasping for life under the terrible leadership of bolingbroke. and so men from every walk of life flock like sheep to follow him.
it's the tragedy of our times that lunatics must lead the blind. do as i asked you. or rather, do what you feel like doing. but above all, get out of here.
no, madam. but i swear i'm not the person i'm playing. are you the lady of the house?
i knew all this, but to tell you the truth, this terrible grief had pushed it out of my thoughts. come inside; i want to hear everyone's ideas on the best way to defend ourselves and enact our revenge. send out messengers and letters, and make new allies quickly. our numbers have never been smaller, but there's never been more need for what we have to do.
i'll bring the crazy beggar the best clothes i have, no matter what happens.
i am, unless i somehow stole this role.
sirrah sirrah = term of address for a person of lower social rank sirrah , you giant falstaff is mocking the page for being so small. giant , what did the doctor say about my urine?
hey, naked guy, 
if you're the lady of the house, then it's true you're stealing your role, because what's yours to give away is not yours to keep for yourself. but that's not part of what i'm supposed to say. i'll go on with my speech praising you, and then i'll get to the point.
he said that the urine itself was good, healthy urine, but that the man who owned it probably had more diseases than he could tell.
poor tom's chilly. (to himself) i can't play this role any longer.
get to the point now. i'll let you get away with skipping the praise.
all kinds of people make it a matter of pride to heckle me. no man, that foolishly assembled lump of clay, could ever invent something quite as funny as i seem to be to other people. i'm not only witty on my own, but i bring out wit in other people. look at the two of us, walking here: i look like a sow that's smothered all of her baby pigs, except for you. if the prince sent you to serve me for any other reason than to irritate me, i'm a fool. you weedy little son of a bitch: you're so tiny that you should be a decoration on my hat, not a servant at my feet. i've never had a servant before who was as tiny as a ring stone. but i won't set you in a gold or silver ring; i'll wrap you in rags and send you back to your master, to be used as a jewel, that youth, the prince your master, whose chin is still lacking a beard. why, i'll grow a beard in the palm of my hand before he'll have one that he can shave off his face. and yet, this doesn't stop him from claiming that he has a face for royalty falstaff puns on the fact that a "royal" was a kind of coin, stamped with the king's face. royalty . well, god will give him a beard whenever he chooses to, there's not a hair out of place yet. it's a good thing the prince's face is a royal, because a barber will never earn a coin from shaving it. and still, the
come here, man.
that's too bad, because i spent a long time memorizing it, and it's poetic.
prince brags that he's been a full-grown man since before he was born. he can keep that title, for all i care; i have no affection for him now, i can assure him. what did master dommelton say about the satin for my cape and baggy trousers?
(to himself) but i must., bless you, sir. your dear eyes are bleeding.
that means it's more likely to be fake. please, keep it to yourself. i heard you were rude when you were standing outside my gate, and that's the only reason i let you in. i was curious. but i don't necessarily want to listen to you. if you're just insane, then get out of here. if you're in your right mind, get to the point. i've got no patience for lunacy at the moment, and i don't want to waste my time on ridiculous conversations.
he said that you have to give him a better guarantee of payment than just saying bardolph was good for it. he wouldn't accept bardolph's promise or yours; he felt that neither should be trusted.
do you know the way to dover?
ready to set sail, sir? the door's right here.
damn him to hell then, just like dives in the bible, the rich glutton who rejected the beggar lazarus! and may dommelton burn even hotter! he's a son-of-a-bitch traitor! a two-faced liar, who smiles and says "yes sir, that'll be fine" to my face, and then demands a guarantee of payment! these bastard shopkeepers, with their fashionable short haircuts, and fancy shoes, and their fat key chains on their belts, you make an agreement to put something on credit, and then they throw a "guarantee of payment" at you. i would rather eat rat poison than guarantee my payment. i expected him to send me twenty-two yards of satin, and instead he sends me a "guarantee of payment." well, let him guarantee himself a good night's sleep. after all, his wife's in somebody else's bed, so why not? she's practically shining a spotlight on her adultery, but he's so clueless he can't even tell. where's bardolph?
i know it like the back of my hand, every step of the way. poor tom has been scared out of his mind. bless you, good man, and stay away from the devil. five devils haunted poor tom at the same time: obidicut, the devil of lust; hobbididence, the devil of mutes; mahu, the devil of stealing; modo, the devil of murder; and flibbertigibbet, the devil of mockery, who causes chambermaids to make silly faces. bless you, master.
no, this boat's docking here a bit longer, little sailor., my lady, would you mind asking your giant here to back off a bit?
he went to smithfield to buy you a horse, sir.
(giving edgar a purse) here, take some money. the torments of heaven have brought you down to this humble state. my misery makes you more fortunate in comparison. it should always work like that. the spoiled man who has everything, who can't see the misery around him because he doesn't feel it himself, should be made to feel agony so he can learn to share his wealth. that way wealth would be redistributed until everyone has enough to survive. are you familiar with dover?
tell me what you want.
i bought bardolph at st. paul's cathedral unemployed men waited at st. paul's cathedral to be hired for short-term jobs. the nearby smithfield was a livestock market; horses bought there were considered cheap nags. st. paul's cathedral , and he's buying me a horse in smithfield. now if he could just find me a wife in a whorehouse, i'd be fully stocked with high-quality servants, horses, and wives.
yes, sir.
i have a message to deliver.
sir, here comes the man who put the prince in jail for hitting him during that argument about bardolph.
there's a cliff there that leans precariously over the deep sea. take me to the edge of it, and i'll reward all your troubles with something valuable. once i'm there, i won't need a guide anymore.
it must be a message about something horrible, since you deliver it so rudely. tell me what it's about.
hide; i don't want to talk to him.
give me your arm. poor tom will take you there.
it's about you. i'm not bringing any declarations of war or demands for cash. i'm coming in peace.
who is that man?
welcome, my lord. i'm surprised my bland husband didn't meet me on the way here.
but you began so rudely. who are you? what do you want?
falstaff, if it please you, sir.
where's your master?
if i seemed rude, it's because of how badly i was treated when i got here. who i am and what i want are a secret. you're the only one i can share the secret with. it's sacred, just for you. it's not for anyone else to hear.
the man who was a suspect in that robbery?
he's inside, ma'am, but he has changed dramatically since you last saw him. when i told him that the invading army has landed, he just smiled at me. when i told him you were on your way, he replied, "too bad." when i told him about gloucester's betrayal and his son edmund's loyal service, he called me an idiot and said i had it all wrong. he was delighted by the bad news and disgusted by the good news.
everyone, please leave us alone for a moment. i've got a "sacred" secret to hear.
that's the one. but he did good work in the battle of shrewsbury, and i hear he's taking some soldiers to help lord john of lancaster.
(to edmund) then don't come in with me. he's a coward and can't commit himself to doing anything risky. he chooses not to be insulted rather than challenge those who offend him. but what we talked about with longing on the way may soon come true. edmund goneril may be referring to the beginnings of a romance between her and edmund. edmund , go back to see my brother-in-law. gather his soldiers and organize his troops. i plan to take charge of my household. from now on i will wear the pants, and my husband can play the housewife. we can trust oswald to carry messages between us. if you act boldly, you will soon obey me as your true mistress. take this as a token of my esteem. don't speak. lean down. this kiss should encourage you. (she kisses edmund goneril's words suggest both that she will take charge and that she will become edmund's lover. in many productions, goneril gives edmund a chain that she puts around his neck. edmund ) i hope you understand me. goodbye, and good luck.
now, sir, what's this holy secret you wanted to tell me?
where, to york? tell him to come here.
i'm at your service until death.
most sweet lady, 
sir john falstaff!
my dear gloucester!
oh, "sweet"! it sounds like a nice and gentle kind of faith. where's the passage of holy scripture that you're basing your sermon on?
boy, tell him i'm deaf.
what a man!, especially compared to my husband. edmund, you deserve me to be your woman. there's a fool sharing my bed now.
in orsino's heart.
you have to speak up; my master is deaf.
ma'am, my master's coming.
in his heart? in what chapter and verse of his heart?
i'm sure he is, when anything good's being said. go, tap him on the shoulder. i must speak with him.
so you finally find me worthy of your attentions.
the table of contents says it's in the first chapter of his heart.
sir john!
goneril, you aren't worth the dust the wind blows in your face. i don't trust you. you can't trust anyone who abuses her own father, her flesh and blood. a woman who breaks off relations with her bloodline is like a branch that tries to break away from the tree. she will wither and come to a bad end.
oh, i've read that. that's not holy, it's heresy. do you have anything else to say?
what? a young troublemaker? a beggar? isn't there a war on? isn't there work to do? doesn't the king need subjects? don't the rebels need soldiers? though it's shameful to be on any side but the king's, it's even more shameful to be an idle beggar than a soldier on
oh, shut up. your words are idiotic.
madam, please let me see your face.
wrong side, even if the rebellion were more despicable than the word "rebellion" already leads me to believe.
bad people can't appreciate wisdom or goodness. they only like things as bad as themselves. what have you two sisters done? you're tigers, not daughters. barbaric degenerates, you've driven insane a kindly old father, whom even an angry bear would treat gent-ly. could my good brother-in-law, a man to whom the
has your lord given you any orders to negotiate with my face? i don't think so. you're overstepping your bounds now. but i'll open the curtain and let you see the picture. look, sir, this is a portrait of me as i am at this particular moment. it's pretty well done, isn't it?
you're mistaken, sir.
king gave half his kingdom, have allowed you to do it? if the heavens don't punish these crimes immediately, the end will come. human beings will become cannibals, like ravenous sea fishes.
it was done excellently, if it's all-natural, the way god made it.
why is that? did i say you were an honest man? because, setting aside the fact that i'm knight and a soldier, i'd be nothing but a liar if i said that.
coward! you take everything lying down, you just turn the other cheek, you can't even see the difference between being honored and being taken advantage of! if we punish criminals by "criminals," goneril may be referring to gloucester, lear, cordelia, or all three. criminals before they have a chance to commit their crimes, you're a fool to pity them. why aren't you preparing for war? the french have invaded our peaceful country. your territory is at risk, and all you can do is sit around like a preachy fool and whine, "ah, why is he doing that?"
oh, it's all-natural, sir. wind and rain can't wash it off.
then please, sir, set aside your knighthood and your soldiership and let me tell you that you're a deliberate liar, if you say i'm anything other than an honest man.
look at yourself, devilish shrew! a woman deformed by hatred and rage is more horrifying than the devil!, at least the devil is supposed to look that way.
that's true beauty. mother nature herself painted your skin so white and your lips so red. my lady, you'd be the cruelest woman alive if you let your beauty die with you, with no children to inherit your good looks for future generations to enjoy.
should i allow you to say that? should i set aside something that's mine by right? if i allow you anything, hang me. if you allow yourself, hang you. you're running in the wrong direction: get out of here! go!
you useless fool!
oh, i'd never be that cruel. i'll definitely do as you say and leave my beauty for the rest of the world to enjoy. i'll write out a detailed inventory of my beauty and label every part. for example, item: two lips, ordinary red. item: two gray eyes, with lids on them. item: one neck, one chin, and so on. anyway, were you sent here just to tell me i'm beautiful?
sir, my master wants to speak with you.
shame on you, warped hag! your true demonic features are distorting your body. if i let myself do what i yearn to, i'd rip the flesh off your bones. but i won't attack a woman, even if she is a demon.
i see what you're like. you're proud. but you'd still be gorgeous even if you were as proud as the devil. my lord loves you. you should return a love as deep as his, even if you're the most beautiful woman in the world.
sir john falstaff, i'd like a word with you.
i sneeze on your manhood. ha!
how does he love me?
my good sir! god grant you a good day! it's great to see you out and about: i'd heard you were sick. i hope your doctor knows you're out. though you're not entirely past your youth, your lordship, you have a touch of age in you, a touch of the passage of time, and i must humbly urge you to take good care of your health.
what news do you bring?
he adores you. he cries and groans and sighs.
sir john, i sent for you to come see me before you left for shrewsbury.
oh my lord, the duke of cornwall's dead. he was killed by his servant as he about to gouge out glouces-ter's other eye.
your lord knows what i think. i can't love him. i'm sure he's a very nice man. i know he's noble, rich, young, and with a fine reputation. people say he's generous, well educated, and brave, and he's very attractive.
if you don't mind my saying so, i hear the king is back from wales and it didn't go so well.
gloucester's eyes?
but i just can't love him. he should have resigned himself to that a long time ago.
i'm not talking about the king. you didn't come when i sent for you.
a servant gloucester had raised in his house, full of compunction, opposed the blinding and turned his sword on the duke of cornwall. enraged, cornwall attacked and killed the servant, but not without receiving his own wound, of which he later died.
if i loved you as passionately as my master does, and suffered like he does, your rejection would make no sense to me. i wouldn't understand it.
and i also hear that the king has fallen into a terrible paralysis.
there's justice in heaven after all! that these crimes are punished so quickly is proof. but oh, poor glou-cester! did he lose his other eye?
what would you do about it?
well, god give him a speedy recovery. please, let me speak with you.
he lost both, my lord., ma'am, this letter is from your sister, and needs an immediate answer.
i'd build myself a sad little cabin near your house, where my soul's imprisoned. from that cabin i'd call out to my soul. i'd write sad songs about unrequited love and sing them loudly in the middle of the night. i'd shout your name to the hills and make the air echo with your name, "olivia!" oh, you wouldn't be able to go anywhere without feeling sorry for me.
his paralysis is, as i understand it, a kind of lethargy, if it please you. it's a sleepiness in the blood, a nasty tingling.
(to herself) in a way i'm glad to hear that cornwall is dead. but on the other hand, edmund is traveling with regan, who is now a widow. if something happens between them on the road, it would shatter my hopes of having edmund for myself and escaping this hateful life. still, there are benefits to having cornwall out of the way., i'll read this letter and answer it.
not bad; you might accomplish something. who are your parents?
why are you telling me this? let it be.
where was gloucester's son edmund when they gouged his eyes out?
i was born to a higher position than i've got now. but i'm still fairly high-ranking. i'm a gentleman.
it comes from heavy sadness; from too much reading, and too much thinking. i read about it in the reference books: it's a kind of deafness.
he was on his way here with your wife.
go back to your lord. i can't love him. tell him not to send any more messengers, unless you feel like coming back to tell me how he took the bad news. goodbye. thanks for your trouble. here's some money for you.
i think you must have that disease as well, because you're not hearing a word i'm saying.
but he isn't here now.
i'm not a paid messenger, my lady. keep your money. it's my master who's not getting the reward he deserves, not me. i hope you fall in love with a man whose heart is hard as a rock and who treats your love like a big joke, just like you've done. goodbye, you beautiful, cruel woman.
very likely, my lord, very likely. but actually, sir, i have the not-listening disease; i have the not-paying-attention sickness.
no, my lord. i met him going back again.
"who are your parents?" "i was born to a higher position than i've got now. but i'm still fairly high-ranking. i'm a gentleman." yes, i'm sure you are. your way of talking, your face, your body, your behavior, and your sensitive soul all prove you're a gentleman. ah, no. calm down, calm down. if only his lord were more like him. how strange i'm feeling! can someone fall in love this quickly? i can feel this young man's perfection creeping in through my eyes like some kind of disease, slowly and invisibly. oh, well., malvolio! come here!
the cure for that illness would be to put you in shackles, and i wouldn't mind being your doctor.
does he know about this wicked crime?
at your service, madam.
i may be as poor as job in the bible, job patiently withstood a series of hardships set on him by god. job , but i'm not as patient. you may be able to throw me in jail because of my poverty, but some people might have slight reservations about that.
yes, my lord. he was the one who denounced his father. he then left the house specifically so that the punishment might be carried out without concern for their father-son bond.
run after that obnoxious messenger, the duke's servant. he insisted on leaving this ring with me whether i wanted it or not. tell him i want nothing to do with it. (she hands him a ring) ask him not to encourage orsino or to get his hopes up. i'm not for him. if that young man comes here again tomorrow, i'll tell him why. hurry, malvolio.
i sent for you to come speak with me. there were charges against you that might have earned you the death penalty.
gloucester, i'll thank you forever for the love you've shown the king. i'll get revenge for what they did to your eyes., come here, my friend. what else you do know?
madam, i will.
i was advised that, since i was working for the army at the time, i shouldn't go.
do you know why the king of france suddenly went back home?
i don't know what i'm doing. i'm afraid i'm not using my head, and i'm falling for his good looks. fate, do your work. we human beings don't control our own destinies. what is fated to happen must happen. so let it happen!
the truth is, sir john, that you are massively notorious.
he'd left some unfinished business, which he remembered after arriving here. it was urgent and important enough to require his personal presence.
you won't stay any longer? and you don't want me to come with you?
anybody who wears a belt this big couldn't be anything less than massive.
whom did he leave in charge here?
no, i'd rather you stayed here. my luck is pretty bad right now, and it might rub off on you. so just let me say goodbye and face the bad stuff alone, otherwise i wouldn't be thanking you very well for all you've done for me.
your bank account is thin, and yet you put it to huge waste.
the marshal of france, monsieur la far.
at least tell me where you're going.
i wish it were the other way around: that my bank account were huge and my waist were thin.
was queen cordelia aggrieved by the letters you delivered?
honestly, i can't. i'm just wandering, with no particular destination. but i know you'd never force me to tell you things i don't want to, so i should be polite and tell you what i can. my name's sebastian, though i've been calling myself roderigo. my father was sebastian of messaline. i know you've heard of him. he's dead now. he left behind myself and my twin sister, who was born in the same hour as me. if god had been willing, i wish we had died in the same hour too! but you kept that from happening. an hour before you pulled me out of the breaking waves, my sister drowned.
you've misled the young prince.
yes, sir. she took the letters and read them in front of me. now and then a large tear trickled down her delicate cheek. she seemed to be trying to control her emotions, which were overwhelming her.
how tragic!
the young prince has misled me. i'm the man with the big belly, and he's the dog who walks in front of me.
so she was moved by it?
although many people said she looked like me, she was considered beautiful. and though i can't believe everything people said about her beauty, i'll be so bold as to say she had a beautiful mind. even those who were jealous of her would have to admit that. she's been drowned in salty sea water, and now my salty tears are about to drown her memory all over again.
well, i'd rather not open up a wound that's just healed. the good work you did at shrewsbury has made up a little for the bad thing you did at gad's hill. you can thank the rebellion for helping you get away with that terrible deed.
there were no outbursts. she was struggling between emotion and self-control. you've seen how it can rain while the sun shines? that's how she was, smiling and crying at once, only more lovely. the little smile on her full lips didn't seem aware of the tears that were dropping like diamonds from her pearly eyes. if everyone looked so lovely in their sorrow, then sorrow would be highly prized.
i'm sorry i wasn't a better host for you, sir.
really?
she didn't ask anything?
oh, antonio, i'm sorry i caused you so much trouble.
but since things are calm now, let's keep them that way. we won't wake a sleeping wolf.
actually, once or twice she sighed and said, "father," as if the word were pressing on her chest. once she exclaimed, "sisters, sisters, shame on you! kent, father, sisters! what, out in a storm in the middle of the night? i can't believe it." the tears fell from her eyes like holy water. then she ran away to grieve alone.
i care about you a lot. please let me be your servant so i can be with you. you'll be killing me if you don't.
to wake a wolf is as bad as to smell a fox smell a fox = be suspicious smell a fox .
it must be fate that makes us who we are, otherwise someone as good as cordelia could not possibly be related to those two witches. have you not spoken to her since then?
if you don't want to break my heart, then say goodbye to me right now. i like you very much. i'm really about to cry, just like my mother would do. i'm going to count orsino's court. goodbye.
what? you're like a candle, half burned out.
no.
i wish you all the best. if i didn't have so many enemies in orsino's court, i'd go join you there. but who cares. i'm so crazy about you that danger doesn't bother me. i'll go anyway.
maybe, if i were a big, fat holiday candle made of animal fat. but you'd be better off saying that i'm a wax candle: i keep "waxing" larger and larger.
did this happen before the king of france returned home?
excuse me, weren't you with countess olivia just now?
your gray beard should be a sign that you're a man of gravity.
no, afterward.
yes, sir. i've only made it this far since i left her place, walking at a moderate pace.
i'm a man of gravy, gravy, gravy.
well, sir, poor delirious lear is in town. sometimes when he's lucid he remembers why we're here, and absolutely refuses to see his daughter.
she's sending this ring back to you, sir. you should've saved me some trouble and taken it away yourself. she wants you to make it very clear to your lord that she wants nothing to do with him, and that you should never come again on his behalf, unless you want to come back to tell her how he reacted to the bad news. here, take the ring.
you follow the young prince everywhere, like a false angel on his shoulder.
why, good sir?
she took that ring from me. i won't take it back.
that's not so, my lord. false angels angel = a kind of coin; angels were often trimmed of some of their metal; a defective angel could be distinguished from a proper by weighing it on a scale. angels are light, and anyone can see without having to weigh me that i'm too heavy. but i don't know; in some ways, you're right. i'm not for these times. virtue counts for so little in this commercial world of ours. true courage is worthless; it's only used by animal trainers in the bear-baiting rings. intelligence is good for nobody but bartenders, who waste their wits totaling up tavern bills. in these mean-spirited days, man's best qualities aren't worth a thing. you older folks don't value us young people. you measure our fiery passion according to your melancholic bitterness. and i have to tell you, those of us who are highly advanced in our youth, we're spirited as well as young.
he's too overwhelmed with shame. he remembers how unkind he was to her, how he disowned her and sent her abroad, how he gave her rightful inheritance to her two dog-hearted sisters. all those memories pain his mind so deeply that guilt and shame keep him away from cordelia.
you threw it at her rudely, and she wants you to take it back. (he throws down the ring) if it's worth bending over to pick up, there it is on the ground, where you can see it. if not, whoever finds it can have it.
you'd add your name to the list of the young? you, who have age written all over you? don't you have mucus in your eyes? dry skin? jaundice? a white beard? an
oh, the poor man!
i didn't give her any ring. what's she trying to say? i hope she doesn't have a crush on me! it's true she looked at me a lot, in fact, she looked at me so much that she seemed distracted, and couldn't really finish her sentences very well. oh, i really think she loves me! she sent this rude messenger to tell me to come back, instead of coming herself, which would be indis-
arthritic leg? a growing belly? isn't your voice scratchy? your breath short? your chin doubled? your last wit abandoned? isn't every part of you devastated by age? and still you call yourself young? shame on you, sir john.
have you heard about albany's and cornwall's troops?
creet. she doesn't want orsino's ring! orsino never sent her a ring. i'm the man she wants. if that's true, which it is, she might as well be in love with a dream, the poor lady. now i understand why it's bad to wear disguises. disguises help the devil do his work. it's so easy for a good-looking but deceitful man to make women fall in love with him. it's not our fault, we women are weak. we can't help what we're made of. ah, how will this all turn out? my lord loves her, and. poor me, i love him just as much. and she's deluded enough to be in love with me. what can possibly fix this situation? i'm pretending to be a man, so my love for the duke is hopeless. and since i'm a woman, too bad i'm a woman, olivia's love for me is hopeless as well! oh, only time can sort out this mess. i can't figure it out by myself!
sir, i was born around three o'clock in the afternoon, with a white head and a bit of a round belly. as for my scratchy voice, i lost it through shouting and singing loud songs. but i won't try to prove how young i am any longer. i have only one trait of old age, and that is wisdom. if somebody wants to challenge me to a dance contest for a thousand- mark mark = unit of currency mark wager, let him hand me the money and off we go. now, as for the fact that the prince hit you on the head, he did it like a rude prince and you took it like a sensible gentleman. i reprimanded him for it, and he repents. he's not wearing the traditional sackcloth and ashes, for sure, but he's repenting in silk cloth and wine.
i have. they're on the march.
come on, sir andrew. if we're still awake after midnight, then we're up early in the morning. and the doctors say it's healthy to get up early, 
may god send the prince a better friend!
well, sir, i'll take you to lear and have you stay with him a while. i have important business that requires me to remain in disguise a while longer. when i've revealed my true identity, you'll be glad you took the time to help me out. please come with me.
i don't know what the doctors say. all i know is that staying up late is staying up late.
may god send the friend a better prince! i can't get him off my hands!
sadly, it's the king that's missing. they saw him just now as mad and deranged as the stormy sea, singing loudly, wearing a crown of nettles, thorns, hemlock, and all the other weeds that grow in our cornfields., send out a hundred soldiers to find him. search high and low, in every acre of the fields, and bring him here for me to see him.
a false conclusion. i hate your logic as much as i hate an empty drinking cup. staying up after midnight means that you go to bed after midnight, in the wee hours of the morning, which is early. so it's like going to bed early. isn't everybody made up of the four elements, earth, water, fire, and air?
well, the king has separated you and prince harry. i hear you're going with john of lancaster to go fight northumberland and the archbishop.
what can human knowledge do to make him sane again? i'd give all my wealth to whoever can help him.
that's what they say, but i think life consists of food and booze.
yes, and thanks for reminding me. i hope that all of you who stay home, safe and sound, will say a prayer that we soldiers don't end up in some hot battle. for, by the lord, i've only packed two shirts, and i don't want to sweat too much. if things get hot and i pull out any other weapon besides a bottle, i'll never drink wine again. i get sent out on every dangerous assignment
there is a way, ma'am. nature heals people with rest, which lear hasn't had. but there are many herbs that will help him rest and take his mind off his anguish for a while.
you're a smart guy. so we should eat and drink. maria! bring us some wine!
that comes up. well, i can't live forever. that's the thing about the english: when they have something good, they use it continually. if you're going to insist that i'm an old man, then let me rest. i wish to god the enemy weren't as scared of me as they are: i'd rather sit and rust than be worn out by all this work.
then i'll water all those precious herbs with my tears to make them grow. may they relieve a sick old man's suffering. go find those herbs for him, before his madness puts his life in danger.
look, here comes the fool.
well, stay honest, stay honest. god bless your undertaking.
i have news, ma'am. the british forces are on their way here.
hello, my friends! what a pretty picture, three fools all together.
could your lordship lend me a thousand pounds for some equipment i need?
we already knew that. our forces are ready for them. oh, father, i'm taking care of your business. that's why the king of france listened to my pleas and tears. we're not invading england out of ambition or greed, but out of love, dear love!, and my father's right to his kingdom. i hope i see him and hear him again soon.
hello, you idiot. sing us a song.
not a penny, not a penny: you're too impatient to endure adversity. farewell; give my regards to my kinsman westmoreland.
have my brother-in-law's troops been mobilized?
i swear, this fool has an excellent singing voice. i'd give forty shillings to have his nice legs and his beautiful voice. (to the fool) fool, you were very funny last night talking that astrological nonsense these are nonsense words that sound like astrology. astrological nonsense about pigrogromitus and the vapians passing the equinox of queubus. very amusing. i sent you some money to spend on your girlfriend. did you get it?
if i do, hit me with a sledgehammer. old age and greed go together like youth and lust. gout afflicts one and syphilis plagues the other, so there's no point in me cursing either the old or the young: they're both cursed already. boy!
yes, ma'am.
i gave your little present to my girlfriend because you can't get a grip on malvolio's nose to whip your horse with it. my girlfriend has beautiful white hands, and great warriors aren't mom-and-pop diners this is more nonsense to amuse sir andrew. mom-and-pop diners , you know.
sir?
is he there in person?
ha, ha! i love it when you talk nonsense, that's what fools should do. come on now, sing for us.
how much money's in my wallet?
yes, making a big fuss. your sister's the better soldier of the two.
(giving the fool money) yes, come on. here's sixpence for you. let's hear a song.
about seven groats groat = coin worth four pence groats and two pence.
lord edmund didn't speak to your master at home?
(giving the fool money) here's something from me too. if one knight gives, 
there no way to cure the illness that's making my wallet waste away; borrowing makes it live a little longer, but the disease is incurable. bring this letter to lord john of lancaster, this one to the prince, this one to westmoreland, and this one to madame ursula. i've promised to marry her every single week since i got my first gray hair. get going: you know where i'll be.
no, ma'am.
would you rather hear a love song or a song about the good life?
damn this gout! or damn this syphilis! one of them is really messing up my big toe. oh well, it doesn't matter if i limp. i can blame it on the war, and that will help justify my disability payments. a sharp brain can turn any problem to its advantage. i'll turn my diseases into cash.
what could my sister's letter to him say?
a love song, a love song.
so that's what we're fighting for, and that's the kind of support we have. now please, my noble friends, tell me frankly if you think we have a chance. first you, marshal mowbray. what do you say?
i don't know, ma'am.
yes, yes. i'm not interested in being good.
i absolutely agree with our reasons for fighting. but given our resources, i'd feel better if i knew how we're going to grow bold and strong enough to defeat this mighty and powerful king.
he rushed away on serious business. it was a huge mistake to let old gloucester live after we blinded him. wherever he goes, he inspires compassion and people turn against us. i think edmund went off to kill him, to put him out of his blind misery. and also to find out the size of the enemy army.
(he sings) oh my lover, where are you roaming? stay and listen! your true love's coming, the one who can sing both high and low: don't roam any further, pretty darling. your journey ends when you meet a lover, as every wise man's son knows.
our army has grown to twenty-five thousand good men. our reinforcements are coming with northumberland, and his heart burns with anger over all he's lost.
i have to follow him and give him the letter.
that was excellent, really excellent.
then, lord hastings, this is the question: can our twenty-five thousand get the job done without northumberland?
our troops are deployed tomorrow. stay with us tonight. it's dangerous out there.
good, very good.
with him, we can.
i can't, ma'am. my lady ordered me to deliver her letter.
(singing) what is love? it isn't in the future. when you're having fun now, you're laughing right now. the future's unsure, and there's no reason to waste time. come kiss me while you're twenty. you won't be young forever.
yes, exactly, and that's the point. if we're too weak without him, then i don't think we should advance until we know that his help is guaranteed. in a fight as bloody as this one, we need to be certain about the status of our supporters: we can't rely on conjecture, hope, and guesswork when aid isn't guaranteed.
why would she write to edmund? couldn't you just deliver the message orally? it probably has something to do with... i don't know. i'll be so grateful to you if you let me open that letter.
a beautiful voice, i swear.
that's right, lord bardolph. that's what happened to young hotspur at shrewsbury.
ma'am, i'd rather, 
his breath stinks.
that's true, my lord. hotspur fortified himself with nothing but hope, and mistook empty words as a true promise of reinforcements. he imagined that a huge army was coming to his aid, but what actually arrived turned out to be even smaller than the smallest of his fantasies. and so, with daydreams that could only belong to a madman, he closed his eyes and leaped into destruction.
i know your lady goneril doesn't love her husband. i'm sure of that. and when she was here recently she flirted with edmund and gave him significant glances. i know she trusts you and tells you everything.
yes, it stinks very sweetly.
but, begging your pardon, there's no harm in making guesses and hopeful strategies.
me, ma'am?
if we could listen to him with our noses, we would definitely say he stinks very sweetly. so what do you say, should we sing loud enough to shake the heavens? should we sing a round to wake up the night owl? should we do that?
yes, there is. presently, our armies are already in motion, but putting our hope in them is as ridiculous as expecting that early spring buds will produce fruit: at that time of year, buds are more likely to be killed by frost than to bloom. when we want to put up a building, first we survey the land, and then we draw up a set of plans. then we calculate the cost, and if we can't afford it, we revise the plans with fewer rooms, or we decide not to build at all. in the great task we're attempting, the taking down of one kingdom, and the building of another, we have even more reason to evaluate the land and the plans. we must be certain that the foundation is sound, that the engineer is skilled. we must know precisely what we can afford, how ready and able we are, and we must consider the opposing arguments.
i know what i'm talking about. you're close to her, i know it. so i recommend you take note of what i'm about to say. my husband is dead. edmund and i have talked, and it makes more sense for him to marry me than goneril. you can figure out the rest. if you find him, please give regan probably hands something to oswald here, such as a letter or a love token. give him this. and when your mistress hears about all this, please tell her to use her head next time. so goodbye. if you happen to hear anything about that blind traitor gloucester, i'll reward anyone who snuffs him out.
let's go for it. i'm a very good singer, and can sing rounds like a dog dog = expert dog .
otherwise, it becomes a meaningless exercise: papers and numbers, and names of men rather than real, live men. that's like drawing up plans for a house you can't possibly afford, building half of it, and then abandoning the partly-built structure to be ruined by the elements.
if i could run into him, ma'am, i'd prove which side i'm on.
then you'll be good at catchy tunes. dogs like to play catch.
let's suppose that everything we're hoping for fails to materialize, and the army we have now is as big as it's going to get. i still think that, even in this condition, we're a match for the king.
goodbye.
absolutely. let's dance to "you jerk."
why? does the king only have twenty-five thousand men?
when will we get to the top of that cliff?
you mean, "shut up, you jerk"? that's the song where the singers call each other jerks, right? so i'll be forced to call you a jerk, sir andrew.
the king isn't facing us with any more than that, in fact, he doesn't even have that many, lord bardolph. this is a time of war, and the king's had to divide his army into three sections. one division is fighting the french; one's fighting glendower. that leaves a third of his army to fight against us. the king is weak and divided into three, and the coffers of his treasury echo with the sounds of hollow poverty and emptiness.
we're walking up to the top right now. see how hard it is to climb?
it won't be the first time someone was forced to call me that. you start, fool. it starts, "shut up."
there's no reason to fear that he will pull all three divisions together and confront us with his full strength.
the ground feels flat to me.
i'll never be able to start if i shut up.
if he did that, he'd be vulnerable at the rear, and the french and the welsh would be at his heels. he would never let that happen.
no, it's dreadfully steep. listen. do you hear the sea?
that's true. but come on, start.
who's going to lead his troops against us?
no, really, i don't.
you're making a terrible racket out here! lady olivia told her servant malvolio to kick you out of the house. i swear it's true.
the duke of lancaster and westmoreland. the king and harry monmouth will fight against the welsh. i don't know for sure who is in charge of the fight against the french.
then your other senses must be getting worse because of the trauma of blindness.
lady olivia can go to china for all i care. we're very smart guys, and malvolio's little bo peep. (he sings) we're just having some fun., aren't i her relative, after all? aren't we related? fiddle-dee-dee, "lady!" (singing) there lived a man in babylon, lady, lady!
let's continue. we'll publicly proclaim the reasons we're fighting. the people are sick of the leadership they themselves supported. they were greedy for it, but now they have overfed. when you build your foundation on the public's love, you build on shaky and unsure ground. oh, you foolish masses! you shouted your love for bolingbroke to the skies, before you knew what he'd turn into. now that you're dressed in the things you desired, you monstrous devourer, you're so full of bolingbroke that you're ready to vomit him up. this, you vulgar dog, is just how you emptied your gluttonous stomach of king richard; and now you want to eat up your dead vomit, and you howl trying to find it. what can you count on in this world? the very people who wanted richard dead when he was alive are now in love with his corpse. the very people who threw garbage on his noble head when he marched through london in shame behind the admired bolingbroke are now saying, "oh earth, return that king, and take this one!" curses on men's thoughts! only the past and the future appeal to them; whatever they have right now they despise.
it may be so. it seems to me that your voice has changed, and that your speech is more elegant than it used to be.
gosh, the knight's very good at acting like a fool.
should we gather our troops and press forward?
you're mistaken about all that. the only thing different about me is my clothes.
yes, he's good at it when he's in the mood, and so am i. he's practiced more, but it comes more naturally to me.
time is our commander, and time proposes we be on our way.
i think you're more articulate.
(he sings) on the twelfth day of december, 
master fang, have you filed the lawsuit?
come on, sir. this is the place. stand still. it's so scary to look down! it makes me dizzy. the crows flying down below look as small as ants. halfway down the cliff there's somebody clinging to the rock and gathering wild herbs, a risky business! he looks like a dot to me. the fishermen walking along the beach are as small as mice. that big ship over there looks no bigger
for god's sake, shut up!
it's filed.
than its lifeboat, and its lifeboat looks as small as a tiny buoy. up here you can't even hear the waves crashing against the rocks. i have to stop looking, or my head will start spinning and i'll fall.
are you all crazy? what's wrong with you? are you making all this noise at this time of night because you have no manners, or because you're just stupid? are you trying to turn my mistress's house into a noisy bar? is that why you're squealing out these ridiculous vulgar songs without lowering your voices at all? don't you have any respect for anything?
where's your deputy? is he a strong deputy? will he rise to the occasion?
lead me to where you're standing.
we respected the beat of the song, sir. so shut up!
sirrah, where's snare?
give me your hand. you're now within a foot of the cliff's edge. i wouldn't try to jump up and down here for anything on earth.
sir toby, i've got to be frank with you. my lady told me to tell you that while she lets you stay at her house because you're a relative, she doesn't approve of your behavior. if you can shape up, you're welcome to stay in the house. if you can't, and would prefer to leave, she's very willing to say goodbye to you.
oh my goodness! master snare!
let go of my hand. (he gives edgar another purse) here's another purse, my friend. inside it there's a jewel that any poor man would be happy to have. i hope it's only the beginning of future prosperity for you. now go further away. say goodbye to me, and let me hear your footsteps as you walk away.
(he sings in this line and the following lines, sir toby and the fool are singing variations on the lyrics of a popular song of the day. sings ) goodnight, sweetheart, i'm going to leave you now.
here, here.
goodbye, good sir.
no, good sir toby.
snare, we've got to arrest sir john falstaff.
with all my heart.
(singing) you can tell from his eyes that his life is almost over.
yes, good master snare. i've filed the suit against him and everything.
(to himself) i'm toying with his despair to cure him of it.
is this how it's going to be?
it could cost some of us our lives: he'll stab.
oh, you mighty gods! (he kneels) i hereby renounce this world and all my troubles and torments. if i could bear them better, and not fight against your unstoppable decisions, then i would simply wait until i expired naturally. if edgar's alive, bless him, gods!, now, man, goodbye. (he falls)
(singing) but i will never die.
oh my goodness! watch out for him: he stabbed me in my own house, and it was nasty. i swear, he doesn't care what trouble he causes. once he's got his weapon out, he'll thrust it like the devil. he won't spare man, woman, or child.
gone, sir. goodbye. (to himself) but i still wonder if it's possible for his own imagination to kill him, since he's so willing to die. if he'd been standing on the edge of the cliff as he thought, he'd be dead right now. is he alive or dead?, hey, sir, friend! can you hear me? answer me., maybe he passed away after all. but no, he's stirring., who are you, sir?
(singing) sir toby, that's a lie.
if i can get close to him, i won't worry about his thrusting.
go away and let me die.
this behavior really makes you look great.
me neither. i'll be right next to you.
even if you were made of feathers and air, you should've been smashed in pieces like an egg after falling as far as you just did. but your flesh is solid, your mind is strong, you're breathing and talking, you're not bleeding. you just fell the height of ten ship masts, straight down. it's a miracle you're alive. say something again.
(singing) should i tell him to go?
if i can grab him once, if he just comes within my grasp, 
but did i fall or not?
(singing) what if y,ou do?
i'm bankrupt i.e., "he's run up a bill as big as infinity." mistress quickly has a tendency to comically mangle her phrases. bankrupt from his never paying. he's run up an infinitive bill with me. catch him, master fang! don't let him get away, master snare! he's always going to pie corner pie corner was a market known for cook's shops, horses, and sex. "saddle" is a pun on female genitalia. pie corner , sorry to mention it, to buy a saddle. and every day he gets indited indited = invited indited to lunch with master smooth the silk seller, at the leopard's head on lumbert street. please bring him to justice. i've been entered, i mean, my lawsuit's been entered at court, and the whole world knows how easy i am, i mean how easy it was for him to rip me off. a hundred marks mark = unit of currency marks is a lot for a poor, solitary woman to take. and i've taken it, and taken it, and taken it. and i've been fobbed off and fobbed off and fobbed off, day in and day out. it's horrible to even think about. that's a terrible way to treat people, unless you think that every woman should be made an ass and an animal, and that she should be opened to every jerk's molestation. here he comes, with that notorious wine-faced crook, bardolph. do me a favor and do me your jobs, master fang and master snare. do me! do me! do me a favor and do me your jobs!
you fell from the terrifying top of this chalk cliff. look for yourself, see the top of the cliff way up there? the lark shrilly singing up there is too far away to be heard. just look.
(singing) should i tell him to go, and be harsh with him?
what's going on? whose horse died? what's the matter?
i can't. i have no eyes. if you're wretched and desperate, aren't you allowed to kill yourself? it used to be the last ditch comfort of miserable people.
(singing) oh no, no, no, no, don't you dare.
sir john, you're under arrest for charges brought by mistress quickly.
give me your arm. get up. there you go. how do you feel? can you feel your legs? you're standing.
that's out of tune, sir. you lie. (to malvolio) you're nothing more than a servant here. do you think that just because you're a goody two shoes, no one else can enjoy himself?
get out of here, you crooks! draw your sword, bardolph. cut off this rascal's head, and throw this whore in the gutter.
only too well.
they certainly will. they'll have double helpings, too.
throw me in the gutter? i'll throw you in the gutter. you will? you will? you bastardly cheat! murder! murder! oh, you honeysuckle honeysuckle, honey-seed, hemp-seed = homicidal, homicide honeysuckle criminal! you're going to kill god's sheriffs, and the king's? oh, you honey-seed creep! you're a honey-seed, a man-killer, and a woman-killer.
this is beyond weird. what was that thing i saw moving away from you up on the cliff before you fell?
you're right. (to malvolio) go polish your steward's chain, sir. maria, bring us some wine!
keep them off me, bardolph.
that was a poor unlucky beggar.
miss mary, if you cared what lady olivia thinks about you at all, you wouldn't contribute to this rude behavior. i assure you, she'll find out about this.
an escape! an escape!
from down here, i thought his eyes looked like full moons. he had a thousand noses and twisted horns, like wave crests in a storm at sea. it was some devil. you lucky old man, it seems that the gods have saved your life. they love to perform miracles so that humans will worship them.
go and wiggle your ears!
somebody, bring an escape mistress quickly mistakes fang's warning as a request for "escapes." escape or two! (to falstaff) you will, will you? you will, will you? go ahead, go ahead, you scoundrel! you hemp-seed!
i understand now. from now on i'll put up with my anguish until the anguish itself cries out, "enough, enough!" and disappears. i thought that thing you're talking about was a man. it would often talk about the devil. it took me to that deadly place.
there's nothing i'd love more than to make a fool out of that guy somehow. i could challenge him to a duel and then not show up. that would do the trick.
get off, you serving wench! you ruffian! you fat old hag! i'll beat you on the backside!
cheer up and be at peace.
do that. i'll write a letter challenging him to a duel on your behalf. or i'll deliver your insults to his face.
what's the matter? let's have some order here!
but who is that? a sane person would never dress like this.
dear sir toby, don't do anything rash tonight. ever since the duke's messenger visited olivia, she's been upset. as for monsieur malvolio, let me take care of him. i'll make a big fool out of him, just trust me. i'll make him famous for his stupidity. everyone will laugh at him. i know i can do it.
good sir, be good to me. i beg you, stand up for me.
no, they can't accuse me of counterfeiting coins. i'm the king himself.
tell us something about him. come on, tell us something.
well if it isn't sir john! are you making trouble here? is this appropriate for a man of your position, your age, and your responsibilities? you should be well on your way to york by now. (to fang) get off him, man. why are you holding him?
(to himself) oh, what a heartbreaking sight!
well, sometimes he acts like a goody two shoes.
oh, most excellent lord, begging your pardon: i'm a poor eastcheap widow, and he's arrested on charges i brought against him.
life's better at breaking hearts lear's insane speeches are full of non sequiturs and difficult to follow. breaking hearts than art is., hey, a new recruit. here's your enlistment bonus., look how awkwardly he handles his crossbow., come on, pull it back farther!, look, look, a mouse! calm down, this
oh, i'll beat him up for that!
what sum does he owe you?
piece of cheese will get him., i challenge you to a match. i'll even fight a giant., call out the infantry. , oh, that arrow was well shot. whoosh! right in the bull's eye., , what's the password?
you're going to beat him up for being good? and what's your brilliant reason for that, please?
it's more than some, sir: it's all, all that i have. he's eaten me out of house and home. he's put everything i own into that fat belly of his. (to falstaff) but i'll get some of it back again, or i'll ride you all night like a bad dream.
sweet marjoram.
i don't have any "brilliant" reason for it, but i have a good enough reason.
i think i might just ride you, if i get the chance to mount you.
that's it!
he isn't really that pure and good. he's just a conceited flatterer. he's a pretentious guy who aspires to speak and act like nobility. he's proud, and he thinks he's so stuffed full of wonderful qualities that everyone loves him. that's the weakness i'll use to get revenge on him.
what is this, sir john? damn! how could any decent man put up with this storm of screaming and cursing? aren't you ashamed to force a poor widow to take these extreme measures simply to get what's hers?
i know that voice.
what are you going to do?
(to mistress quickly) what's the total i owe you?
ha! goneril with a white beard? ha, regan?, they flattered me and told me how wise i was, wise before my time. to agree to everything i said was not truly devout., the rain came to drench me, and the wind to make me shiver, and the thunder wouldn't stop roaring when i ordered it to. that's when i learned the truth about them. that's when i sniffed them out. i tell you, they are not honest men. they told me i was everything. it's a lie. i'm not immune to chills.
i'll drop some mysterious love letters in his path. he'll think they're addressed to him, because they'll describe the color of his beard, the shape of his legs, the way he walks, and the expression on his face. i can make my handwriting look just like lady olivia's: she
my goodness! if you were an honest man, you'd give yourself to me, as well as the money. you swore to me, over a gold-plated wine goblet, in the dolphin room in my tavern, at the round table, next to the fire, on the wednesday seven weeks after easter, when the prince swung at your head for claiming his father was a fake, you swore, while i was cleaning your wounds, to marry me and make me a proper lady and your wife. can you deny it? didn't mrs. baconfat, the butcher's wife, come into the room then and ask to borrow some vinegar, saying that she had some good prawns, and you wanted to eat some, and i told you that it was a bad idea, to eat shrimp when you had a fresh wound, and
i recognize something about that voice. isn't that the king?
and i can't tell the difference between each other's handwriting.
when she left, didn't you tell me to stop being friends with low types like her, because before long we'd be married and i'd be a proper lady? and didn't you kiss me and tell me to lend you thirty shillings shillings = unit of currency shillings ? put your hand on the bible and deny it, if you dare.
yes, every inch a king. my subjects tremble when i look at them. i pardon that man. what are you accused of? adultery? i'll commute your death sentence. to die for adultery? no. little birds do it, and dragonflies copulate right in front of me. let's have more sex in the world, since gloucester's bastard son was kinder to him than my daughters, conceived in lawful wedlock, have been to me. get to it, be lustful, sleep around, i need soldiers for my army. look at that simpering lady over there. from looking at her face, i'd say she's
excellent! sounds like you've got a good trick in mind.
sir, this is a poor, insane soul. she's been saying all over town that her oldest son looks just like you. she was once rich, but poverty has driven her crazy. now, as for these two foolish officers, i would like to press charges against them.
frigid. she pretends to be virtuous and to disdain the word "sex, but she's hornier than a passel of rabbits. women are sex machines below the waist, though they're chaste up above. above the waist they belong to god, but the lower part belongs to the devil. that's where hell is, and darkness, and fires and stench! death and orgasm! ah, ah, ah! give me an aphrodisiac, pharmacist. let me have sweet dreams. there's money in it for you.
i like it too.
sir john, sir john. i know too well how you are accustomed to turning the truth into a big lie. but neither your confident demeanor nor the storm of words that accompanies your insolent disrespect will sway me from making a just consideration. as far as i can see, you've taken advantage of this trusting woman, and you've made her give you cash and other favors.
oh, let me kiss his hand!
he'll think these letters are from olivia and that she's in love with him.
yes, truthfully, sir.
let me wipe it off first. it stinks of death.
yes, that's the idea.
quiet, please. (to falstaff) pay her what you owe her, and undo the wrongdoings you've done to her. you can do the first with money, and the second with a sincere apology.
a ruined man! this is how the whole world will end up, worn away to nothing., do you know who i am?
he's going to look like a total idiot.
sir, i will not put up with this snub without a reply. you call my brave, honorable dealings insolent disrespect. does a man have to stand here, silent and bowing, to be a virtuous man? no, sir. with all due respect, i won't bow down to you. i say that i want to be set free by these officers, seeing as i have urgent work to do for the king.
i remember your eyes quite well. are you squinting at me? go ahead, try to make me fall in love, blind cupid cupid is the blind greek god of love. he shoots arrows at people to make them fall in love. cupid . i won't ever love again. read this letter. just look at the handwriting.
absolutely, you idiot.
you talk as though you have permission to break the law. but act appropriately to your status: satisfy this poor woman.
if every letter on that page were a sun, i couldn't see even one of them.
this is going to be great!
come here, hostess.
(to himself) i wouldn't believe this if i weren't seeing it with my own eyes. it's real, and it breaks my heart.
it's going to be fun, i promise. i know my medicine will work on him. i'll have you two hide, and the fool too, right where he'll find the letter. watch his reaction. meanwhile, let's go to bed and dream about this. good night.
master gower, what's going on?
read it.
good night, you amazing woman, you.
my lord, the king and harry prince of wales are nearby. this letter will tell you the rest.
how? with my eye sockets?
she's a fine woman, all right.
on my honor.
oh ho, is that what you're getting at? you want money before you'll read? no eyes in your head til there's money in your wallet? your eyes are in a bad way, your wallet's empty, but you understand the ways of the world.
she's a good little woman, and she adores me. what about it?
honestly, that's what you said before.
i do understand, by touch.
someone adored me once, too.
on my honor. come, let's not talk about it anymore.
what, are you crazy? you don't need eyes to see how the world works. look with your ears. look how the judge yells at a simple thief. listen. but mix them up, have them switch places, and do you think you'd be able to tell which one is which? have you seen a farmer's dog bark at a beggar?
let's go to bed, knight. tomorrow you need to get more money sent to you.
by heaven above and below, i'll have to pawn my good china and the tapestries in my dining rooms.
yes, sir.
if i can't persuade your niece to marry me, i'm going to be in some serious financial trouble.
it's not such a big deal. glass is the only good thing to drink out of anyway. and as for the walls the biblical tale of the prodigal son, who wastes his inheritance before contritely returning to his father's house, was a popular subject for wall decorations. walls , something pretty and comical, or a depiction of the prodigal son; or maybe one of those german hunting scenes, painted on the wall to look like a tapestry, why, those are worth a thousand of those bed curtains and moth-eaten tapestries. let me borrow just ten pounds, all right? come on, other than your moodiness, you're the best wench in england. go wash your face and withdraw the lawsuit. come on, don't be this way with me. don't you know me? come, come, i know somebody put you up to this.
and you saw how the beggar ran from the mutt? that's authority! even a dog is obeyed sometimes. you stupid cop, stop your violence! why are you whipping that whore? you should be whipping yourself, since you lust after her and yearn to do the same thing for which you're punishing her. one criminal punishes another. poor men's sins are much more noticeable than rich men's. cover up a crime with gold and the arm of justice can't touch it. but dress the crime in rags and it's caught easily. everyone sins. you can't blame anyone for it anyone, i say. i'll vouch for that. believe me, my friend, since i have the power to stop the prosecutors. get yourself some glass eyes, and pretend to see things you can't, like a crooked politician. now, now, now, now. pull off my boots. harder, harder. like that.
get your hands on some money and everything will be all right. i know you'll win over olivia in the end.
please, sir john, let's call it twenty nobles noble = unit of currency; twenty nobles = approximately six pounds twenty nobles . i don't want to have to pawn my china, in god's name!
(to himself) oh, wisdom and absurdity mixed up together! reason in madness!
i know i will too, if it's the last thing i do.
all right, forget it. i'll figure something else out. you'll always be a fool.
if you want to cry over my bad luck, i'll give you my eyes. i know you. your name's gloucester. you have to be patient with me. i came here crying. the first time we see the world as newborns, we cry and scream. i'll read you a sermon. listen to this.
come on, i'll go warm up a nice glass of sherry for us. it's too late to go to bed now. come on, my friend, come on.
all right, i'll lend it to you, even if i have to pawn my clothes. i hope you'll have dinner here tonight. you'll pay me the full amount then?
oh, how awful!
play me some music. (music plays) good morning, my friends., have them sing me that song again, cesario, that old-fashioned song someone sang last night. it made me feel better and took my mind off my troubles much better than the silly songs they sing nowadays. please, have them sing just one verse.
will i live? (to bardolph) go, stick with her, stick with her. don't let her out of your sight.
when we're born, we cry because we've arrived on the stage of life, like all the other fools. that's a nice hat you've got there. how ingenious to make horseshoes out of felt. i'll test it out. and when i've sneaked up on my sons-in-law, then i'll kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!
sir, the person who should sing that song isn't here.
do you want doll tearsheet to meet you at dinner?
(noticing lear) oh, here he is. grab him., sir, your most dear daughter, 
who was it?
no more talking. let's have her.
what, i'm a prisoner? no rescue for me? my luck has always been bad. treat me well. there's a ransom. i need a doctor. my brains are injured.
feste, the jester, my lord. olivia's father used to like him. he's somewhere else in the house.
i've heard better news.
you can have anything you want.
then go find him. meanwhile, play the tune.
what's the news, my lord?
will no one back me up? am i all alone? that would make anyone cry enough to water his garden with his tears.
(to viola) come here, boy. if you ever fall in love and feel the bittersweet pain it brings, think of me. because the way i am now, moody and unable to focus on anything except the face of the woman i love, is exactly how all true lovers are. what do you think of this song?
where did the king spend last night?
good sir, 
it really makes you feel what a lover feels.
at basingstoke, sir.
i'll die courageously shakespeare puns on the idea that orgasm is similar to death, in part because both involve a loss of awareness of the world. courageously , like a well-dressed bridegroom. okay, i'll be cheery. i'm king. did you know that, gentlemen?
you're absolutely right. i'd bet my life that, as young as you are, you've fallen in love with someone. haven't you, boy?
i hope everything's okay, sir. what's the news?
you're of royal blood, and we obey you.
a little bit.
and his armies have come back?
then there's still a chance. come and get it! but you'll have to catch me! catch me if you can! sa, sa, sa, sa.
what kind of woman is she?
no. fifteen hundred infantrymen and five hundred horsemen are marching to meet lord lancaster, to fight against northumberland and the archbishop.
this is a difficult to see even in a beggar. in a king, the sight is unbearable. he has a daughter good enough to cancel out the wickedness of the other two.
she's a lot like you.
is the king back from wales, my noble lord?
hello, good sir.
she's not good enough for you, then. how old is she?
i'll give you some letters shortly. come with me, master gower.
how do you do, sir. how can i help you?
about as old as you are, my lord.
sir!
have you heard any news of impending battle?
that's definitely too old. a woman should always pick an older man. that way she'll adjust herself to what her husband wants, and the husband will be happy and faithful to her. because however much we like to brag, boy, the truth is that we men change our minds a lot more than women do, and our desires come and go a lot faster than theirs.
what's the matter?
certainly. everyone who can hear has heard about it.
i think you're right, sir.
master gower, would you like to join me for lunch?
could you tell me how near the enemy is?
so find someone younger to love, or you won't be able to maintain your feelings. women are like roses: the moment their beauty is in full bloom, it's about to decay.
i have to attend to this noble man right here. but thank you, sir john.
very near, and approaching fast. the main body of the army is expected here any hour now.
that's true. it's too bad their beauty fades right when it reaches perfection!
sir john, you've been loitering here too long. you have to recruit soldiers in the counties you pass through on your way north.
thank you, sir. that's all i wanted to know.
my friend, sing us the song you sang last night., listen to it carefully, cesario, it's a simple old song. spinners and knitters used to sing it while they sewed, and maidens used to sing it over their weaving. it tells the simple truth about innocent love, as it was in the good old days.
will you join me for supper, then, master gower?
the queen is here on special business, and her army has moved on.
are you ready, sir?
what foolish teacher taught you these manners, sir john?
thank you, sir.
yes. please, sing.
master gower, if my manners falstaff is referencing an earlier part of the scene, when the chief justice similarly ignored falstaff. manners are inappropriate, i must have indeed been taught by a fool. that's how the game is played, tit for tat, and game over.
gentle gods in heaven, please let me die. don't tempt me to suicide again.
(he sings) come on, let me die now and put my body in a dark coffin. i feel my breath leaving me. i've been killed by a beautiful girl. prepare my shroud of white, adorned with sprigs of yew-tree. i'm the most faithful person who ever lived or died. don't scatter sweet flowers on my black coffin. don't let my friends see my poor corpse. i don't want to hear sad sighs, so bury me where no sad lovers can find my grave to weep over it!
god help you! you are a great fool.
pray well, father.
(giving the fool money) here's some money for your trouble.
i swear to god, i'm exceedingly tired.
and who are you, good sir?
no trouble, sir. i like singing.
really? i would have thought that weariness wouldn't dare afflict someone as highly born as you.
i'm a poor man who's been humbled by many misfortunes. i've had enough sorrow in my life to feel compassion for others. give me your hand. i'll lead you to some shelter.
then i'll pay you for doing what you like.
well, it afflicts me, although saying so dims my nobility somewhat. does it make me seem coarse and common to say that i'd love a small beer small beer = a kind of weak, thin beer small beer ?
thank you very much. may heaven bless you.
well, in that case, all right. we all pay for what we like sooner or later.
a prince shouldn't be vulgarly inclined toward things like small beer.
what good luck! i'll get the promised reward. that blind head of yours was created to make me rich. you old traitor, repent all your sins. prepare to die.
you may leave.
then i suppose don't have a prince's appetite, because right now all i can think about is small beer. but it's true: all these everyday considerations distance me from my own nobility. it's disgraceful that i should be familiar with a man like you! to know your name, your face, and your wardrobe so intimately that i know that you have two pairs of stockings: the ones you're wearing now, and those peach-colored ones. i even know how many shirts you have: one to wear, and one extra. but then, the keeper of the tennis courts knows your wardrobe better than i do, for when you've run out of clean shirts, you don't show up to play. and you haven't played in a while, because the whore houses have eaten all the rest of your money, which you'd otherwise use to buy more shirts. god only knows whether all the crying brats you've fathered will make it to heaven. but then, the midwives say that babies don't bear the sins of the parents. that's how the population increases, and families are strengthened.
death is exactly what i want. i hope you're strong enough to do it.
i'll pray for the god of sadness to protect you, sir. and i hope your tailor will make you an outfit out of fabric that changes color, because your mind is like an opal that changes colors constantly. men as wonderfully changeable as you are should all go drifting on the sea, where they can do whatever comes their way, and go wherever the current takes them. those are the men whose trips are always successful. goodbye.
it seems wrong, after all your hard work in battle, that you should be spending your time now in idle chatter. how many other princes would behave like this if their fathers were as sick as yours?
whoa, man, you dare to support someone who's been proclaimed a traitor? get out of here, before his bad luck infects you too. let go of his arm.
all the rest of you can leave too.
can i tell you something, poins?
oh no, sir, i won't let him go, sir, not without a good reason.
cesario, go visit that cruel olivia one more time. tell her my love is purer than anything else in the whole world, and has nothing to do with her property. the wealth she's inherited isn't what makes me value her. it's her rich, jewel-like beauty that attracts me.
sure; and make sure it's an excellent thing.
let go of him, peasant, or you die!
but if she can't love you, sir?
it'll be fine, for people who aren't any smarter than you are.
get on with your business, sir, and leave the poor people alone. if macho talk edgar speaks with the accent of someone from the west of england here. macho talk like yours could kill me, i'd have died weeks ago. no, don't come near the old man. keep away, i'm warning you, or i'll find out whether your head is harder than my walking stick. i'm completely serious.
i refuse to accept that.
go ahead. i'm can take whatever you have to say.
get out of here, you pile of crap.
but you have to. just imagine some lady might exist who loves you as powerfully and agonizingly as you love olivia. but you can't love her, and you tell her so. shouldn't she just accept that?
here it is, then. it's not seemly for me to be sad over my father's illness. but i could tell you, as a person who, for lack of anyone else, i'm pleased to call my friend, that i could be sad. i could be very sad, indeed.
i'll knock your teeth out, sir. to hell with your sword.
no woman is strong enough to put up with the kind of intense passion i feel. no woman's heart is big enough to hold all my love. women don't feel love like that, love is as shallow as appetite for them. it has nothing to do with their hearts, just their sense of taste. they eat too much and get indigestion and nausea. but my love's different. it's as all-consuming and insatiable as the sea, and it can swallow as much as the sea can. don't compare a woman's love for a man with my love for olivia.
it would be difficult to feel that way over a thing like this.
(falling) you peasant, you've killed me! villain, take my money. if you survive, make sure i have a decent burial. give the letters i'm carrying to edmund, earl of gloucester. he's with the english camp. oh, early death! (he dies)
yes, but i know, 
i swear, you must think that i'm as sinful as you and falstaff are, and as stubborn and persistent. we'll see about that. but i'm telling you: my heart is bleeding for my father, and for his illness. but because i'm hanging out with lowlifes like you, i can't show how sorrowful i am.
i know you well. you're a hardworking villain who'd do anything his evil mistress wanted him to.
what do you know?
why?
is he dead?
i know a lot about the love women can feel for men. actually, their hearts are as sensitive and loyal as ours are. my father had a daughter who loved a man in the same way that i might love you, if i were a woman.
what would you think of me if i started crying?
sit down and rest, father. let's look in his pockets. the letters he spoke of may help me. he's dead. i'm just sorry i had to be the one to kill him. let's see here. (takes letters out of oswald's pocket and opens them) come on, envelope, open up for me. i know it's bad manners, but we kill our enemies to know their secrets. reading their mail isn't as bad. (reads) "don't forget the vows we made to each other. you have many chances to kill albany. if you have the strength of will to do it, you'll have many opportunities. if he returns in triumph, then all is lost. i'll be his prisoner, and his bed will be my prison. help me escape him, and you can take his place. your, i wish i could say "wife", loving servant, who is ready to love you, goneril." is there no limit to women's lust? she's plotting against the life of her virtuous husband, and wants my brother to replace him! (to the dead oswald) i'll bury you here in a shallow grave, you messenger for lustful criminals. in due time i'll show this ugly letter to the duke whose life's at risk. it's a good thing for him that i can tell him about your death and the letter you were carrying.
and what's her story?
i would think you're a royal hypocrite.
the king is insane. i hate the fact that i'm sane enough to be aware of my own great suffering. it'd be better to be delirious and unaware of anything. then my mind would be free of sorrow, and sadness would be forgotten in my hallucinations.
there was no story, my lord. she never told him she loved him. she kept her love bottled up inside her until it destroyed her, ruining her beauty. she pined away. she just sat waiting patiently, sadly, smiling despite her sadness. her complexion turned greenish from depression. doesn't that sound like true love? we men might talk more and promise more, but in fact we talk more than we really feel. we might be great at making vows, but our love isn't sincere.
that's what everyone would be thinking. and what's great about you is that you think just the way everyone else does: nobody sticks to popular opinion quite as well as you. everyone would think i was a hypocrite, indeed. and, your honor, what makes you think that?
give me your hand. i think i hear the drums far away. come, father, i'll leave you at a friend's house.
but did your sister die of love?
because you've behaved so badly, and because you're so attached to falstaff.
oh, kent, what could i ever do to become as good as you are? i won't live long enough, and all my efforts will fail me.
i am the only daughter in my father's family, and all the brothers too, but i'm not completely sure about that. anyway, sir, should i go see the lady?
and to you.
just being thanked is more than enough for me, madam. i hope all reports about me simply tell the truth, no more or less.
yes, go quickly and give her this jewel. tell her my love won't go away and won't be denied. (he hands her a jewel)
honestly, people think highly of me; i hear their praises with my own ears. the worst thing they can say about me is that, as a younger brother, i've had no inheritance from my family, and that i'm a good fighter. and i can't help either of those things. by god, here comes bardolph.
change into better clothes. these rags will just remind us of those bad times when you had to wear a disguise. please take them off.
come along with us, signor fabian.
and the boy who i sent to work for falstaff. he was a normal boy when i sent him, and now look: the fat bastard's turned him into an ape. possibly, falstaff has dressed his page in a ridiculous outfit. the fat bastard's turned him into an ape.
i'm sorry, madam, but i can't do that yet. if people recognize me now, i won't be able to carry out my plans. i have to ask you, as a favor, not to let on that you recognize me until the time is right.
i'm coming, don't worry. if i miss this, let me be boiled alive.
god save your grace!
all right, my lord., how's the king doing?
won't you be glad to see that rascal dog humiliated?
and yours, most noble bardolph!
he's still sleeping, ma'am.
i'll be thrilled. you know, he got me in trouble with the lady of the house once when i arranged a bear-baiting here.
(to bardolph) come on, you principled ass, you timid fool! why are you blushing? what a womanly solider you are! is it that big a deal to deflower a two-quart tankard of ale poins and the page are joking about bardolph's face, which is red from drinking. tankard of ale ?
kind gods, heal the wounds that he's wrongly suffered! restore the sanity of this father whose children have driven him mad and changed him into a child again!
we'll have another bear-baiting just to make him angry, and we'll mock him till he's black and blue. won't we, sir andrew?
just now he called to me from behind a red window shade, and i couldn't tell his face from the curtain! finally i saw his eyes, and i thought he'd made two holes in a whore's skirt and peeped through them!
would you mind if we woke up the king? he's slept a long time.
if we don't, it'll be the biggest disappointment of our lives.
this kid's learned a lot from falstaff, hasn't he?
do whatever you think best. is he in his royal garments?
here comes the little villain herself.
get out of here, you little rabbit! get out!
yes, ma'am. we changed his clothes while he was fast asleep.
how are you, my golden girl?
you get out, you rotten althea's dream!
stay close by when we wake him up, ma'am. i'm sure he will stay under control.
hide behind the boxwood hedge, all three of you. malvolio's coming down the path. he's been over there practicing how to act for the past half hour. watch him carefully if you want to have some fun, guys. this letter's going to turn him into a starry-eyed idiot. now hide, for god's sake!
what dream, boy? tell us.
all right.
now, you lie there on the path. (maria throws down a letter) here comes the fish that's going to gobble up our bait.
sir, althea dreamed she gave birth to a red-hot iron. that's why i call him her dream; he's all red in the face.
please come closer., make the music louder, please!
it's all luck. everything's luck. maria once told me olivia was fond of me. i've almost heard olivia say that herself. she said if she were interested in someone, it would be someone who looked like me. besides, she treats me more respectfully than the other servants. what's the obvious conclusion from that?
that joke's worth a crown crown = kind of coin crown ! here you go, boy.
(kisses lear) oh, my dear father, please get better. may my kiss heal the wounds inflicted on you by my sisters, who should have respected and cherished you.
(whispering) what an egomaniac!
i wish this wholesome little flower could be kept away from disease. well, here's a sixpence for you.
kind and dear princess!
(whispering) shh! when he's alone with his thoughts, he's even more like a haughty peacock. watch him strut!
if between the three of you this boy doesn't end up hanged, the gallows will be cheated.
if you hadn't been their father, your white hair would have inspired in them only compassion. is this a face that should have endured the freezing winds or withstood the dreadful thunder or the terrible lightning? to stay awake all night like a guardsman, poor lost soul!, with only your thinning hair for a helmet? i would've let even my enemy's nastiest dog stay inside by the fireplace on that night, even if he had bit me. and were you then happy to find shelter on a bed of hay along with swine and homeless bums? oh, oh! it's a wonder you didn't lose your life and your mind all at once., he's waking up. talk to him.
(whispering) i swear, i'd like to beat the jerk so hard!
how's your master falstaff doing, bardolph?
you talk to him, ma'am. that's most appropriate.
(whispering) be quiet!
fine, sir. he heard you were coming to town. here's a letter for you.
how are you, my royal lord? how is your majesty doing?
just think, i could be count malvolio!
delivered very respectfully. how is that fattened calf, your boss?
you do me wrong by taking me out of the grave. you're a soul in heaven, but i'm tied to the fiery wheel of a torture machine in hell. even my tears burn me like molten lead.
(whispering) ah, what a jerk!
his body's healthy, sir.
sir, do you know who i am?
(whispering) shoot him, just shoot him.
that's right, it's just his immortal soul that needs a doctor. but he doesn't care. his soul may be sick, but it won't die.
you're a spirit, i know. where did you die?
(whispering) shh, shh!
(reads to himself) i allow this wart to be as familiar with me as my dog, and he holds onto his privileged position. listen to how he writes. (he hands the letter to poins)
(whispering to the doctor) he's still in outer space.
after all, it wouldn't be the first time that kind of thing has happened. lady strachy married her wardrobe manager.
(reads) "john falstaff, knight", he always throws that title around, every chance he gets. it's like people who are related to the king: every time they get a tiny cut, they say, "some of the king's blood has been spilled." then someone pretends not to get it, and asks, "how do you mean?" the answer comes faster than a beggar can whip out his cap: "i'm the king's poor relative."
he's still half asleep. let him be for a bit.
(whispering) damn him, the arrogant fool!
right. they all say they're related to us, even if they have to trace the family tree all the way back to japhet, the common ancestor of all europeans. but back to the letter. (takes the letter and reads) "sir john falstaff, knight to the son of the king, nearest to his father, harry prince of wales, sends his greetings."
where have i been? where am i? is it daytime? i've been tricked. i would die of pity to see someone else in my condition. i don't know what to say. i can't even be sure these are my hands. let's see. i feel this pinprick. i wish i knew what is happening.
(whispering) shh! we've got him right where we want him. he's on a big ego trip.
listen to that. it sounds like a contract.
(kneeling) look at me, sir, and give me your blessing. no, sir, don't kneel.
just think of me, having been married to her for three months, sitting around majestically, 
quiet! (reads) "i will copy the romans in shortness."
please don't make fun of me. i'm a foolish, senile old man, eighty-something years old, not an hour more or less. to put it plainly, i'm afraid i'm not quite sane. i feel i should recognize you and that man (he points to kent),
(whispering) if only i had a slingshot so i could hit him in the eye!
he must mean shortness of breath, and wheezing.
but i'm not sure. i don't know where i am. i don't remember these clothes. i can't recall where i slept last night. don't laugh at me, but i swear i think this lady is my child cordelia.
calling my servants together, wearing an embroidered robe, having just come from a couch where i've left olivia sleeping, 
(reads) "i salute myself, i salute you, and i'm done. don't get too close to poins. he takes such rampant advantage of your kindness that he swears you will marry his sister nell. confess your sins when you have the time; and with that, farewell. yours up and down
and i am, i am.
(whispering) that does it!
(which is to say, in whatever way you feel like), i remain jack falstaff to my friends, john to my brothers and sisters, and sir john to all europe."
are your tears wet? yes, indeed they are. please don't cry. if you have poison for me, i'll drink it. i know you don't love me. if i remember, your sisters did me wrong for no reason. but you didn't, even though you had every reason.
(whispering) oh, be quiet, be quiet!
sir, i'll soak this letter in wine and shove it down his throat.
i had no reason, no reason.
then i'd put on a lofty and exalted expression. i'd look around the room calmly, then tell them that i know my place, and i'd like them to know theirs. then i'd tell them to go find my cousin toby, 
that would be making him eat twenty of his words. but are you taking advantage of me like he says, ned? must i marry your sister?
am i in france?
(whispering) that really does it!
it would be her lucky day if you did. but i never said that.
you're in your own kingdom, sir.
(whispering) oh, quiet, quiet! please, please.
well, we're wasting time, and the angels in heaven are mocking us. (to bardolph) is your boss here in london?
don't deceive me.
i'd send seven of my servants to go get him. while i waited, i'd frown impatiently, and perhaps wind my watch, or play with my, with some expensive piece of jewelry i happen to be wearing. toby would approach me. he'd bow to me, 
yes, my lord.
you can relax, ma'am. his insane period is over. but it's dangerous to make him try to make sense of the time he lost. ask him to go in. don't trouble him further until his mind is more settled.
(whispering) are we going to let this guy live?
where's he eating tonight? is the old pig eating in the old sty?
would your highness like to take a walk?
(whispering) yes, we have to be quiet, even if it's torture.
at the old place, my lord. in eastcheap.
you'll have to bear with me. please forgive and forget. i'm old and foolish.
i reach out my hand to him like this, giving him a stern look instead of my usual friendly smile, 
who's with him?
is it true, sir, that the duke of cornwall was killed as they say?
(whispering) and then doesn't toby punch you in the mouth?
the usual old characters.
yes, it's true, sir.
and i'd say to him, "cousin toby, since i've been lucky enough to marry your niece, i have the right to say a few things to you, "
are any women eating with him?
who is leading his men?
(whispering) oh yeah, like what?
no women sir. just old mistress quickly and mistress doll tearsheet.
they say gloucester's bastard son is.
"you must stop being such a drunk."
what heathen is that?
i hear that edgar, gloucester's exiled son, is with the earl of kent in germany.
(whispering) get out of here, you scab!
a proper lady, sir, and my master's relative.
you can't trust all the rumors. it's time to reassess the situation. the british troops are coming near.
(whispering) no, be quiet, or we'll screw up the joke.
exactly the kind of relative as the country cows are to the town bull. ned, should we spy on them as they eat supper?
it will likely be a bloody fight. goodbye, sir.
"and you're wasting your time with that foolish knight, "
i'm after you like a shadow, my lord: i'll follow you.
my life and my plans completely depend on how today's battle ends.
(whispering) that's me, i bet.
sirrah, you boy, and you, bardolph, don't tell your master that i'm back in town. (gives them money) this is for your silence.
(to a gentleman) go find out from the duke of albany if his decision still holds, or if he's changed his mind. he's always going back and forth and second-guessing himself. come back and tell me what his final decision is.
"that sir andrew, "
i have no tongue to speak with, sir.
my sister's servant oswald has certainly run into trouble.
(whispering) i knew he was talking about me. a lot of people call me foolish.
as for my tongue, i'll manage it.
i'm afraid that may be the case, madam.
(seeing the letter) what's this?
farewell to you both; go now.
now, my sweet lord, you know how much i like you. tell me truthfully, do you love my sister?
(whispering) he's taking the bait.
this doll tearsheet must be some road road = slang for "common prostitute" road .
yes, truly and honorably.
(whispering) shhh! i hope he reads it out loud, to make it funnier!
truly, she's as well-traveled as the highway to london.
but have you ever gone in my brother-in-law's bed and had sex with her?
(picking up the letter) my goodness, this is my lady's handwriting this is an obscene joke: malvolio unwittingly spells out "cut," elizabethan slang for vagina, which is what she uses to make her "pees." handwriting ! these are her c's, her u's and her t's, and that's how she makes her big p's. it's definitely her handwriting, no doubt about it.
how can we see falstaff behave like his true self tonight, and yet not be detected ourselves?
no. you dishonor yourself and our relationship by thinking that.
(whispering) her c's, her u's, and her t's. why focus on that?
we'll put on leather jackets and aprons and wait upon him as bartenders.
i'm just worried that you've been cozying up to her, and gotten intimate with her.
(reads) to my dear beloved who doesn't know i love him, i send you this letter with all my heart", that's exactly how she talks! excuse me, sealing wax. (he breaks the seal) wait! this is the stamp my lady seals her letters with, it has a picture of lucrece on it. this letter is from olivia. who is this written to?
should a god disguise himself as a bull? that's quite a degradation. well, jove the roman god jove disguised himself as a white bull to carry away the maiden europa jove did it. and should a prince disguise himself as an apprentice bartender and transform into something so lowly? yes, i will: in every undertaking, the ends must match the means. follow me, ned.
no, i swear on my honor, i haven't, madam.
(whispering) this'll get him.
please, my loving wife and sweet daughter-in-law, support me in my difficult tasks. don't let the grimness of these days be reflected in your faces; don't add to percy's troubles.
i can't stand her. please, my lord, don't be friendly with her.
(he reads) god knows i love someone. but who? i can't let my lips say his name; "no man must know."
i give up; i won't say any more. do what you want. let your wisdom guide you.
don't worry about me., your sister and the duke are here.
"no man must know." what comes after that? look, the meter changes in her poem. "no man must know." what if this someone were you, malvolio?
for goodness sake, sweet wife, my honor is at stake. nothing can redeem it except my going.
(to herself) i'd rather lose this battle than allow that sister of mine to come between me and edmund.
(whispering) go hang yourself, you stinking badger!
for god's sake, don't go to these wars! father-in-law, you once broke your word when you had better reason to keep it than you do now. your own son percy, my heart's beloved harry, looked northward again and again, hoping to see his father coming with an army. but he hoped in vain. who persuaded you to stay home that time? two honors were lost in that battle: yours, and your son's. as for yours, i hope god will make it shine again. as for harry's honor, it clung to him like the sun in a pale blue sky, and by its light every knight in england was moved to act bravely. he was the mirror in which noble youths dressed themselves. all men copied his way of walking, except those who had no legs. and talking loudly and quickly, the one flaw nature had given him, became the speech pattern for all brave men. those who spoke softly and slowly would corrupt their proper speech, just to seem more like
my dear and loving sister-in-law, i'm happy to see you. (to edmund) sir, i've heard that the king has joined up with his daughter as well as others who have complained about our strict policies. i've never fought for a cause i didn't believe in. i'm concerned about the french because they have invaded our soil, not because they support king lear or those others, who, i'm afraid, may have legitimate grievances against us.
(reading) "i may order the one i love. but silence, like a knife, cuts open my heart with strokes that draw no blood. m.o.a.i. rules my life."
harry. in speech, bearing, and diet; in inclinations toward pleasure, in military actions, and in moods, he was the target, mirror, example, and rulebook that other men followed. and him, oh wondrous him! oh miracle of men!, you left him! the best man in the world, unsupported by you, faced the hideous god of war from a position of weakness. his only defense was the sound of his own name, and that is how you left him. never insult his memory by letting your honor count more with strangers than with him. leave them alone: marshal mowbray and the archbishop are strong. if my darling harry had had half their army, i might be hanging on his neck today, talking about prince hal's grave.
noble words, sir.
(whispering) what a pretentious riddle!
for goodness sake, pretty daughter-in-law. you take me out of myself, reminding me again of these past mistakes. but i must go and face danger there or danger will find me somewhere else, where i will be less prepared.
why are we talking about this?
(whispering) that maria has outdone herself!
oh, run to scotland until these noblemen and their armies have skirmished against the king.
we must join forces against the enemy. our domestic squabbles are not the issue here.
"m.o.a.i. rules my life." hmm, let me see, let me see, let me see.
if they make any headway against the king, then join them, and like a steel rod make their strength even stronger. but in the name of the love you feel for us, let them begin on their own. that's how your son fought. you allowed him to do that, and that's how i became a widow. if i spend the rest of my life pouring tears on
then let's meet with our senior command and discuss what to do next.
(whispering) what a dish of poison she's mixed for him!
the plant of remembrance, it will never grow tall enough to pay proper tribute to my extraordinary husband.
i'll meet you at your tent.
(whispering) and look how willingly he's taking the bait.
come. come. go inside with me. my thoughts are like the ocean at high tide, neither coming in nor going out, seeming to stand still. i want to go join the archbishop, but many thousands of reasons are holding me back. i'll go to scotland and wait there till events unfold and my help is called for.
goneril, are you coming with us?
"i may command the one i love." well, she commands me. i'm her servant. she's my boss. why, anyone can see what this means. there's no ambiguity here. but the end, what do those letters mean? if only i could somehow relate them to me! hmm. m.o.a.i., 
what the hell have you got there? apple johns apple johns = a variety of apple, eaten once the fruit is shriveled apple johns ? you know sir john can't stand apple johns.
no.
(whispering) oh, bad dog., he's losing the scent!
damn, you're right. one day the prince put a plate of apple-johns in front of falstaff and said, "here are five more sir johns." then the prince took off his hat and said, "i'm now going to bid farewell to these six dry, round, old, withered knights." it angered sir john deeply, but he got over it.
it's the best thing to do. please come with me.
(whispering) he'll find it again, no matter how much it stinks.
well then, put the table cloth on and set the dish down. go see if you can find sneak's band of musicians. mistress tearsheet wants to hear some music.
(to herself) oh ho, i know her little tricks., okay, i'll go.
"m", malvolio. "m", why, that's the first letter in my name.
hurry! the room they ate in was too hot, and they'll be here any minute.
(to albany) if you can stoop to speak to a man as poor as i am, then listen to me, please.
(whispering) didn't i tell you he'd figure it out? this dog's excellent at following false leads.
sirrah, the prince and poins will be here soon. they're going to put on a couple of our jackets and aprons. sir john can't know it's them. bardolph came and told me.
(to edmund, regan, and goneril exiting) i'll catch up with you., 
"m." but then the next letter isn't the same. "a" should be next, but instead "o" comes next.
well, there's going to be hilarity here! what a great scheme!
go ahead.
(whispering) and an "o" like a noose will end this, i hope.
i'll see if i can find sneak.
(giving albany a letter) before you go into battle, open this letter. if you win, then blow your trumpet as a signal for me. i may look wretched, but i'll bravely stand up to defend my claims. if you die in battle, all your projects and this plan are off. good luck to you.
(whispering)yeah, or i'll beat him up and make him yell "oh!"
i swear, sweetheart, you seem to be in a great temporality temporality = temper temporality . your pulsidge pulsidge = pulse pulsidge is beating as strongly as you could want, and your color is as red as a rose; truly! but seriously, i do think you've drank too much of that sweet wine from the canary islands, it's a mighty powerful drink, and it'll get into your blood faster than you can say, "what's this?" how are you feeling now?
wait until i read the letter.
and then the "i" comes next.
better than i was before. (she coughs or belches)
i was ordered not to. when the time comes, tell the herald to blow the trumpet and i'll return.
(whispering) if you had an i in the back of your head, you'd see trouble behind you.
well said! a healthy heart is worth its weight in gold. look, here comes sir john.
goodbye, then. i'll take a look at your letter.
m.o.a.i. this code's not as easy to crack as the other one. but if i shake it up a little it'll work, because every one of those letters is in my name. but wait, there's some prose after her poem.
(singing) "when arthur first in court", somebody empty the chamber pot! "and was a worthy king" the lyrics are from a popular ballad of the time, "sir lancelot du lake." "when arthur first in court", somebody empty the chamber pot! "and was a worthy king" , how are you, mistress doll?
the enemy's in sight. prepare your troops. (gives albany a document) the reconnaissance operation has returned this estimate of the enemy's manpower and weaponry. but now, please hurry.
(he reads) "if this letter falls into your hands, think carefully about what it says. by my birth i rank above you, but don't be afraid of my greatness. some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon them. your fate awaits you. accept it in body and spirit. to get used to the life you'll most likely be leading soon, get rid of your low-class trappings. show some eagerness for the new upscale lifestyle that's waiting
she's sick of a qualm qualm = nausea, or a fainting spell qualm , she is.
we'll be ready when the time comes.
for you. argue with a relative like a nobleman, and be rude to servants. talk about politics and affairs of state, and act free and independent. the woman who advises you to do this loves you. remember the woman who complimented you on your yellow stockings, and said she always wanted to see you with crisscrossing laces going up your legs, remember her. go ahead. a happy new life is there if you want it. if you don't want it, just keep acting like a lowly servant who's not brave enough to grab the happiness there before him. goodbye. signed, she who would be your servant, the fortunate unhappy."
that's how all the women in her profession are. as soon as they're calm, and not in someone's bed, they get sick.
i've sworn my love to both of these sisters. they're jealous of each other like poisonous snakes. which one of them should i pick? both? one? neither? i can't enjoy either of them as long as the other one's alive. goneril would go crazy if i chose regan, but it would be hard to get in with goneril while her husband's still alive. i'll use albany's power and authority for now to win the war, but afterward one of the sisters, whichever one wants to, can get rid of him. albany wants to spare lear and cordelia, but once they are my prisoners after the battle, they won't stay alive long enough to see his pardon. i have to defend my position with actions, not words.
this is as clear as sunlight in an open field. i'll do it. i'll be vain and proud, i'll read up on politics, i'll insult sir toby, i'll get rid of my lower-class friends, and i'll be the perfect man for her. i know i'm not fooling myself, or letting myself get carried away by my imagination, because every clue points to the fact that lady olivia loves me. she did compliment me on my yellow stockings recently, and she said she liked how the crisscross laces looked on my legs. that's her way of saying she loves me. oh, i thank my lucky stars, i'm so happy. for her i'll be strange and condescending, and i'll put on my yellow stockings and crisscross laces right away. thank god and my horoscope! here's a postscript!.
you stupid bastard. is this how you make me feel better?
here, father, rest awhile in the shade of this tree. say a little prayer for our side in battle. if i ever come back, i'll bring you good news.
(reads) "you must have figured out who i am. if you love me, let me know by smiling at me. you're so attractive when you smile. please smile whenever you're near me, my dearest darling."
you make fat bastards, mistress doll.
good luck, sir.
dear god, thank you! i'll do everything she wants me to do.
i make them fat? gluttony and disease will make men fat; i have nothing to do with it.
we have to get out of here, old man. let me help you up. let's go! king lear's been defeated. he and his daughter are captured. give me your hand. come on.
i wouldn't have missed this even for a pension of thousands of pounds, to be paid by the shah of persia.
well, cooks help create gluttony, by making and selling food, the object of gluttony. and you help create diseases, doll. we catch them from you, doll, we catch them from you: admit it.
i can't go any further, sir. this is as good a place as any to die.
i could marry that maria for thinking this up.
sure, sweetheart. you catch us by the chains and the jewels, and then you steal them from us.
are you depressed again? you can't choose your time of death any more than your time of birth. we live and die when our time comes. come on.
so could i.
"your brooches, pearls, and gems" this might be a line from a ballad. "ouches," in the original shakespearean line, meant both "gem, brooch, or buckle" and "sore." falstaff jokes that the "jewels" men get from doll are the sores of a venereal disease. brooches, pearls, and gems" , we fight bravely and then come away limping. we retreat from the breach in the wall with our weapons bravely bent. we head off to the doctor, bravely. and then we charge into the loaded chambers falstaff describes a bout of venereal disease as a military battle. loaded chambers again, bravely.
and that's true too.
and i wouldn't ask for any dowry except for her to play another trick like this one.
drop dead, you filthy eel. drop dead!
officers, take them away. guard them carefully until we decide how to punish them.
neither would i.
i swear in shakespeare's line, mistress quickly mistakenly uses "rheumatic" for "choleric" (i.e., irritable) and "confirmities" for "infirmities." swear , this is how it always is. you two even see each other without fighting. you're as hot as dry toast, you can't stand each other's bad qualities. good grief! but one of you has to bear the burden, and that's you, doll. you're the weaker sex, the empty vessel.
(to lear) at least we're not the first ones in our position. the road to hell is paved with good intentions. but i'm worried about you, my poor king. if it were only me, i would just wait out my bad luck. should we meet with my sisters?
here she comes, the brilliant fool-catcher.
can a weak, empty vessel bear the burden of such a huge, full barrel? there's a whole merchant's stock of bordeaux wine in him; you've never seen a ship with a fuller cargo hold. come, jack, i'll be friends with
no, no, no, no! come on, let's go to prison. the two of us together will sing like birds in a cage. we will be good to each other. when you ask for my blessing, i'll get down on my knees and ask you to forgive me. that's how we'll live, we'll pray, we'll sing, we'll tell old stories, we'll laugh at pretentious courtiers, we'll listen to nasty court gossip, we'll find out who's losing and who's winning, who's in and who's out. we'll think about the mysteries of the universe as if we were god's spies. in prison we'll outlast hordes of rulers that will come and go as their fortunes change.
may i kiss your feet?
you. you're going off to war, and whether or not i ever see you again, well, who cares.
take them away.
and i too?
sir, ensign pistol's downstairs. he wants to talk with you.
my cordelia, even the gods admire how much you've sacrificed for me. have i hugged you yet? anyone who wants to separate us will have to smoke us out of the cave of our togetherness like foxes. wipe your eyes.
shall i be your slave?
let him drop dead, that hot-tempered jerk! don't let him in: he's got the foulest mouth in england.
our jailers will shrivel up with old age before they make us cry again. we'll watch them starve to death first. come on.
me too.
if he's going to make trouble, don't let him in. no way; i have my neighbors to think about. i'll have no troublemakers here. i've got my good reputation to watch out for. shut the doors; no troublemakers are getting in here. i haven't lived this long to have trouble now. shut the doors, please.
come here, captain. listen. (gives the first captain a sheet of paper) take this note. follow those two to prison and follow these instructions. i've already promoted you once. if you do as you're told, you'll be richly rewarded. just remember this: you have to go with the times, and these are the times for being tough. a soldier can't afford to be a ninny. there'll be no quibbling about this assignment. either you accept it, or go find some other way to support yourself.
you've made him so delusional he'll go crazy when he learns the truth.
do you hear, hostess?
i'll do it, sir.
did it really work?
please, be quiet a second, sir john. no troublemakers are coming in here.
then off you go. when you've finished, you'll be a happy man. go immediately, and do exactly as i wrote down.
like medicine for a sick man.
didn't you hear? it's my ensign.
jobs are hard to come by. i can't pull a cart or eat dried oats like a horse. if it's work for a man, i'll do it.
if you want to really have some fun, watch him next time he's near lady olivia. he'll show up in yellow stockings, she hates yellow, and with laces crisscrossing up his legs, she hates that style of dress, and he'll smile, which will go completely against her mood, since she's addicted to sadness now. she'll definitely get upset with him. if you want to watch, follow me.
oh fiddlesticks, sir john, i don't want to hear it. your ensign troublemaker is not coming in here. i talked to master tisick, the deputy, the other day. and he said to me, it couldn't have been longer ago than last wednesday, "i swear, neighbor quickly," he said. (master dumbe, the minister, was here at the time.) "neighbor quickly," he said, "only let in people who are well behaved, because," he said, "your reputation is suffering." he said that, and i'll tell you why. "you're an honest woman, and people think highly of
(to edmund) sir, you've shown your true courage today, and luck was on your side. you've taken prisoner the leaders of the opposition. i need to take cus-
i'd follow you to the gates of hell, you sneaky little devil!
you. so think about who you let in. don't let in," he said, "any troublemakers." and none are getting in. you'd be lucky if you heard what he said. no way, no troublemakers.
tody of them so i can do what's best out of concern for their honor and the safety of the kingdom.
i'll come too.
he's not a troublemaker, hostess. he's a harmless cheater; you can pet him like a little puppy. he wouldn't even start a fight with a guinea-hen, if her feathers stood up in annoyance. get him up here, drawer.
sir, i decided it was appropriate to send the pathetic old king to a guarded prison cell. his old age and his title make him so popular among the commoners that i was worried our enlisted soldiers would turn against us on his behalf. i sent the french queen with him too, for the same reason. they're ready to meet with you tomorrow, or whenever you like, wherever you'd like to hold your hearing. these are difficult times. many have lost friends in battle, and soldiers will curse even a justified war if it causes them pain. we need a more appropriate place to discuss cordelia and her father.
god bless you, my friend, and your music too. do you make your living by playing that drum?
you call him a cheater mistress quickly misunderstands "cheater" as "escheator," a type of royal treasury officer. cheater ? i won't keep an honest man out of this bar, so i won't keep a cheater out, either. but i don't like troublemakers, i swear. i get sick when i hear the word, "troublemaker." feel, masters: i'm shaking. look, i'm telling you.
i'm sorry, sir, but in this war i consider you a subordinate, not my equal.
no, sir, i live by the church.
you are shaking.
that's for to me to decide. you might have asked my opinion before saying something so rude. edmund has led our forces well, and implemented my wishes, and his close connection with me gives him the right to be considered your equal.
oh, you're a clergyman?
i am?, i am! i swear, i'm shaking like a big tree leaf. i can't stand troublemakers.
not so fast. he has distinguished himself as a great soldier in his own right, deserving more than any honor your can bestow on him.
no, i live by the church because i live in a house, and my house is by the church.
good to see you, sir john!
i'm the one who gave him his military commission, and it is as my proxy that he fought bravely.
you could just as easily say that a king sleeps near a beggar if the beggar lives near him, or that the church is supported by your drum because it "stands by" your drum.
welcome, ensign pistol. here, pistol falstaff "charges", or toasts pistol, and asks him to toast mistress quickly in return. a pistol is also "charged," or loaded, with bullets, and "discharged" when it is fired. pistol . i charge you with a glass of wine. now discharge on the hostess.
he'd really be your proxy if he married you.
you're right, sir. what a wonderful time to be alive! sentences can be turned inside out so easily nowadays!
i'll unload two big bullets bullets = testicles bullets on her, sir john.
don't joke, it might come true.
that's true. people who fool around with words too much can make words act like whores, changing all the time, and immoral too.
she's pistol-proof, sir. you'll hardly be able to injure her.
whoa, whoa! you're so infatuated with him that you're hallucinating.
that's why i wish my sister didn't have a name, sir.
i won't have any proofs or any bullets. i won't drink any more than i feel like, not for any man.
hey, lady, if i weren't feeling a little sick, i'd give you a piece of my mind. (to edmund) general, take my soldiers, my prisoners, my whole inheritance, and do as you like with them. i surrender myself to your good judgment. let the whole world see that i hereby make you my lord and master.
why, man?
then here's to you, mistress. dorothy, i'll charge you.
are you trying to sleep with him?
well, her name's a word, and if you fooled around with it you might make her into a whore. but, you know, words have been rascals ever since people started using written contracts rather than their word of honor.
charge me? get lost, you sick jerk. what? you broke, rude, scheming, cheating, shirtless fool! get away from me, you moldy bastard, away! i'm meant for your betters.
(to goneril) it's not up to you to say "yes" or "no."
why do you say that?
i know you, mistress dorothy.
nor is it up to you, my lord.
honestly, sir, i'd need to use words to explain why, and since words are so unreliable and false, i'd rather avoid using them in a serious discussion.
get away, you pickpocket rascal! you dirty thief, away! i swear on this wine, i'll stick a knife in your rotten cheeks if you keep abusing me like this. out, you boozy rascal! you imposter of a solider! since when are you a soldier, i ask you? with two armor tags on your shoulder? i'm sure!
yes it is, you half-blood.
i bet you're a happy fellow who doesn't care about anything.
i'll strangle your neck for that, or i'll die trying.
(to edmund) let the drums beat. prove your right to me by defeating any challenger.
you're wrong, sir, i do care about something. but i'll admit i don't care for you. if that means i don't care about anything, you should disappear right now, since you're nothing.
hold it, pistol. i don't want you to go off here. discharge someplace else, pistol.
hang on a second. listen to me., edmund, you're under arrest for capital treason. along with you, your co-conspirator, this snake of a woman. (points at goneril. then, speaking to regan) my dear sister-in-law, i veto your marriage announcement for the benefit of my wife, who is already engaged to edmund. so if you want to get married, you'll have to woo me. my wife's already spoken for.
aren't you lady olivia's fool?
no, good captain pistol. not here, sweet captain.
what a farce!
no, sir. lady olivia doesn't want to have anything to do with foolishness. so she won't have a fool until she gets married. fools are to husbands as anchovies are to sardines, husbands are the bigger ones. i'm not her fool. i just make words into whores for her.
captain? you horrible, damned liar, aren't you ashamed to be called "captain"? if captains shared my opinions, they'd beat you for taking their rank without earning it. you, a captain? you bastard, for what? for
you've got a sword, gloucester. blow the trumpets. if nobody else comes to challenge you and prove what an abominable traitor you have been, i'll have to challenge you myself. (he throws throwing down a glove was a way of challenging someone to fight. throws down his glove) i'll prove soon enough that you're just as wicked as i say you are.
i saw you at count orsino's recently.
tearing a poor whore's clothes in a whorehouse? him, a captain? let him drop dead, the rogue! he lives off the moldy food you find in brothels. a captain? for god's sake! men like him will make the word "captain" as nasty as the word "occupy," occupy = slang for "copulate" "occupy," which was a fine word before it got corrupted. captains had better watch out.
oh, i'm sick, sick!
i'm everywhere. foolishness is all over the world, just like sunshine. i'd be sorry if people thought your master was less familiar with foolishness than my mistress is. i think i saw you there, you wise man.
please, calm down, good ensign.
(to herself) if she's not ill, i'll never trust drugs again.
oh no, if you're joking around with me, i'm leaving. wait, here's a coin for you.
listen here, mistress doll.
(throwing down his glove) you're on. whoever calls me a traitor is a vicious liar. blow the trumpet. anyone who dares to step forward and make that accusation, you or anyone else, go ahead. i'll uphold my truth and my honor.
next time god sends out a shipment of hair, i hope he gives you a beard!
not me. i'll tell you what, corporal bardolph, i could tear her. i'll get revenge on her.
a herald! "herald"=person who reads proclamations aloud. herald! call a herald!
oh, i know. seriously, i'm dying for one, (to herself) i mean, i'm dying for a man who has a beard; i don't want one to grow on my chin. (to the fool) is lady olivia inside?
please, calm down!
a herald, a herald!
if i had two of these coins, do you think they'd breed more coins?
i'll see her damned first. to the waters of hell, i swear, to the endless deep, with chaos and vile tortures. hold onto that pole, i say. down, down, dogs! down, fates! here's my sword!
(to edmund) you're on your own now. the soldiers were all drafted in my name, and now they are discharged in my name.
yes, if you kept them together and invested them.
captain pisser, be quiet! it's late. i beg of you, stop being angry!
i feel sicker and sicker.
i'd like to be like that famous pimp, lord pandarus, and get a cressida for my troilus a "cressida for my troilus" means "a female coin for my male coin." troilus and cressida were famous lovers, brought together by cressida's uncle pandarus, traditionally regarded as the first pimp. cressida for my troilus .
now we're talking! are we going to let old nags from here until he exits, pistol's language is strange and heightened. he continually makes garbled references to classical plays and poems that would have been familiar to shakespeare's audience. nags and pampered horses (who can't manage more than a few miles a day) be compared with kings, and generals, and mythic heroes? no! damn them to hell, and let the storms rage! should we fight over nothing?
she's not feeling well. take her to my tent.
(giving the fool money) i get what you're driving at, sir. you're a very clever beggar.
my goodness, captain! those are strong words!
come here, herald., let the trumpet sound!, read this out. (he hands the herald a document)
it shouldn't be too much to ask; i'm only begging for a beggar. they say cressida became a beggar in her old age. my lady olivia's inside, sir. i'll tell them where you come from, though i don't know who you are or what you want. i'd say i was "out of my element," but that phrase is overused, so i'll say i'm "out of my air."
you should go now, ensign. this is going to get out of control in a minute.
blow the trumpet!
this guy's wise enough to play the fool, and only clever people can do that. he pays attention to the mood and social rank of the person he's joking with, and also to the time of day. and he doesn't let go of his target when a distraction appears. his job requires as much effort and skill as any wise man's occupation could. and he shows he's very smart at playing the fool, while smart people look stupid when they play the fool.
let men die like dogs! give away kings' crowns like they're nothing! isn't this a sword we have here?
(reads) "if any noble man in the army asserts that edmund, so-called earl of gloucester, is a traitor many times over, let him step forward by the third trumpet blast."
hello, sir.
my word of honor mistress quickly mishears the word "hiren" as a woman's name. word of honor , captain, there's no such thing here! for goodness sake! do you think i'd say she's not if she were? for god's sake, be quiet!
sound!
hello to you too, sir.
then eat and grow fat, my sweet lady! come, bring me some wine. si fortuna me tormente "if fortune torments me, hope contents me." pistol's motto is a garbled mix of french, spanish, and italian. fortuna me tormente , sperato me contento. are we scared of an attack? no! let the devil open fire. give me some wine, and darling, lie there. (he lays his sword down) is the party over? what about the rest of it, the et ceteras et ceteras = slang for "vaginas" et ceteras ?
again!
(speaking in french) may god protect you, sir.
pistol, i'd be quiet if i were you.
again!
(speaking in french) and you too, sir. i'm at your service.
sweet knight, i kiss your fist. look! it's so late, we can see the big dipper out.
(to herald) ask him why he's stepping forward.
( stammering sir andrew's awkwardness reveals that he's bad at french. stammering ) oh, good, i am too.
for god's sake, throw him down the stairs. i can't stand such a worthless jerk.
who are you? what's your name and rank, and why are you stepping forward?
my niece would like you to come in to the house, if your business here has to do with her.
throw him down the stairs? don't we know a common prostitute when we see one?
i've lost my name and title to a traitor. but i'm as noble as my opponent.
i'm headed for your niece, sir. she's the reason i'm here.
toss him down, bardolph, like a coin on a game board. he does nothing but talk a bunch of nothing, so he's going to count for nothing here.
and who is that?
taste your legs, sir. please go inside.
come on. get downstairs.
who's the spokesman for edmund, earl of gloucester?
taste my legs? my legs stand under me, but i don't understand what "taste your legs" means.
what? is there going to be cutting in greek and roman mythol-ogy, the three fates spun threads representing the life of each human being; atropos, the third sister, cut the thread when life was finished. cutting now? shall we be soaked in blood? (he grabs his sword) then let death sing me a lullaby; let him end my melancholy days! let grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds unravel the thread of my life, spun by those three sisters of fate! come, atropos, cut off my thread!
i'm my own spokesman. what do you have to say to me?
i mean please go into the house, sir.
this ought to be good.
draw your sword. if i offend you by what i say, you can use your sword to take revenge. here's mine. (he draws his sword) look at it. it's the symbol of my honor, my rank, and my status as a knight. in spite of your youth, rank, strength, and excellence at warfare, in spite of your courage, your recent victory, and your good luck, i declare that you're a traitor. you've betrayed your gods, your brother, and your father. you've plotted against this noble duke. you're a rotten traitor, through and through, from the top of your head to the soles of your feet. if you disagree with me, i'm ready to use this sword and my courage to prove that you're a liar.
i will. but now we don't have to!
give me my sword, boy.
normally i would ask you what your name is first. but since you look so fine and noble, and since you're so well mannered in your speech, i'm prepared to overlook the rules of knighthood, which say i should refuse to fight a man i don't know. i throw your accusations back in your face. your lies can hardly hurt me, but i'll
oh, beautiful and accomplished lady, may the heavens rain odors upon you!
please, jack, please; don't fight!
still fight you and embed your lies back in your hellish heart., trumpets, blow!
(to himself) that young man's classy. "rain odors." that's good.
get downstairs! (he draws his sword and chases pistol)
(to edgar) save him, save him!
my message is not for anyone else to hear, my lady. it's only for your willing and receptive ear.
this is going to be some fight! i would sooner close this bar than put up with terrors and fits. it's murder, i swear! oh my! oh my! put away your naked weapons! put away your naked weapons!
you were tricked into fighting, gloucester. according to the laws of war, you didn't have to fight a stranger. you haven't lost this fight; you've been tricked and deceived.
(to himself) "odors," "willing," and "deserving." i'll have to remember those words so i can use them later myself.
please, jack, calm down; the jerk's gone. oh you son-of-a-bitch, brave little bastard, you!
shut your mouth, woman, or i'll shove this paper in it., stop, sir. (gives the letter to edmund) you despicable criminal, read your crime. (to goneril) don't try to tear it up, madam. i take it you know what this letter says.
close the garden door and leave me alone to hear his message.
did he hurt you in the groin? i thought he got in a good shot at your belly.
and what if i do? i make the laws, not you. who can prosecute me for it?
give me your hand, sir.
did you kick him out of here?
oh, monstrous! (to edmund) do you know what letter this is?
i give you my obedience and my humble service, madam.
yup! the jerk's drunk. you hurt his shoulder.
don't ask me what i know.
what's your name?
that jerk! how dare he challenge me!
follow her. she's desperate. make sure she doesn't do anything stupid.
cesario is my name, your servant's name, fair princess.
oh, you sweet little rogue, you! oh my, you poor monkey, you're sweating! come, let me wipe your face. come on, you fat bastard. oh, you rogue! i swear, i love you. you're as brave as hector of troy hector of troy and agamemnon were great heroes of the trojan war. hector of troy , you're worth five agamemnons, and you're ten times better than the nine wonders of the world! oh, you villain!
i've done everything you accuse me of, and more, much more. you'll find out everything in due time. it's all over now, and so am i. (to edgar) but who are you, you who've managed to defeat me? if you're a nobleman, i forgive you.
my servant! the world's gone downhill since fake humility started passing for compliments. you're not my servant, young man. you're count orsino's servant.
the no-good jerk! i'll wrap the rogue in a blanket, the way they punish cowards.
let's forgive each other. i'm no less noble than you are, edmund. if i'm more noble than you, you've done me wrong. my name is edgar, and i'm your father's son. the gods are fair, and they use our little vices to punish us. the woman he committed adultery with, your mother, cost him his eyes.
but he's your servant, so everything that's his must be yours too. your servant's servant is your servant, madam.
do it, if you dare. if you do, i'll toss you between a pair of sheets!
you're right. that's true. it's all come full circle, and here i am.
as for him, i never think about him. as for his thoughts, i wish he'd think about nothing at all rather than think about me all the time.
the music is here, sir.
i suspected that you were noble when i saw how you walked. let me embrace you. i swear i never hated you or your father!
madam, i've come here to try to make you like him.
let them play. play, sirs. sit on my knee, doll. a no-good, bragging jerk! the fool ran from me like quicksilver.
i know, prince.
oh, please, i'm begging you, don't mention him again. but if you want to tell me that someone else loves me, i'd enjoy hearing that more than i'd enjoy listening to angels sing.
truly, and you chased him like a church, slowly. you rotten little fat roasting pig! when will you stop fighting all day and thrusting all night, and start to get your body ready for its final resting place?
where have you been hiding? how did you know what happened to your poor father?
my dear lady, 
quiet, doll. don't talk like a death's-head death's-head = a skull, used as a reminder of one's mortality death's-head . don't make me think of my own end.
i knew because i helped nurse him through his suffering. listen to my little story, and when it's done, oh, my heart will break! to escape the decree condemning me
please let me say something, i'm begging you. after you cast your magic spell on me last time, i sent you a ring. i fear it was a mistake, since i tricked my servant, myself, and you too. you probably think poorly of me after i forced that ring on you with such outrageous trickery. what else could you possibly think of me?
sirrah, what's the prince directors must decide if doll sees hal and poins and sets falstaff up, or if she doesn't see them and happens to ask these questions innocently. prince like?
to death, i disguised myself as a madman beggar and became a creature despised even by dogs., oh, how sweet our lives must be if we prefer to die gradually by debasing ourselves rather than dying all at once!, in that disguise i met up with my father with bloody sockets where his beautiful eyes used to be. i became his guide, i led him and begged for him, and kept him from suicide. i never, oh, what a mistake!, revealed myself to him until half an hour ago, when i was in my armor. with hope in my heart i asked him for his blessing, not sure that he'd give it to me. he did. i told him everything that had happened on my journey. but his frail heart, too weak to grapple with such a conflict between joy and sadness, gave out.
haven't you totally dismissed my honor and integrity in your anger? for someone as intelligent as you the situation must be clear enough. i'm wearing my heart on my sleeve, and i can't hide my feelings. so let me hear what you have to say.
he's a shallow youngster. he would have made a good pantry servant: he would have been great at trimming the crusts off bread.
your words have moved me, and maybe it'll do some good. but go on. you look like you have something more to say.
i feel sorry for you.
they say poins is smart.
if there's anything more sorrowful left to add, keep it to yourself. i'm almost ready to break down hearing this much.
that's a step in the direction of love.
him, smart? hang him, he's a baboon! he's as thick as mustard, and no smarter than a sledgehammer.
this may have seemed like the pinnacle of sadness, but if i went on i could outdo it. while i was sobbing loudly, a man came in. he had seen me in my ragged clothes and shunned me, but when he found out who i was, he clasped my neck with his strong arms and cried to high heaven. he threw himself on my father and told the saddest story you've ever heard about lear and him. as he was telling that story he grieved more and
no, not at all. it's a perfectly ordinary experience for us to feel sorry for our enemies.
then why does the prince love him?
more, until his heart started to break. then i heard the trumpets blow twice, and left him there in a trance.
well, enough of my whining then. that's that! i was getting carried away with fantasies i didn't deserve to have. but i should consider myself lucky. it's much better to be destroyed by a noble enemy than by a cruel and heartless one. (a clock strikes) listen to that, the clock's scolding me for wasting my time loving you. don't worry, young man, i won't stalk you. and when you're older and wiser and ready for marriage, your future wife will have a fine husband. there's the way back home for you, due west.
because their legs are the same size, and he likes to play the game of quoits and eat fatty foods; and he'll play drinking games, like dropping burning candle ends into his drinks. he plays on the see-saw with the boys, and pulls crazy stunts, and curses nicely. and his boots fit nice and smooth, just like the ones painted on the shoe store's signs. and he doesn't cause trouble by spilling secrets. he has all kinds of qualities associated with weak minds and healthy bodies, and that's why the prince keeps him around: because the prince is exactly the same. there's not a hair's difference between the two of them.
but who was that man?
then west is where i'm headed! i wish you all the best. you do
(to poins) we should cut this fatso's ears off.
it was kent, sir, the exiled kent, who, after the king treated him like an enemy of the state, put on a disguise and followed his king, carrying out tasks unworthy of even a slave.
stay, please, tell me what you think of me.
let's beat him in front of his whore.
help, help, oh, help!
i think you're denying what you really are.
look at that old geezer possibly, doll is playing with falstaff's hair. geezer having his head scratched like a parrot.
what kind of help do you need?
if that's true, i think the same thing about you.
isn't it odd that desire lasts so much longer than the ability to perform?
say something, man!
you're right. i am not what i am.
kiss me, doll.
what is that bloody knife?
i wish you were what i wanted you to be!
saturn and venus saturn was the planet of old age, venus the planet of love and desire. saturn and venus must be aligned this year! what do you think the astrological tables have to say about that?
it's still warm from the cut. it was just removed from from the heart of, oh, she's dead!
would it be better if i were that, instead of what i am? i wish i were something better, because right now i'm a big fool.
and look. that fiery-faced bardolph is whispering sweet nothings to quickly, his master's old confidante.
who's dead? speak, man.
(to herself) oh, how beautiful he is even when he's angry and full of contempt! a murderer can hide his guilt longer than someone in love can hide her love. love shines brightly and can't be hidden. (to viola) cesario, i swear by the spring roses, by virginity, honor, truth, and everything, i swear i love you. i love you so much that i can't hide my passion for you, as clever as i am. don't assume that because i'm pursuing you there's no reason to pursue me. put two and two together and realize that asking for love is good, but getting it without asking is much better.
(to doll) you flatter me with your kisses.
your wife, sir, your wife. and her sister's dead too, poisoned by your wife. she confessed.
and i swear by my youth and innocence that i've only got one heart and one love to give, and that i've never given them to a woman and never will. so goodbye, my lady. i won't ever come to complain about my lord's love for you again.
i swear, my kisses are heartfelt.
i was engaged to both of them. all three of us will marry now in death.
then come again for another reason. you might still be able to make yourself fall in love with me, the person he loves, even though you hate me now.
i'm old. i'm old.
here comes kent.
no, i won't stay a second longer.
i love you more than i could love any ridiculous young man in the world.
(to second knight) bring the bodies here, whether they're alive or dead. we tremble at the gods' wrath, but we don't mourn these deaths.
why are you leaving, my angry friend?
what fabric do you want a new skirt made out of? i'll get paid on thursday, so you'll get a new hat tomorrow. let's have a happy song. it's getting late; let's go to bed. you'll forget me when i'm gone.
oh, is that kent? there's no time for polite greetings.
yes, you have to tell us why, sir andrew.
i swear, you'll make me cry if you talk like that. i won't wear any beautiful clothing till you return. well, we'll see what happens.
i've come to say farewell to my king and master. isn't he here?
well, because i saw your niece olivia treat the count's messenger better than she's ever treated me. i saw it in the orchard.
some wine, francis.
what an enormous thing for us to forget!, edmund, tell us, where's the king? and where's cordelia?, 
did she see you there the whole time, old boy? tell me that.
right away, sir!
do you see this, kent?
yes, she saw me quite clearly.
what! a bastard son of the king? and aren't you poins, his brother?
oh, why is this so?
well, that proves she's in love with you.
your globe, covered with continents of sin! what kind of life are you leading?
still, edmund was beloved. one of the sisters poisoned the other out of love for me, and then killed herself.
are you trying to make fun of me?
a better life than you. i'm a gentleman and you're just a drawer.
apparently so., cover their faces.
no, i'll prove it with airtight evidence and logical argument.
that's right, sir. and i'm going to draw you out of this room by the ears.
i wish i could live longer. i want to do a little good despite my evil nature. go quickly, hurry, to the castle, for i've given orders to have lear and cordelia killed. hurry, send someone immediately!
and you can't deny evidence and argument, they've been around since noah's ark.
oh, may god bless you, sir. i swear, welcome to london. god bless that sweet face of yours! oh jesus! have you come from wales?
run, run, oh, run!
she flirted with the messenger boy to exasperate you, fire up your passions, and make you angry and jealous. you should have run up to her, unleashed a few excellent quips invented on the spot, and rendered the young man speechless.
you son of a bitch, you insane block of royalty! (indicating doll) i swear on this piece of weak flesh and corrupt blood that you're welcome here!
whom should we look for in the castle?, whose job is it? send something along to prove you're withdrawing the orders.
that's what she was expecting, and you let her down. you wasted a golden opportunity, and now my lady thinks badly of you. you can only raise her opinion of you with some impressive act of courage or complicated intrigue.
what? you fat fool! the hell with you!
good idea. take my sword. the captain, give it to the captain.
i'll have to do something courageous then, because i hate intrigue. i'd rather be a heretic than a schemer with fancy plots.
my lord, if you don't strike while the iron's hot, he'll turn everything into a joke and rob you of your chance for revenge.
run as if your life depended on it.
well then, improve your situation with a show of courage. challenge the count's young servant to a fight. hurt him in eleven different places. my niece olivia will notice, and let me tell you, no matchmaker in the world can get you a woman faster than a reputation for courage.
you son of a whore, you giant piece of candle wax, you said such horrible things about me just now, in front of this honest, upstanding and well-behaved lady.
my wife and i ordered him to hang cordelia in prison and then to make it look as if she committed suicide in despair.
it's really the only way, sir andrew.
may god bless your good heart! she is all that, i swear.
heaven help her!, get him out of here for now.
will either of you give him the message that i'm challenging him to a duel?
did you hear me?
howl, howl, howl, howl! oh, you men are made of stone! if i were you with eyes and a tongue to speak with, i'd crack heaven wide open with my laments! she's gone forever. i know how to tell when someone is alive or dead. she's as dead as the cold ground. let me borrow a mirror. if her breath steams up the glass, then she's alive.
go ahead and write it down. make your handwriting look like a soldier's. be pointed and brief. it doesn't need to be witty as long as it's eloquent and imaginative. taunt him as much as you want, since you're only doing it in writing. it's fine if you refer to him as "thou" instead of "you." "thou" was an informal version of "you," and thus insulting when used to an aristocrat. "you." write down as many lies as you can fit on a sheet of paper. go ahead, get on with it. you may be using an ordinary pen, but you can fill it with poison ink. now get busy.
yes. and you knew i was there, right? it's just like when you ran away at gad's hill the incident at gad's hill occurs in act two of henry iv, part one. gad's hill : you knew i was the one who beat you, and you made up some story just to irritate me.
is this doomsday? the end of the world?
where will i find you when i've finished it?
no, no, no. not at all. i had no idea you were there.
or just a foretaste of it?
we'll come find you in the bedroom. go on.
then i'm going to make you confess that you deliberately slandered me. and then i'll know what to do next.
let the world collapse around us.
this precious little guy is putty in your hands, sir toby.
no slander, hal. on my honor, no slander.
this feather moved because of her breath. she's alive. if that's true, it makes up for all the sorrows i've ever known.
he must like me, since he's let me spend two thousand of his ducats.
no? to malign me, and call me a pantry servant and a bread-trimmer, and i don't know what else?
oh, my good master!
his letter's going to be hilarious. but you're not going to deliver it, are you?
no slander, hal.
please, go away.
never trust me again if i don't. and by all means see if you can get the young man to answer it. i don't think a team of oxen could get them close enough to fight. if you dissected andrew and found enough red blood in his liver it was commonly believed that cowards had white livers with no blood in them. liver for a flea to eat, then i'd eat the rest of his corpse. he's a coward.
no slander?
it's noble kent, your friend.
and his opponent, the young messenger, doesn't look like he'd be very aggressive in a fight.
no slander, ned, in the world, honest ned, none. i maligned him only to the wicked, so that the wicked wouldn't fall in love with him. and by doing that, i've acted like a good friend and loyal subject, and your father should thank me for it. no slander, hal, none, ned. no, truly boys, none.
curse you all, you're all murderers and traitors! i could have saved her. now she's gone forever., cordelia, cordelia, stay a while. ha? what are you saying?, her voice always was so soft and gentle. that's a good thing in a woman., i killed the scum who was hanging you.
here comes my little bird.
now your absolute fear and utter cowardliness has made you wrong this good lady in order to make peace with us. is she wicked? is this hostess here wicked? is your boy here wicked? or honest bardolph, whose piety burns in his face? is he wicked?
it's true, my lords, he did.
listen, if you want a good laugh, and i mean a side-splitting one, then follow me. that gullible idiot malvolio must have renounced christianity, since no christian could do such outrageous things as he's doing. he's wearing yellow stockings.
answer, you withered old trunk, answer.
didn't i? back in the old days i would've made him dance with my sword. but i'm old now, and suffering has weakened me. (to kent) who are you? my eyesight's not the best, i'll tell you straight.
with crisscrossed laces?
the devil has marked bardolph as long gone, and his face is lucifer's kitchen, where only drunks are served. as for the boy, he may have a good spirit on one shoulder, but the devil on the other is stronger.
we're looking at the unluckiest man who ever lived.
oh, he looks like a pathetic sunday school teacher. i've stalked him like a murderer, and he's done everything the letter told him to. he smiles so much his face has more lines in it than a map of the east indies. you've never seen anything like it. i can hardly keep myself from throwing things at him. i know that my lady's going to end up hitting him. and when she does, he'll imagine she's flirting with him.
and the women?
my vision is dull. aren't you kent?
come on, take us to him.
one of them is in hell already, where she gets poor souls hot. as for the other, i owe her money. if she's damned for that, i have no idea.
that's me. your servant kent. where's your servant caius caius is the name kent took when he disguised himself and became lear's servant. caius ?
i really didn't want to inconvenience you. but since you seem to enjoy helping me, i won't nag you to stop any more.
i'm not, i promise you that.
he's a good fellow, i can tell you that much. not afraid to fight, he's a feisty one. he's dead and rotting in the dirt now.
i couldn't stay behind after you left. i just felt a sharp desire to follow you. it wasn't just that i wanted to see you, though i very much did want that. i was also worried about what might happen to you while you were traveling, since you're not familiar with this area, and it's rough and unwelcoming to a stranger with no guide. i followed you because i love you and i was worried about you.
no, i think you're not. i think you've been excused for that. but there's another charge against you. you serve flesh in this place, and that's against the law. you're going to hell for that.
no, my lord, that was me. i'm the one who, 
my friend antonio, all i can say is thank you. i know words are cheap. if i had any money i'd back up my gratitude with cash. anyway, what should we do? should we go see the sights in the town?
everybody who serves food does that. what's wrong with a bite or two of meat during lent?
i'll get right on that.
we can do that tomorrow, sir. first we should make sure you have somewhere to stay.
you, good lady, 
, followed you on your sad wanderings, ever since your bad luck began.
i'm not tired, and night is a long time away. come on, let's go see the sights.
what is it, gracious sir?
nice to see you.
i'm sorry, but i can't. you see, it's dangerous for me to walk in these streets. once in a battle at sea i did a lot of damage to count orsino's warships. if they arrested me here, it'd be the end of me.
he may speak to you graciously, but his body feels otherwise.
it was me, no one else. everything is gloomy, dark, and dreadful. your eldest daughters destroyed themselves and died in despair.
you probably killed a lot of his men?
who's knocking so loudly on the door? francis, go see.
yes, i think that's true.
no, i didn't do anything as violent as that, though we would've been justified in shedding a little blood over the matter. the whole quarrel might have been resolved since then when we repaid what we stole from them, which most of our city did, for the sake of friendly trade relations. i was the only one who refused to give back what i stole. that's why i'll pay dearly if they find me here.
peto, how are you? what's going on?
he doesn't know what he's saying. it's useless to try to talk to him.
then don't make yourself too conspicuous.
your father the king is in westminster. twenty exhausted messengers have arrived from the north. and, on my way here, i met a dozen captains, hustling and working hard, knocking on the door of every tavern and searching for sir john falstaff.
yes, it's pointless.
you're right. hang on a minute, here's some money for you. (he gives sebastian money) the best place to stay around here is an inn called the elephant, in the suburbs south of the city. i'll arrange for our meals while you enjoy yourself and educate yourself by looking at the town. you'll find me at the elephant.
my god, poins, i feel terrible wasting precious time on this idleness when a huge black storm is brewing, soon to open up on our bare, vulnerable heads. give me my coat and my sword. good night, falstaff.
edmund is dead, my lord.
why are you giving me your purse?
now's the sweetest part of the night, and we have to leave without enjoying it.
that doesn't matter much with everything else that's going on., gentlemen, i will announce my plans. i'll do everything i can to ease the king's suffering. as for me, i'm surrendering all my power over to him, giving him absolute authority for the rest of his life.
maybe you'll see some little trinket you want to buy. i doubt you've got enough money for little purchases like that.
more knocking!
(to edgar and kent) you will get back your rightful property and titles, along with new honors that you have more than deserved., my friends and allies will be rewarded for their support, and my enemies will get what they deserve. look, look!
i'll hold on to your money and leave you for an hour.
what's going on? what's the matter?
and my poor fool lear seems to be talking about cordelia, using the word "fool" as an endearment. fool was hanged., no, no, no life left? why should a dog or horse or rat have life, but not you? you'll never come to me again, never, never, never, never, never., please help me undo this button. thank you, sir. do you see that? look at her. look, her lips. look there, look there. oh, oh, oh, oh. (he dies)
we'll meet at the elephant.
you have to go to the royal court immediately, sir. a dozen captains are at the door waiting for you.
he's fainted., my lord, my lord!
i remember.
(to the page) pay the musicians, sirrah. goodbye, waitress. goodbye, doll. see, wenches, how wanted we valuable men are? the good-for-nothing may sleep when the man of action is needed. farewell, good wenches. if i'm not sent away immediately, i'll come see you again before i go.
my heart will break, break.
i've sent for him. he says he'll come. what kind of food should i serve him? what presents should i give him? it's easier to buy young people than to beg or borrow them. oh, i'm talking too loud., where's malvolio? he's very serious, which is right for someone in mourning like me. where is malvolio?
i can't speak; my heart is ready to burst. well, sweet jack, take care of yourself.
(to lear) look at me, my lord.
he's coming, madam; but he's acting very strangely. he must be possessed by the devil.
farewell, farewell.
don't disturb his soul. let it go up to heaven. his soul would be angry at anyone who tried to keep him in the torture chamber of this life any longer.
why, what's the matter with him? is he talking nonsense?
well, goodbye. i've known you twenty-nine years this june. but a more honest, more good-hearted man, well, fare you well.
oh, he's really gone.
no, he just smiles. you should have a guard nearby if he comes in here, because he's clearly disturbed.
(offstage) mistress tearsheet!
what's amazing is how long he lasted. he was living on borrowed time at the end.
ask him in here.
what's the matter?
carry them away. our business now is mourning and grief. (to kent and edgar) my friends and soulmates, you two will reign over this kingdom and keep the wounded country alive.
i'm as crazy as he is, if sad craziness and happy craziness are equivalent.
(offstage) mistress tearsheet, come to my master.
i will have to go on a journey to death soon, sir. my master's calling me. i can't say no.
what's going on, malvolio?
o, run, doll, run; run, good doll. come., she's coming, all crying and blubbering., will you come, doll?
we must remember the gravity of this sad day. we should speak what we feel, not what we ought to say. the oldest one suffered the most. we young ones will never see as much as he has seen, or live as long.
hello, sweet lady.
call the earls of surrey and warwick. tell them to read over these letters before they come, and to think carefully about them. hurry.
you're smiling? i sent for you about a sad occasion.
thousands of even my poorest subjects are sleeping right now. oh sleep! oh sweet sleep, nature's gentle healer, what have i done to frighten you? you won't weigh down my eyelids anymore, or dull my mind to make me forget. sleep, why do you lie in filthy hovels, stretched out on uncomfortable cots, where insects' buzzing is the lullaby? why don't you lie in the sweet-smelling bedrooms of kings, under opulent canopies, lulled with soft and beautiful music? you drowsy god, why do you lie with the common people in their loathsome beds, leaving the royal bed lonely like a sentry post, or a bell tower? will you even close the eyes of a ship boy, high up on the whirling mast, and rock him gently in a cradle made of rough, tossing seas and howling winds, winds which take the waves and, curling them over, crashes them through the air with such a deafening noise that they wake death itself? can you, oh unfair sleep, give rest to a drenched little sailor in the midst of such roughness, and yet deny it to a king?
boatswain!
sad, my lady! i could be sad if i wanted to be. these crisscrossing laces do cut off the circulation in my legs a bit, but who cares? as the sonnet says, "if you please one special person, you please everyone who matters."
a king on the calmest, stillest night, with everything available for sleep? then, you happy commoners, put yourselves to bed. the head that wears the crown sleeps uneasily.
i'm here, sir. how can i help you?
why, what's going on? what's the matter with you?
good morning, your highness.
my good boy, give the other sailors a pep talk, and do it fast, before we're shipwrecked. hurry, hurry!
my legs may be yellow, but i don't feel blue. it was addressed to him, and orders must be obeyed. i think we know whose fancy handwriting that was.
is it morning, lords?
come on, men! that's the way to do it! quickly! quickly! take in the upper sail. listen to the master's orders. , blow your heart out, storm! so long as we have enough room to avoid running aground!
don't you think you should go to bed, malvolio?
it's after one o'clock.
be careful, good boatswain! where's the master? make these men work.
to bed! "yes, sweetheart, i'll come to you."
well, then, good morning to you all, my lords. have you read the letters i sent you?
please stay below deck, sir.
for heaven's sake, why are you smiling like that and kissing your hand so much?
we have, your highness.
where's the master, boatswain?
how are you feeling, malvolio?
then you can tell how sick the kingdom is. there are serious diseases spreading through its body, very near its heart.
he's busy, can't you hear him giving orders? you're getting in the way of our work. stay in your cabins. you're helping the storm, not us.
you're asking me! noble people don't answer to peasants!
the body's only out of sorts. it can be brought back to full health through good care and some medicine. northumberland will soon be suppressed.
don't get wound up, my good man.
why are you acting so brazen toward my lady?
oh god! if only we could read the book of destiny! we'd see how time changes everything, bringing mountains low and melting the land, which is tired of being solid and firm, into the sea. we'd see how the beach is sometimes too wide for even the tide to conquer. we'd see how blind luck can make mockeries of men, and how change can affect you in countless ways.
i'm only wound up because the sea's wound up. now get out of here! do you think these waves care anything about kings and officials? go to your cabins and be quiet! don't bother us up here.
"don't be afraid of greatness." that was well written.
if even the happiest youth could read this book, he'd look at the course of his life, the dangers he's endured, the challenges that still lie ahead, and he'd shut that book, sit down and die. it was less than ten years ago that richard and northumberland loved each other. then two years later, they were at war. just eight years ago, northumberland was the man closest to my heart. like a brother, he devoted himself to me, dedicating both life and limb to my cause. he even challenged richard on my behalf. but which of you was there, i think it was you, warwick, when richard, his eyes brimming with tears because of northumberland's rebellion, spoke these words that now seem prophetic: "northumberland, you are the ladder that bolingbroke has climbed to get to the throne." although, god knows, it wasn't my intention then to become king. but the country needed it so badly, i was forced to rise up and become great. "the time will come," richard continued, "when this terrible sin, growing in size, will break out into corruption." that's how he went on. he predicted our current condition, and the collapse of our alliances.
just remember who you've got on board with you, good man.
what do you mean by that, malvolio?
there is a chronicle for every man's life, which shows what happened to him in times now past. if you study that chronicle, you can prophecy what lies ahead with some accuracy. the seeds of things to come are buried in the things that have already happened. these seeds grow, and become the children of time.
nobody i care about more than myself. you're a king's advisor. if you can order the storm to calm down, we can all put down our ropes and rest. go ahead, use your authority. if you can't do it, be grateful you've lived this long and go wait to die in your cabin, if it comes to that., harder, men!, now get out of our way, i'm telling you.
"some are born great, "
king richard could look at the pattern of what had gone before and predict perfectly that northumberland's betrayal, then still a seed, would someday grow larger, if it could find suitable soil to root in. and you're the only soil it could have found.
i feel a lot better after talking to this guy. he doesn't look like a person who would drown, he looks like he was born to be hanged gonzalo implies that the boatswain looks and acts like a dangerous criminal. hanged . i hope he lives long enough to be hanged. the rope that hangs him will do more good than all the ropes on this ship, since it'll guarantee he stays alive through this storm. but if he's not destined to die by hanging, then our chances don't look too good.
what?
were these things necessary, then? then we'll treat them like necessities, even though the very word "necessities" cries out against us. they say the archbishop and northumberland have fifty thousand men in their army.
bring down that top sail! fast! lower, lower! let the ship sail close to the wind.
"some achieve greatness, "
that can't be, my lord. rumor, like an echo, doubles the size of our enemy's army. please, your highness, go to bed. i swear on my soul that the army you've already sent out can win this battle easily. and here's more good news: i've heard for sure that glendower is dead. you've been ill for two weeks now, your majesty. keeping such irregular hours will surely make things worse.
damn those men shouting down there! they're louder than the storm or us sailors.
what are you saying?
i'll listen to your advice. and once we've got this civil war in hand, we will, my friends, march to the holy land.
oh, not you again. what do you want? should we all give up and drown? do you want to sink?
"and some have greatness thrust upon them."
come on, come on, come on, sir. shake my hand, sir, shake my hand. you're an early riser, i swear. how are you, cousin silence?
oh, go to hell, you loud-mouthed bastard!
heaven help you!
good morning, cousin shallow.
well, get to work, then.
"remember who liked your yellow stockings, "
and how's my cousin, your wife? and your prettiest daughter, my fair god-daughter ellen?
just die, you lowlife! go ahead and die, you nasty, rude bastard!you're more scared of drowning than we are.
your yellow stockings?
i'm afraid she's got dark hair dark hair was considered unattractive. dark hair , cousin shallow!
yes, i guarantee he won't drown, even if this ship were as fragile as an eggshell and as leaky as a menstruating woman.
"and wanted to see you with laces crisscrossed over your legs."
by gum, i bet william's become a real scholar. he's still at oxford, right?
turn the ship to the wind! set the sails and let her go out to sea again!
crisscrossed?
he sure is, and i'm the one who's paying for it.
it's no use! pray for your lives! we're done for!
"go ahead. a happy new life is there if you want it, "
he'll be going to law school soon. i studied law at clement's inn the inns of court are london legal colleges. clement's inn , where i think they still talk about crazy old shallow.
what, we're going to die?
am i a new life?
you were known as lusty shallow back then, cousin.
the king and the prince are praying. let's go join them, since whatever happens to them happens to us too.
"if you don't want it, just keep acting like a lowly servant."
i was known as anything, i swear. and i would have done anything too, and all the way, too. i was there, and little john doit from staffordshire, and black-haired george barnes, and francis pickbone, and will squele, from the cotswolds. since then, no law college
i'm out of patience.
this is completely insane.
in the world has seen four swashbucklers like us. and let me tell you this: we knew where to find the highest-quality whores, and the best of them were at our beck and call. at that time, jack falstaff, now sir john, was just a boy. he worked as a page for thomas mowbray, the duke of norfolk.
yes, we've been cheated out of our lives by a bunch of drunken, incompetent sailors. this bigmouth jerk here, (to boatswain) i hope you drown ten times over!
madam, count orsino's young messenger has returned. it was hard to get him to come back, but he's here now, waiting for you.
do you mean the same sir john that's coming here soon to recruit soldiers?
he'll still die by hanging, not drowning, even if every drop of water in the sea tries to swallow him.
i'll go to him.
the same sir john, the very same. i saw him beat skogan upon the head when he was a little tyke, not this high. the same day, i had a fight with a guy named sampson stockfish. he sold fruit behind gray's inn. jesus, jesus! i've had some crazy times! to think that so many of my old pals are dead!
god have mercy on us!, the ship's breaking up!, goodbye, wife and kids!, goodbye, brother!, we're breaking up, we're breaking up!
maria, take care of this poor fellow here. where's my cousin toby? have some of my servants take care of malvolio. i'd give half my dowry to keep anything bad from happening to him.
we'll all follow them, cousin.
let's all sink with the king.
oh ho! look at me now! no less a person than sir toby, lady olivia's own relative, is going to take care of me. this is just what the letter said. she's sending him to me on purpose, so i can be rude to him just like she said in the letter. "get rid of your low-class trapping," she said. "argue with a relative of mine like a nobleman, and be rude to servants. talk about politics and affairs of state, and act free and independent." and then she explains how to do it: i should have a serious face and dignified demeanor, well-modulated speech, acting like a distinguished gentleman and so on. i've got her now, but i've got god to thank for it! and when she left just now, she said "take care of this poor fellow here." fellow!" not "malvolio," not anything referring to my low station in life, but "fellow." everything's going perfectly. not the tiniest ounce, not the littlest insignificant amount of trouble or bad luck could ruin it, what can i say? nothing can come between me and the fulfillment of all my hopes. well, god is responsible for that, not me, and he deserves thanks.
right you are, very right. that's for sure, that's for sure. death, as the psalms say, is certain. everyone dies. how much are they getting for good young bulls at the stamford county fair?
let's say goodbye to him.
where is he, for god's sake? i don't care if all the devils in hell crammed together to possess him, i still want to speak to him.
truly, i wasn't there.
right now i'd give a thousand furlongs furlong = yards furlongs of sea for one little acre of dry ground: barren weed patch, anything at all. what's destined to happen will happen, but i'd give anything to be dry when i die.
here he is, here he is. how are you, sir?
death is certain. is old double from your hometown still alive?
dear father, if you caused this terrible storm with your magic powers, please put an end to it. the sky's so dark it looks like it would rain down boiling hot tar if the sea weren't swelling up to the sky to put its fire out. oh, i suffered along with all the men i watched suffer! a fine ship, with some good people in it, i'm sure, smashed to pieces. their dying shouts broke my heart! the poor people died. if i'd been a god i would've let the sea sink inside the earth before it had a chance to swallow up that ship and all the people it was carrying.
go away. i don't want to see your face. let me enjoy my privacy. go away.
dead, sir.
calm down. there's nothing to get upset about. no harm was done.
(to sir toby belch) ooh, listen to the scary devil speaking from inside him! didn't i tell you? sir toby, lady olivia wants you to take care of him.
jesus, jesus, dead! he was a good archer, and dead! he could fire one heck of a shot. john of gaunt loved him, and used to wager on his shooting. dead! he could hit a target from two hundred and forty yards, and he could shoot a straight arrow two hundred and eighty yards, maybe even two hundred and ninety. that was something to see. how much are they getting for twenty ewes?
oh, what a horrible day!
ah-ha! does she?
depends on the quality. twenty good ewes could be worth ten pounds.
there was no harm, i'm telling you. everything i've done has been for you, my dear daughter. you don't know what you are, since you don't know who i am or where i come from, or that i'm better than merely prospero, your humble father who lives in a poor little shack.
(to fabian and maria) come on, come on! calm down, calm down. we need to treat him gently. let me take care of this., how are you, malvolio? how are things? come on, man, just say no to the devil! think about it, he's the enemy of mankind.
and old double's dead?
it never occurred to me to imagine there was anything more to know.
do you even know what you're talking about?
here come two of sir john falstaff's men, i think.
it's time for you to know the whole story. give me a hand and help me off with this magic cloak.
(to sir toby belch) look at that, he acts insulted if you say bad things about the devil! i hope to god he's not bewitched!
good morning, gentlemen.
(to the cloak) so, lie there, my magic. (to miranda) wipe your eyes. take comfort. i arranged the horrible sight of this shipwreck, which moved you to such pity, so carefully that not a single person was hurt, no, not so much as a hair on anyone's head was destroyed in the ship that you saw sink. sit down. it's time for you to know more. (they sit)
get a urine sample and take it to a witch doctor to find out.
if you don't mind, which of you is judge shallow?
you've often started to tell me who i am, but then suddenly stopped, leaving me asking questions that never get answered, telling me, "wait. not yet."
sure thing, we'll do it tomorrow morning. my lady would never want to lose him.
i'm robert shallow, sir, a poor landowner in this county, and one of the king's justices of the peace. how can i help you?
well, the time has come. this is the moment for you to listen hard and pay close attention. can you remember the time before you came to live in this shack? i doubt it, since you weren't even three at the time.
what are you saying, mistress?
my captain sends his regards. my captain, sir john falstaff. he's a valiant gentleman, i swear, and a brave leader.
sure i can, father.
oh, lord!
it's great to hear from him. i knew him to be a good fencer. how's the good knight doing? and, if you don't mind my asking, how's his wife?
what do you remember? a house, a person? tell me anything you remember.
(to maria) please, keep quiet. this is not the way to act. don't you see you're upsetting him? leave me alone with him.
i beg your pardon, sir. a soldier has no need for a wife; he is well enough accommodated.
my memory is hazy, more like a dream than a recollection. didn't i use to have four or five women taking care of me?
gentleness is the only way to go, gently, gently. the devil inside him is rough, but we can't treat it roughly.
well said, i swear, sir. well said. "well enough accommodated!" that's good. that's very good. good turns
indeed you did, and more besides, miranda. but how is it possible that you still remember this, through all the darkness of the past? if you remember your life before you came here, you may also remember how you got here.
(to the imaginary devil inside malvolio) so how are you, my pretty little bird? how are you doing in there, sweet little chicken?
of phrase deserve to be praised. "accommodated!" it comes from the latin, "accommodo." very good. that's a good turn of phrase.
no, that i don't remember.
sir!
excuse me, sir. i've heard the word. you call it a turn of phrase? i don't know anything about phrases, but i'll fight for the word. it's a good, soldier-like word; a word with many uses, to be sure. "accommodated." you can say that a man is accommodated when he has been furnished with supplies. and you can also say that a man is being accommodated when he's, you know, being accommodated bardolph here gives "being accommodated" a sexual connotation. being accommodated . which is an excellent thing.
twelve years ago, miranda, twelve years ago your father was the duke of milan, a powerful prince.
yes, dear little chick, come along with me., shut up, man! you're serious enough to know not to play games with satan. damn that dirty black coalminer of a devil!
it certainly is. look, here comes good sir john. let me shake your hand; let me shake your hand, sir. i swear, you look good, like you haven't aged a day. welcome, good sir john.
aren't you my father?
get him to say his prayers, sir toby, get him to pray.
i'm glad to see you're well, master robert shallow. and this is master surecard, isn't it?
your mother was extremely virtuous, and she said you were my daughter. and your father was duke of milan, and you were his heir, a princess.
my prayers, you hussy?
no, sir john. it's my cousin silence. like me, he's also a justice of the peace.
good lord! what evil things were done to us that we were driven here? or was it a blessing that we came here?
(to sir toby belch) no, i'm telling you, he refuses to hear anything about religion.
master silence. your name suits a justice of "the peace."
both, both, my girl. we were pushed out of power by evil deeds, as you call them. but we were blessed in being helped toward this island.
go hang yourselves, all of you! you're all lazy and shallow. i'm not like you. i have a higher future waiting for me. you'll know more about it later.
welcome, sir.
oh, it breaks my heart to think how painful it must be for you to recall all this, things that i can't remember. but please tell me more.
is it possible?
damn! it's hot out, gentlemen. have you found half a dozen able-bodied men for me?
my brother, your uncle antonio, just listen to this (i still can't believe a brother could be so disloyal!), my brother whom, aside from you, i loved more than anyone else in the world, i trusted to run my state, which at that time was the strongest in the land, and prospero the number one duke, famous for my dignity and my education. since i was so drawn to studying things like logic, grammar, geometry, and astronomy, i let my control of the government slide a bit, being too wrapped up in my occult books. your disloyal uncle, are you paying attention?
if this were a play, i'd complain it was unrealistic.
yes sir, we have. won't you sit?
i'm hanging on every word.
he's really taken this prank to heart. he's playing the role perfectly.
let me see them, please.
once antonio got the knack of granting certain requests, denying others, promoting some officials and keeping down those who were getting too ambitious, he won over the people who used to be mine, or changed them, remade them, you might say. since he had control over the whole government and everyone in it, he soon made everyone sing his own song, whichever song he happened to like. he became like the ivy that sticks to the side of the tree, and sucked my vitality out of me., you're not paying attention.
no, follow him now, before he divulges the prank and ruins everything.
where's the list? where's the list? where's the list? let's see, let's see, let's see. right, right. yes, sir: ralph mouldy! let them come when i call. let them do that, let them do that. let's see. where's mouldy?
oh, yes i am, father.
wow, we're really going to drive him crazy.
here, sir.
please listen to me carefully. as i neglected practical matters, being totally dedicated to solitude and to improving my mind with subjects more valuable than most people imagine, i was so shut away from the world that i unwittingly stirred up evil wishes in my disloyal brother. my deep trust in him made him deeply untrustworthy, arousing in him a treachery as big as my trust was, my trust which had no limit, an infinite confidence. with antonio possessing such powers and wealth, coming not only from my income but also from his ability to take whatever my authority allowed him to take, antonio started to believe that he was the duke, like some liar who begins to believe in his own lie. he put on the face of royalty, with all the rights that go along with it. with his ambition growing like this, do you hear what i'm saying?
the house will be so much quieter.
what do you think, sir john? he's got good muscles. young, strong, and well-connected.
what you're saying could cure deafness, father. of course i hear it.
come on, let's put him in a dark room and tie him up. my niece already thinks he's insane. we can go on like this, punishing him and having some fun, until we're tired of it. then we can take mercy on him and let him out, and talk about how well the joke went. we'll also worship you for setting up this trick. let's do it, let's do it!
are you mouldy?
to make his political performance absolutely perfect, he simply had to become the duke of milan himself. my library was a large enough dukedom for me. so, now antonio judges me incapable of carrying out my duties. he's so power-hungry that he allies himself with the king of naples, agreeing to pay him a regular annual sum, swear subservience to him, and put the dukedom of milan, never subservient to anyone before!, under the humiliating control of naples.
here's more insanity for us.
yes, sir.
good heavens!
(presenting them a piece of paper) here's the challenge, read it. it's bursting with fighting words.
well then, it's about time you were put to use.
think about that, and about what followed afterward. then tell me if antonio can be called a brother.
is it that aggressive?
ha, ha, ha! excellent, i swear! things that don't get used enough do indeed become moldy. good one, i swear. well said, sir john, very well said.
it would be wrong for me to think poorly of my grandmother. good women sometimes give birth to bad sons.
yes, it is, i think. just read it.
prick i.e., mark his name on the list prick him.
now listen to the agreement they made. the king of naples, my arch-enemy, listens to my brother's request, which was that the king, in exchange for the respect and money paid to him, would get rid of me and make my brother duke of milan instead. a treacherous army was gathered, and one fateful night at midnight, antonio opened the gates of milan, and in the pitch black had his officers rush out me and you, my dear daughter. you were crying.
give it to me. (he reads) "young man, whatever you are, you're a real scum bucket."
i've already been pricked pricked = annoyed; "prick" is also slang for "penis"; mouldy puns that he has already been supplied with one. pricked well enough, thanks. you could have left me alone. my old lady's in trouble now: she won't have anyone to do her husbandry or her housework. you didn't have to prick me; there are abler men husbandry = farm work; a husband's sexual duties abler men than me.
how awful! i can't remember how i cried then, but i'll cry all over again. this story breaks my heart.
nice. very courageous.
that's enough; quiet, mouldy. you're going. mouldy, it's time you were put to use.
just listen a little more, and i'll bring you up to date about the present situation, which is the whole reason i'm telling you this story in the first place.
(reading) "don't even ask why i call you that, because i won't give you any explanation."
put to use?
why didn't they just kill us that night?
that's a good thing to put in, it keeps you from getting in trouble with the law.
quiet, man, quiet. step aside. don't you know where you are? now the next, sir john. let's see. simon shadow!
good question, my girl. my story does raise that question. the answer, my dear, is that they didn't dare, because the people of milan loved me too much. the had to disguise their bloody intentions. so, to make a long story short, they hurried us onto a ship and carried us a number of miles out to sea, where they prepared a rotten carcass of a boat, with no sails or masts or ropes, which even the rats had abandoned. they tossed us in the water to cry to the sea that roared back at us, to sigh into the winds that sighed right back at us in pity.
(reading) "you come to see the lady olivia, and she's kind to you. but you're a complete liar. that's not why i'm challenging you to a duel."
now you're talking. i'd like to sit under him. he'll be a cool soldier.
god, what a burden on you i must have been!
nice and short and full of good sense, or should i say nonsense?
where's shadow?
no, my dear, you were a little angel who kept me going. you smiled with a strength you must have gotten from heaven, while i cried salty tears into the salty sea, and groaned at our situation. your smile sustained my spirits against whatever would come our way.
(reading) "i'll ambush you on your way home, and if you're lucky enough to kill me, "
here, sir.
how did we manage to get ashore?
good.
shadow, whose son are you?
with god's help. we had a little food and fresh water that a nobleman from naples, gonzalo, had given us out of the kindness of his heart. he had been chosen to carry out the plan of putting us to sea. he also gave us clothes, linen, and other necessities that have been of great help. knowing how much i loved my books, he gave me some books from my library that i value more than my dukedom.
(reading) "you'll be killing me like a common criminal, a mugger."
my mother's son, sir.
i wish i could see that man someday!
you still haven't said anything incriminating. good.
your mother's son? probably, and you got your father's name. the woman's son is a portrait of the father; yes, that's usually the case, though the son is little more than a dim copy, without any of the father's true substance.
now i'll stand up. (he stands and puts on his magic cloak) sit still and listen to the last of our sad sea adventures. we arrived here on this island, where i, acting as your teacher, have given you a better education than most princesses get, princesses who have less careful tutors, who spend their time instead on empty fun.
(reading) "good luck, and may god have mercy on one of our souls. he may have mercy upon mine. but i have a better chance of surviving, so watch out. signed, your friend, if you treat him right, and your sworn enemy, andrew aguecheek"
do you like him, sir john?
may god thank you for it. but please, father, the question is still nagging at me, why did you conjure up this storm?
if this letter doesn't make him fight, i don't know what will. i'll give it to him.
shadow shadows = fake names of nonexistent people shadow will be useful in the summer. prick him, too. we'll need him, for there are a lot of shadows filling up this roster.
you should know this: much luck is on my side, and my enemies have happened to wreck their ship on this island. as i see it, my fate hangs on this lucky event, and if i handle it wrong, i'll suffer for the rest of my life. now, no more questions.
you might have a great opportunity to give it to him right now. he's conducting some business with my lady, and sooner or later he'll leave.
thomas wart!
you look sleepy. it's a nice hazy feeling, so give in to it. i know you have no choice. 
go, sir andrew. look out for him in the corner of the orchard as if you were a sheriff's deputy. as soon as you see him, draw your sword, and as you draw it, start swearing horribly. sometimes a terrible swear word, like a well-shot arrow, makes you look more brave and manly than getting in a fight would. now go!
where's he?
come on, servant, come. i'm ready now. come here, ariel.
don't worry about me not swearing enough.
here, sir.
humble greetings, great master! worthy sir, greetings! your wish is my command, whatever you want. if you want me to fly, to swim, to jump into fire, to ride the clouds in the sky, ariel will get right to the task.
i won't deliver this letter. the young gentleman's behavior shows that he's sensible and has good manners. the fact that he serves as a go-between for his lord and my niece olivia confirms this. so this letter, which is so incredibly stupid and ignorant, isn't going to scare him at all. he'll just think an idiot wrote it. but i'll deliver sir andrew's challenge by word of mouth, describing sir andrew as courageous in battle and convincing the young gentleman that sir andrew is furious, impetuous, and a skilled fighter (he'll believe me because he's young). this will make them both so afraid that they'll kill each other just by looking at each other.
is your name wart?
spirit, did you carry out the storm just as i ordered?
here comes the messenger with your niece. leave them alone until he sets off home, and then follow him.
yup.
down to the last detail. i boarded the king's ship, and in every corner of it, from the deck to the cabins, i made everyone astonished and terrified. sometimes i appeared in many places at once. on the top sail and main mast i flamed in different spots, then i came together into a single flame. i flashed about faster than lightning. the fire and deafening cracks seemed to overwhelm even the god of the sea himself, making him tremble underwater.
meanwhile, i'll think of some horrible way to phrase the challenge.
you're a pretty ragged wart.
good spirit! who could ever be so steady and strong that a disturbance like that wouldn't make him crazy?
i've said too much to someone with a heart of stone. i've foolishly jeopardized my honor and reputation. i hate myself for behaving that way, but i just had to, and no criticism could have stopped me.
should i prick him on the list, sir john?
everyone there got a little crazy and pulled some desperate stunts. everyone except the sailors dove into the sea, leaving behind the ship that i had set on fire. the king's son, ferdinand, with his hair standing straight up, it looked like reeds, not hair, was the first person to jump, shouting, "hell is empty, and all the devils are here!"
my lord acts just as crazy with love as you do.
not necessary. for look: his clothing is just a bunch of pieces sewn together, and his whole body rests on legs as skinny as pins. he's been pricked enough by pins and needles, don't prick him anymore.
good job! but was this near the shore?
here, take this piece of jewelry. there's a picture of me inside. don't refuse it. it won't annoy you like me, because it doesn't have a voice. and i beg you, please come here again tomorrow. what could you possibly ask of me that i wouldn't give you, as long as it didn't damage my honor and self-respect?
ha, ha, ha! you are funny, sir. you are funny. i've got to hand it to you. francis feeble!
very near, my master.
nothing, except your true love for my lord.
here, sir.
but are they all safe, ariel?
how could i honorably give him what i've already given you?
what kind of work do you do, feeble?
nobody was hurt in the slightest. even their clothes are unstained, and look fresher than before the storm. i've separated them into groups around the island, just as you ordered. i sent the king's son off by himself to a faraway nook on the island, where he's sitting now sighing, with his arms crossed like this. (he folds his arms.)
i'll give it back to you.
i'm a woman's tailor, sir.
tell me what you did with the king's ship, the sailors, and the other ships.
just come again tomorrow. good-bye. a devil like you could lead me to hell.
should i prick him, sir?
the king's ship is safely in the harbor, hidden in that deep cove where you once summoned me to bring back dew from the stormy bermuda islands.
hello, sir.
you might as well. but if he had been a man's tailor, he would have already pricked you with his pins. will you make as many holes in the enemy's armor as you have in women's underwear?
the sailors are all below deck, sleeping both from their labor and from a magic spell i cast over them. as for the rest of the ships, i scattered them, and they've gathered again in the mediterranean, sailing sadly home to naples, believing that they witnessed the shipwreck and death of their great king.
hello to you.
i'll do my best, sir. i can't do any more.
ariel, you've done your work exactly as i ordered. but there's more work to be done. what time is it?
you'd better think up a way to defend yourself. i don't know what you've done to upset him, but someone has challenged you to a duel. he's riled up and bloodthirsty, and he's waiting for you at the back of the orchard. draw your sword and get on your toes, because your assailant is quick, skillful, and deadly.
well said, good woman's tailor! well said, courageous feeble! you'll be as brave as the angriest dove or the most valiant mouse. prick the woman's tailor. a big one, master shallow; a deep one, master shallow.
past noon.
there must be some mistake, sir. i'm sure nobody would have any reason to fight with me. i can't remember anything i've ever done to offend anyone.
i wish wart were going, sir.
at least two hours past. we can't waste time between now and six o'clock.
you're wrong about that, i assure you. so if you value your life at all, be on your guard. your opponent has enough youth, strength, skill, and anger to outfight anyone.
and i wish you were a man's tailor. you could have mended his clothes and made him fit to go. i can't make him a private soldier when he's already the leader of thousands, of lice, that is. but never mind, oh forcible feeble.
is there more work to do? since you're giving me new assignments, let me remind you what you promised me but haven't come through with yet.
but who is this person, sir?
never mind, sir.
what? you're in a bad mood? what could you possibly ask for?
he's a knight. he was made a knight because of his court connections, but when he's fighting a civilian he's a real monster. he's killed three people, and he's so furious right now that the only thing that will satisfy him is seeing you die. "fight to the death" is his motto.
i like you, good feeble. who's next?
my freedom.
i'll go back inside and ask the lady for some kind of escort. i'm not a fighter. i've heard of men who pick fights with other people on purpose, just to see how brave they are. this man is probably like that.
peter bullcalf from the village green!
before your sentence has been completed? don't say anything else.
no, sir. he's furious because you insulted him, and he has a right to satisfaction. so go out there and give him what he wants. you can't go back into the house unless you want to fight with me, and if you're willing to do that, you might as well just go and fight with him. so go to the orchard, or take out your sword right now. you're going to have to fight one way or another, there's no doubt about that, or else you'll have to stop wearing a sword and claiming to be a gentleman.
oh yeah. let's see bullcalf.
i beg you, remember the good work i've done for you, and how i've never lied to you, never made mistakes, and never grumbled in my work. you promised to take a full year off my sentence.
this is as rude as it is strange. please, do me this one favor: find out what i've done to offend this knight. it must be something i did accidentally.
here, sir!
have you forgotten the torture i freed you from?
i will do so. mr. fabian, stay with this gentleman until i come back.
my god! what a great man! prick bullcalf until he shouts again.
no.
excuse me, sir, do you know anything about this?
oh lord! my lord, good captain, 
you have forgotten, and you think it's a burden when i ask you to walk through the ocean, or run on the north wind, or do business for me underground when the earth's frozen solid.
i know the knight is furious with you, so much that he's willing to fight you to the death, but i don't know anything else about it.
what, you're yelling before you've even been pricked?
no, i don't, sir.
what kind of man is he?
oh lord, sir! i'm a sick man.
you lie, you nasty, ungrateful thing! have you forgotten the horrid witch sycorax, stooped over with old age and ill will? have you forgotten her?
he's not much to look at, but he's very brave in battle. he really is the most skillful, bloodthirsty, and dangerous opponent you can find in illyria. do you want to go see him? i'll try to calm him down for you if i can.
what disease do you have?
no, sir.
i'd be very grateful to you if you did. i'm much more of a religious type than a fighter, and i don't care who knows it.
a nasty cold, sir. a cough, sir. i caught it when i was ringing the church bells in honor of the king's coro-nation.
you have. where was she born? speak. tell me.
wow, he's a real devil. i've never seen such a monster. i had a round with him, and his sword thrust is so deadly that you can't even duck out of the way. and when he strikes back at you, he'll hit you as sure as you're standing there. they say he used to fence for the shah of persia.
then you'll go to war in a dressing gown. we'll get rid of your cold, and i'll give orders for some of my men to ring the bells for you while you're away. (to shallow) is this everybody?
in algiers, sir.
that's it! i won't mess with him.
we've got two more here than you need. you can have four, sir. now, come inside and eat lunch with me.
oh, was she now? i'll have to tell the story again every month, since you seem to forget it. this damned witch sycorax was kicked out of algiers for various witching crimes too terrible for humans to hear about. but for one reason they refused to execute her. isn't that true?
yes, but now there's no way to calm him down. fabian can hardly control him over there.
i'll have a drink with you, but i can't stay to eat. but i'm truly glad to see you, master shallow.
yes, sir.
darn it, if i'd guessed he was so brave and such a good swordsman, i never would have challenged him. i'll give him my gray horse capilet if he forgets the whole thing.
oh, sir john, do you remember the time we spent all night in the windmill in st. george's field?
this sunken-eyed hag was brought here pregnant and left by the sailors. you, my slave, were her servant at the time, as you admit yourself. you were too delicate to carry out her horrible orders, and you refused. in a fit of rage she locked you up in a hollow pine tree, with the help of her powerful assistants, and left you there for twelve years. during that time she died, and you were trapped, moaning and groaning as fast as the blades of a mill a mill is a building with machinery for grinding grain into flour. if built next to a river, the machinery would be driven by a paddled wheel propelled by the river. mill wheel strike the water. at that time there were no people here. this island was not honored with a human being, except for the son that sycorax gave birth to here, a freckled baby born of an old hag.
i'll give it a try. stay right here and try to look good. this may end without anyone getting killed. (to himself) i'll ride your horse just like i ride you.
don't go there, master shallow. don't go there.
yes, caliban, her son.
(to fabian) he's given me his horse to try to avoid the fight, i've persuaded him that the young man is a fighting machine.
ha! that was a fun night. is jane nightwork still alive?
that's right, you stupid thing. caliban, who now serves me. you know better than anyone how tortured you were when i found you. your groans made wolves howl, and even made bears feel sorry for you. nobody but the damned souls of hell deserves the spell that sycorax put on you and couldn't undo. it was my magic that saved you when i arrived on the island and heard you, making the pine tree open and let you out.
he's just as terrified of sir andrew. he's pale and hyperventilating, as if a bear were chasing him.
she's alive, master shallow.
thank you, master.
(to viola) there's nothing you can do about it, sir. he insists on fighting with you because he swore he would. but he's thought over his reason for challenging you to fight, and he realizes it's so insignificant that it's not worth thinking about. so draw your sword so he can carry out his vow. he promises not to hurt you.
she never could stand me.
if you complain any more, i'll split an oak tree and lock you up in it till you've howled for twelve years.
(to herself) god help me! if anything happens i'm going to have to tell them exactly how unmanly i am.
never, never. she always said she couldn't stand master shallow.
please forgive me, master. i'll be obedient and do all my tasks without complaining.
back off if he seems really furious.
truly, i could anger her to the core. she was a good-looking wench then. does she still look good?
do that, and i'll set you free in two days.
come on, sir andrew, there's nothing you can do about it. the gentleman insists on fighting a round with you, for the sake of his honor. the rules of dueling say he has to. but as a gentleman and a soldier he's promised me he won't hurt you. come on, get ready.
old, old, master shallow.
that's noble of you, master. what shall i do for you? just tell me. what shall i do?
i hope to god he keeps his promise!
well, she must be old. she's got no choice but to be old. of course she's old. she gave birth to robin nightwork, the son of old man nightwork, before i even got to clement's inn.
go disguise yourself as a sea nymph. be invisible to everyone except yourself and me. take this garment, put it on, and then come back here. hurry, go!
i swear to you, i don't want to be doing this.
that's fifty-five years ago.
(to miranda) wake up, my dear. wake up. you've slept well. wake up.
put your sword away. if this young gentleman has offended you, i'll take the blame for it. if you've offended him, i'll fight you.
ha, cousin silence, if only you'd seen what this knight and i have seen! ha! am i right, sir john?
(waking up)your strange story made me groggy.
you, sir? who are you?
we've seen the clock strike midnight, master shallow.
shake off your sleepiness. come on. we'll go visit caliban, my slave who always talks to us so nastily.
i'm just a good friend of his. in fact, i'd do even more to him than what you've heard him promise to do.
we sure have, we sure have, we sure have. i swear, sir john, we sure have. our slogan was "down the hatch, boys!" come, let's have lunch, let's have lunch. jesus, the things we've seen! come, come.
he's prospero hands ariel a garment that makes him invisible. for the rest of the play, when we see him in the garment, we know he's invisible. he's an evil one, father. i don't like him.
if you're someone who gets into fights, i'll fight with you.
good master corporate bullcalf's mistake for "corporal" corporate bardolph, be my friend. here are some french crowns for you, worth four harry ten shillings a "harry ten shilling" was a ten-shilling coin minted during the reign of henry vii; by shakespeare's time, they were each worth about five shillings. harry ten shillings . i'm telling you, sir, i'd just as soon be hanged as go fight. it's not that i care about my well-being. it's just that i'm not willing to go, and furthermore, i'd like to stay here with my friends. but really, i don't care about myself.
but even so, we can't do without him. he builds our fires, gets our firewood, and does all kinds of useful things for us., hey! caliban! pile of dirt! say something.
oh, sir toby, stop! the police are here.
whatever. stand over there.
(offstage) you've got enough firewood already.
(to antonio) i'll be back for you soon.
and, good master corporal captain, for my old lady's sake, be my friend. she has nobody here to help her do anything once i'm gone. she's old and can't do much by herself. i'll give you forty shillings, sir.
come out, i order you. there's other work for you to do. come on, you turtle!
(to andrew) please, sir, put away your sword. please.
whatever. stand over there.
what a fine sight! my dear clever ariel, listen carefully. (he whispers to ariel)
i certainly will, sir. and as for what i promised to you, i'm as good as my word. you can ride him easily, and he responds well when you pull the reins.
i'll tell you the truth: i don't care one way or the other. you only die once, and we all owe god a death. i won't do anything underhanded. if it's my fate, it's my fate. if not, not. no man is too good to serve his country. whatever happens, happens. if you die this year, you're paid up for next year.
my lord, i'll do it right away.
this is the man. do your job.
well said. you're a good man.
(to caliban) you horrible slave, with a wicked hag for a mother and the devil himself for a father, come out!
antonio, you're under arrest on the orders of count orsino.
i'm telling you. i won't do anything underhanded.
i hope you both get drenched with a dew as evil as what my mother used to collect with a crow's feather from the poison swamps. may a hot southwest wind blow on you and cover you with blisters all over.
you must be mistaking me for someone else, sir.
all right, sir. which men can i have?
i'll give you cramps for saying that, horrible pains in your sides that will keep you from breathing. i'll send goblins out at night to work their nasty deeds on you. you'll be pricked all over, and it'll sting like bees.
no, sir, not at all. i recognize your face perfectly, even without a sailor's cap on your head., take him away. he knows i recognize him.
any four you choose.
i have to eat my dinner now. this island belongs to me because sycorax, my mother, left it to me. but you've taken it from me. when you first got here, you petted me and took care of me, you would give me water with berries in it, and you taught me the names for the sun and the moon, the big light and the smaller light that burn in daytime and nighttime. i loved you back then. i showed you all the features of the island, the freshwater springs, the saltwater pits, the barren places and the fertile ones. i curse myself for doing that! i wish i could use all the magic spells of sycorax against you and plague you with toads, beetles, and bats. i'm the only subject you have in your kingdom, and you were my first king, and you pen me up in this cave and don't let me go anywhere else on the island.
i have to obey. (to viola) this has happened because i came looking for you, but there's nothing i can do about it now. i'll take what's coming to me. but what'll you do now that i have to ask you for my purse back?
sir, may i have a word with you? (whispers to falstaff) i've gotten three pounds to free mouldy and bullcalf.
you liar, you respond better to the whip than to kindness! i took good care of you, piece of filth that you are, and let you stay in my own hut until you tried to rape my daughter.
i'm more upset about not being able to help you than i am about what's going to happen to me. you look so confused. don't worry about me.
no kidding. great.
oh ho, oh ho! i wish i had! you stopped me. if you hadn't, i would have filled this island with a race of calibans.
come on, sir, let's go.
come on, sir john, which four do you want?
you horrid slave, you can't be trained to be good, and you're capable of anything evil! i pitied you, worked hard to teach you to speak, and taught you some new thing practically every hour. when you didn't know what you were saying, and were babbling like an animal, i helped you find words to make your point understandable. but you had bad blood in you, no matter how much you learned, and good people couldn't stand to be near you. so you got what you deserved, and were locked up in this cave, which is more fitting for the likes of you than a prison would be.
(to viola) really, i must ask you for some of that money.
you pick.
you taught me language, and all i can do with it is curse. damn you for teaching me your language!
what money, sir? i feel sorry for you in this situation, and i want to thank you for the kindness you've shown me here, so i'll lend you some of my money, though i don't have much. i'll give you half of everything i have right now. take this. it's half of all my money. (she offers him money)
all right, then. mouldy, bullcalf, feeble, and shadow.
get out of here, you son of a bitch! bring us wood, and be quick about it. are you shrugging and making faces, you evil thing? if you neglect my orders or do them grudgingly, i'll double you up with pains and cramps, and make all your bones ache, and make you scream so loud that the wild animals will tremble when they hear you.
are you really going to pretend you don't know me now? after everything i've done for you, you're refusing to help me? don't make me more miserable than i am. i might do something really weak and unmanly, like listing the kind things i've done for you.
mouldy and bullcalf. mouldy, you stay home till you're too old to fight. and as for you, bullcalf, wait till you've reached fighting age. i don't want either of you.
no, please. (to himself) i have to obey. he's got such strong magic powers that he could conquer and enslave the god, setebos, that my mother used to worship.
i don't know any kind things you've done for me, and i don't recognize your voice or your face. i hate an ungrateful man more than i hate lying, vanity, babbling, drunkenness, or any other vice that we feeble human beings are susceptible to., 
sir john, sir john. don't make a mistake. they're the best men of the bunch, and i want you to have only the best.
go then, slave.
oh, my god!
master shallow, are you going to tell me how to choose a soldier? do you think i care about a man's body,
(singing) come onto these yellow sands, and we'll join hands, when you've curtsied and kissed the waves into silence. prance lightly here and there, and the sweet spirits bear the burden. listen, listen!
come on, sir, please. let's go.
strength, height, bulk, and overall size? give me his spirit, master shallow! take a look at wart. you see how ragged he looks? he can load and fire steadily, as steadily as a tinsmith's hammer. he can advance and regroup fast, faster than a brewer's delivery pail can be refilled. and this skinny guy, shadow, give me this man. he offers no target to the enemy. the enemy might as well try aiming at a knife's edge. and as for retreating, feeble, the woman's tailor, will run faster than you can imagine. oh, give me the spare men and spare me the great ones! bardolph, give wart a musket.
(refrain of the song is heard offstage, from different places, not in unison) bow-wow.
no, i've got something to say. i saved this young man's life when he was half-dead, and nursed him back to health lovingly and tenderly. i devoted myself to him, since he looked noble and good.
here you go, wart. present arms! right shoulder, arms! left shoulder, arms!
the watchdogs bark.
why should we care? time's passing. let's go!
come on, handle your weapon. yes, good. very good. very, very good. oh, give me a little, skinny, old, dried-out, bald rifleman any day. good job, wart. you're a good scab of a guy. wait, here's a tester tester = sixpence tester for you.
(offstage) bow-wow.
but oh, what a deceiver he turned out to be! you don't live up to your good looks, sebastian. you look good but you're bad on the inside, where it counts, since the only real flaws in nature are in a person's mind and soul. only really cruel people can be called deformed. virtue is beauty, but someone beautiful and wicked is like an empty box decorated by the devil.
he's no expert. he's not doing it right. i remember up at mile-end park, when i was at clement's inn, i played the fool in the archery pageant. there was a nimble little guy, and he would handle his weapon like this, and he would run all over the place, and he'd charge and charge. "rat-a-tat tat," he'd say. "bang!" he'd say. then he'd run away, then come back. i never saw anybody like him.
listen, listen! i hear the tune of the strutting rooster who cries cock-a-doodle-doo.
the man's going crazy. take him away. come on, sir. come on.
these guys will be fine, master shallow. god bless you, master silence, i won't say much to you. farewell, gentlemen, and thank you. i have to march twelve miles tonight. bardolph, give the soldiers uniforms.
where's that music coming from? from the earth, or the air? it's stopped now, it must be played for some local god of the island. as i sat on the shore crying over my father's shipwreck, i heard the music creep over the wild waves, calming their fury and soothing my own grief with its sweet melodies. i followed it here, or i should say it dragged me here. but now it's stopped. no, there it is again.
take me.
god bless you, sir john. may god bring you good luck, and bring us peace. when you come back, pay us
(singing) your father lies five whole fathoms fathom = feet fathoms below, his bones have turned to coral now. his eyes have turned to pearls. there's nothing left of him, he's undergone a complete sea change and become something rich and strange. sea nymphs ring his death bell every hour.
he was so angry i feel he must really believe what he was saying. i don't believe it. yet i wish i could. oh, please be true, please let it be that this man has mistaken me for you, my dear brother!
a visit. let's renew our old friendship. maybe i'll even come with you to the royal court!
(refrain, offstage)ding-dong.
come here, sir andrew. you too, fabian. we've got some words of wisdom to mull over.
i swear, i wish you would, master shallow.
listen, i hear them.
he called me sebastian. i know my brother's still alive in a sense, since i see him whenever i look in the mirror. my brother looked like me, and he dressed the same way that i'm dressed now, in the same colors,
i meant what i said. may god keep you.
ding dong, bell.
with the same accessories. oh, if it turns out to be true that he survived, then that storm was kind, and the ocean was full of love!
farewell, gentle gentlemen.
this song's about my dead father. it couldn't be sung by mere mortals. i hear it now overhead.
he's a very dishonest, puny boy, and more cowardly than a rabbit. he abandoned his friend here in an emergency, and even pretended he didn't know him. that shows he's dishonest. as for his cowardliness, ask fabian.
march, bardolph. lead the men away.
(to miranda) raise the curtains of your eyelids and go take a peek at what you can see out there.
he's a coward, a total coward. he's religiously devoted to his cowardice.
when i come back, i'll expose these judges for the frauds that they are. i can see through this judge shallow. lord, lord; we old men sure know how to tell lies! this dried-up old judge has done nothing but go on and on to me about how wild he was when he was as a youth, and how many stunts he pulled in the seedy parts of town. every third word he speaks is a lie, and he'll tell lies quicker than a turk will scramble to pay the sultan. i remember him at clement's inn: he looked like a man someone carved after dinner out of a scrap of cheese. when he was naked he looked like a mandrake root the turkish sultan exacted notoriously harsh punishments on those who failed to pay him on time. mandrake root , with a fanciful head someone had carved in with a knife. he was so skinny that he was invisible to any man with imperfect vision; he truly was the embodiment of starvation. but he was as horny as a monkey: the whores called him "mandrake," because mandrake stimulates the sex drive. he was always a little bit behind the times. he would hear the wagon drivers sing their songs, and then he'd go to his worn-out whores and sing them what he'd heard, pretending he had written them himself. and now this vile stick has become a landowner, and he talks about john of gaunt like he was his own brother. i swear, he only saw gaunt
what is it? a spirit? lord, it's glancing every which way! how handsome it is. it must be a spirit.
by god, i'll go after him again and beat him up.
once, and that was in the arena at the jousting tournament; john of gaunt cut shallow's head with his sword. i saw it all, and i told john of gaunt that he had beaten his own name, since shallow was such a gaunt man back then. you could fit him and all his clothes into the skin an eel sheds. an instrument case was as huge as a mansion to him, as big as a courtroom. now he has land and livestock. well, i'll be his friend if i come back. he won't like it, but i'll turn him into an unending source of wealth for myself. if small fish can be bait for big fish, i see no reason why i can't snap my jaws at shallow. time will tell, and that's all i have to say about that.
no, girl! it eats and sleeps and has the same five senses we do. the gentleman you see now was in the shipwreck, and if he weren't a little spoiled by grief, which always ruins good looks, you could call him handsome. he's lost his comrades and is wandering around looking for them.
please do. beat him up well, but don't draw your sword.
what's the name of this forest?
i could imagine he's divine, since i never saw anything so noble-looking on earth before.
i swear i will, 
gaultree forest, your grace.
(to himself) it's all happening according to plan, just as my soul wanted it to happen. (to ariel) spirit, you fine spirit, i'll set you free in two days for doing such a good job here.
come on, let's go see what happens.
stop here, sirs. send out scouts to find out how many soldiers our enemy has.
(seeing miranda) this must surely be the goddess that the music is being played for!, please, i beg you to answer me, tell me if you live on this island, and tell me how i should behave here. my main question, which i save for the last, is, oh, you marvelous creature!, are you a maiden or a goddess?
i'll bet anything you like that nothing will happen, once again.
we've already done that.
i'm not marvelous, sir, but i'm certainly a maiden.
are you trying to tell me that i wasn't sent to get you?
well done. my friends and brothers in this great undertaking, i have to share with you that i've received new letters from northumberland. they have a chilling purpose, tone, and content. he says that he wishes he could be here in person, with an army as strong someone of his rank should have, but he couldn't raise one. so he's going to go to scotland to increase his power. he prays that your armies will prevail against the terrible power of the enemy.
she speaks my language! my god, i'm the highest-ranking person who speaks this language, if only we were back where it's spoken.
oh, who cares, you're acting like a fool. leave me alone.
and with that, any hope we had for him is thrown to the ground and dashed to pieces.
what's that? the highest-ranking? what would the king of naples do if he heard you say that?
good for you, holding out on me like this! no, i don't know you, and my lady didn't send me to get you, and i'm not supposed to tell you to come speak with her, and your name is not master cesario, and this is not my nose, either. nothing is what it is.
what's happening?
he would just see me for what i am, a person amazed to hear you talking about naples. he does hear me, and that makes me cry. i myself am the king of naples, since i saw with my own eyes, these eyes that haven't been dry since, my father killed in a shipwreck.
oh please, go somewhere else to blab your nonsense. you don't know me.
the enemy is west of this forest, and less than a mile away. they look powerful, and, from the amount of space they're taking up, i'd say they have close to thirty thousand soldiers.
ah, how pitiful!
blab my nonsense? he must've heard that phrase describing some great man and now he's using it on a jester. blab my nonsense! what an idiotic place this world is. now please stop being so strange and tell me what exactly i should blab to my lady. should i blab to her that you're coming?
that's exactly the number we thought they had. let's march ahead and engage them in battle.
yes, indeed, and all the king's men, the duke of milan and his fine son too.
please, fool, go away. here's money for you. (giving him money) if you stay any longer, i'll give you something worse.
who's this well-equipped leader coming here to confront us?
(to himself) the real duke of milan and his far finer daughter could beat you in a heartbeat, if it were the right time. they've fallen in love at first sight!, wonderful ariel, i'll set you free for doing such good work here. (to ferdinand) could i have a word with you, sir? i'm afraid you've made a mistake. just a word.
well, well. you're a generous man. wise men who give fools money might get a good reputation, if they keep up regular payments for fourteen years.
i think it's lord westmoreland.
(to herself) why is my father speaking to him so rudely? this is the third man i've ever seen in my life, and the first one i've felt romantic feelings for. i hope my father takes pity on me and treats him well for my sake!
well, sir, we meet again? take that.
our general, the prince lord john of lancaster, sends greetings and wishes you good health.
oh, if you're a virgin, and you haven't given your heart to another man, then i'll make you the queen of naples.
(returning the blow) well, then, take that, and that, and that. is everyone here insane?
speak in peace, lord westmoreland. what's the reason you've come here?
hang on, sir! just a moment. (to himself) they're both in love. but i need to cause a little trouble between them, or else they'll never appreciate the value of their love. (to ferdinand) i need a word with you, sir. i order you to listen to me. you're calling yourself by a name that doesn't belong to you. you've come onto this island as a spy, to snatch it away from me, i'm the rightful lord of it.
stop right now or i'll throw your dagger over the roof.
the most important part of my message is for you, your grace. you, who are a holy man, and these good gentlemen as well, you would not be here, lending dignity to this bloody insurrection, if it appeared as rebellion normally does: like a lowborn mob, led by bloody youths uniformed in rags, and supported by boys and beggars.
no, i swear, that's not true!
(to himself) i'm going to tell my lady about this right away. i wouldn't be in any of your shoes if you paid me.
you, lord archbishop, whose diocese is peaceful and law-abiding; whose beard has turned white, signifying a peaceful life; whose education and learning are the products of peaceful times; who is the dove and very blessed embodiment of peace, why are you translating yourself from the graceful language of peace into the harsh, violent language of war? you're turning your books into coffins, your ink into blood, your pens into swords, and your holy words into a trumpet that sounds a call to arms.
a man as handsome as that can't have anything evil in him. if the devil had such a beautiful house as his body, then good things would fight to live in it.
(grabbing sebastian) come on, sir, stop!
why am i doing this? that is the question. the short answer is this: we're all sick. we've eaten and drunk too much and stayed up all night, and now we have a burning fever whose only cure is bloodletting. richard, our late king, was infected with this disease and died from it. but, my good lord westmoreland, i'm not here as a physician, nor am i marching with this army as an enemy of peace. what i'm doing is making a frightening show of war, to stop people from indulging all their vices. this will clear the hardening of the arteries which threatens to kill us all. let me speak more plainly. i've carefully considered the options, weighing the harm our armies are likely to cause against the harm we're already suffering, and i find that our grievances are stronger than our offenses. we can see where things are headed, and the rough times ahead leave us with no choice but to step away from our quiet lives. we have a list of grievances which we can publish at the appropriate time. we offered that list to the king a long time ago, but we could never get an audience with him.
(to ferdinand) follow me. (to miranda) don't defend him. he's a traitor. (to ferdinand) come on, i'll chain your neck and feet together, and i'll give you sea water to drink. your food will be slugs, dry roots, and acorn shells. come on.
no, leave him alone. i'll get back at him another way. i'll sue him for assault and battery, if there's any justice in illyria. it doesn't matter that i hit him first.
we were wronged, and when we tried to speak to the king about it, we were denied access to him by the very men who had wronged us most. we're in this seemingly unbefitting armor because of the terrible recent violence, the bloodshed from which is still visible on the ground, and because of the terrible things happening now, every minute. we don't want to harm peace in any way. we want instead to establish a peace that's real and meaningful.
no, i'll have to decline that offer, at least as long as i'm stronger than you are.
(to sir toby belch) let me go.
when was your request to see the king denied? how has the king harmed you? what lord in the king's court has been sent out to do you wrong? and why would you put your holy stamp of approval on an illegal uprising and give religious blessing to a violent civil war?
oh, dear father, don't judge him too quickly. he's a good man, and brave too.
no, sir, i won't let you go. come on, put your sword away, my little soldier. you're awfully eager to fight. come on.
the grievances the original text of this difficult passage may be corrupted; its exact meaning is obscure. grievances borne by my fellow englishmen, and the cruel murder of scroop, my own brother: these are the reasons i've made this fight my own.
what's that? the daughter knows more than the father?, put away your sword, traitor. you make quite a show there, but you're too scared to strike at me, since you feel too guilty. get out of that position, because i can disarm you with my magic wand and make your sword drop.
i'll get free of you.
there's no need for any repayment like that; and even if there were, you should not be the person to benefit.
please, father, i beg you.
what are you going to do now? if you insist on trying my patience any further, then take out your sword right now.
why shouldn't he benefit at least a little? why shouldn't we all benefit, who suffered in these recent battles, and who have allowed our honor to be damaged by the terrible things happening now?
let go of me! don't tug on my clothes.
what? no. because then i'd have to shed an ounce or two of your impudent blood.
oh, my good lord mowbray, if you think about what is necessary in times of war, you'll see that it is the situation
father, take pity on him. i'll guarantee his goodness myself.
stop, sir toby! i order you to stop!
that harms you, and not the king himself. but as for you in particular, it seems to me that you have no foundation on which to build a quarrel with either the king or your current situation. wasn't the entire estate of the duke of norfolk, your father, just given back to you?
quiet! if you say one more word, i'll punish you, maybe even hate you. you're defending an impostor? be quiet. you think he's special, since you've only ever seen him and caliban. foolish girl, in the eyes of most people this man's a caliban, and compared to him, they're angels.
madam!
what did my father lose that i now need to restore? richard, the king at the time, loved my father, but given what was happening he had no choice but to banish him. and then, at coventry, my father and harry bolingbroke met in a formal challenge the duel between bolingbroke (now king henry) and norfolk (mowbray's father) occurs in richard ii, . . challenge . they were both mounted on their horses and ready to charge. their horses were neighing, anxiously waiting for their riders' spurs to drive them forward. their steel-tipped lances were ready for the attack. the visors of their helmets were down. their eyes were on fire behind the steel slits. the trumpet sounded, and then, when there was nothing that could have stopped my father from killing bolingbroke, the king prevented the fight by throwing down his royal scepter. that scepter was a symbol of his life; when he threw it down, he threw down his life and the lives of every man that has since died at war under the leadership of bolingbroke.
then my love is humble. i don't feel any urge to see a more handsome man than this one.
are you always going to be like this? you're an ungrateful slob who's only fit to live in the mountains, in caves far from civilized people where you won't ever need good manners! get out of my sight!, dear cesario, please don't be offended., get out of here, you barbarian!
you don't know what you're talking about, lord mowbray. bolingbroke at the time was considered the bravest gentleman in england. who knows who would have won that fight? but even if your father had won, he never would have made it out of coventry. the whole country hated him, and they loved and prayed for bolingbroke.
(to ferdinand) come on. obey my orders. your muscles are all limp and lifeless.
oh, my dear friend, please don't get too upset by these rude people who bothered you. come with me to my house. i'll tell you about all the pointless, clumsy pranks this thug uncle of mine has come up with, so that you can laugh at this one. you have to come with me. please don't say no. damn that toby! he made my heart leap for you.
they blessed him and adored him even more than the king. but i digress. i was sent here by our general, the prince, to hear your grievances, and to tell you that he's prepared to listen to you. if it appears that your demands are legitimate, he'll give you what you want, except for those things which might suggest that you're his enemies.
that's true, they are. my strength is all gone, as if in a dream. the death of my father, my physical weakness, the loss of all my friends, the threats of this man who's taken me prisoner, all that would be easy for me to take, if only i could look through my prison windows once a day and see this girl. i don't need any more freedom than that. a prison like that would give me enough liberty.
(to himself) what does this mean? where is this all going? either i'm insane or this is a dream. i hope these
but he's made us force him to listen to us. his offer isn't motivated by love; it's a political move.
(to himself) it's working! (to ferdinand) come on. (to himself) you've done well, ariel. (to ferdinand) follow me. (to ariel) listen to what you'll do for me next.
delusions continue. if this is a dream, let me keep on sleeping!
mowbray, you're out of line to think that. his offer is made out of mercy, not fear. just look, you can see our army from here. i give you my word of honor: that army is so confident, it won't even allow the thought of fear to enter. our army has more important people than yours, and better soldiers; our armor is every bit as strong as yours, and our cause is better. it's only logical that we should be as courageous as you are. so don't say you've forced the prince to do anything at all.
(to ferdinand) don't worry, my father's kinder than his words just now make him sound. what he said didn't sound like him at all.
come with me, please. i wish you'd do what i ask!
well, i say we won't agree to any conference.
(to ariel) you'll be free as a bird. but you have to do exactly what i order.
madam, i will.
that just proves that what you're doing here is shameful. a rotten container falls apart at the touch; likewise, a rotten cause cannot withstand scrutiny and argument.
down to the last detail.
oh, say it, and mean it!
has the king given prince john his full authorization to listen to our complaint, and address it in any way the prince sees fit?
(to ferdinand) come, follow me. (to miranda) don't defend him.
no, i'm telling you, put on this robe and beard. make him think you're sir topas the priest. be quick. meanwhile, i'll get sir toby.
that goes without saying. i'm amazed you'd even ask such a foolish question.
(to alonso) please cheer up, sir. like all of us, you have a good reason to be happy. the fact that we're alive outweighs our losses. many people every day feel the sadness we feel now. every day some sailor's wife, a ship's crew, the merchant who hired the ship all experience the same loss we've undergone. but the miracle, the fact that we were saved, only happens to a few people out of millions. so remember that, and take comfort in it, to counterbalance our sadness.
well, i'll put it on and disguise myself. i wish i were the first person who ever told lies in a priest's robe.
then, lord westmoreland, take this document. it lists our grievances. if each complaint listed here is addressed, and if everyone on our side, both here and elsewhere, is granted a full pardon and immediate satisfaction of our demands, then we'll return to our own boundaries again and work together for the cause of peace.
please say no more.
i'm not tall enough to make a believable priest, or skinny enough to look like a good student. but if you're an honest man and a good host, that's almost as good as being moral and studious. here come the conspirators.
i'll show this to the general. please, let's meet at a place where both our armies can see us. then either let our talks end in peace, god willing!, or let us take the fight to the battlefield where it will be decided.
(to antonio) alonso enjoys these comforting words about as much as cold oatmeal.
god bless you, mr. priest.
my lord, we will do so.
(to sebastian) but the goodwill ambassador won't give up that easily.
bonos dies the fool is saying hello in an imitation of latin. bonos dies , sir toby. as the old hermit of prague, who couldn't read or write, said very wittily to a niece of king gorboduc, "whatever is, is." so since i'm mr. priest, i'm mr. priest. because isn't "that" "that," and isn't "is" "is"?
something in my heart tells me that no peace we agree to could possibly last.
(to antonio) look. he's like a clock winding up to strike the hour.
go to him, sir topas.
don't worry about that. if we can come to terms that are as comprehensive as the ones we're insisting upon, then the peace will be as durable as rocky mountains.
(to alonso) sir, 
(disguising his voice) quiet down in this prison!
yes, but in the future the king will think so poorly of us that every little slight, every false accusation, every tiny, silly, frivolous thing will seem to him to be a revival of this rebellion. even if we were as devoted to the king as martyrs are to their causes, he'll regard us so skeptically that even the good things we do for him
(to antonio) there he goes! now we can tell what time it is.
the fool's a good actor. a good fool.
won't count; he won't be able to distinguish them from the bad.
if we let every sad thing that happens to us get us down, then we would find ourselves, 
(offstage) who's shouting?
no, no, sir. listen, the king is tired of getting upset over every little thing. he's discovered that ending one problem by killing someone only creates two bigger problems in the people left alive. so from now on, he'll wipe his memory clean, and forget anything that might remind him of the bad things from his past. he knows that he can't just eliminate every single opponent who crops up. his enemies are rooted in with his friends, to the extent that, if he tries to pull up an enemy, he'll also uproot and discard a friend. this country's like a misbehaving wife, who, just when her husband is about to hit her, holds his baby up, and freezes the intended punishment in the very arm that was poised to apply it.
what a pain.
i'm sir topas the priest. i've come to visit malvolio the lunatic.
besides, the king has expended all his energy for punishment on the recent rebellion. he has nothing left to punish with. his power is like a lion with no teeth: it can threaten, but it can't do any harm.
pain, yes indeed. we would find ourselves in pain. you thought you were being funny, but you said the truth.
sir topas, sir topas, good sir topas, please go find my lady olivia, 
that's true. rest assured, my good lord marshal, if our reconciliation is sincere, then peace will be like a broken bone, which grows stronger for having once been broken.
you're taking it more seriously than i meant it.
get out, demon! why are you bothering this poor man! can't you talk about anything besides ladies?
i hope so. lord westmoreland is back.
(to alonso) therefore, sir, 
(to himself) well said, mr. priest.
the prince is nearby. if you will, please meet him at a spot halfway between our two armies.
(to sebastian) god, doesn't he ever shut up?
sir topas, nobody's ever been as badly treated as i've been. good sir topas, don't believe i'm insane, they've shut me up here in horrible darkness.
your grace, archbishop of york, go forward in god's name.
(to gonzalo) please, no more.
you should be ashamed of yourself, satan, you liar! i'm being gentle with you, because i'm one of those good-hearted people who are polite to the devil himself. you call this house dark?
lead on, and greet his highness. (to westmoreland) sir, we're on our way.
well, i'm nearly finished. but just one last thing, 
dark as hell, sir topas.
i'm glad to see you, my cousin mowbray. good day to you, gentle archbishop, and to you, lord hastings, and to all. lord archbishop, it was better to see you when worshippers, called together by the church bell, surrounded you to hear biblical sermons than it is to see you here, in armor; cheering a mob of rebels with your war drums, turning your words to weapons, and your life into death. when a man is close to the king's heart, and grows strong under the king's protection, only to turn against him, alas! what evils that man will unleash, hidden from view by the king's own reputation! this is exactly how it is with you, lord bishop. who hasn't heard how profound your religious knowledge is? to us, you were our representative in god's own parliament. to us, you might as well have been
(to antonio) he insists on talking.
but it has bay windows that are as transparent as stone walls, and the upper windows facing south-north are as clear as coal. but you're still complaining of darkness and a bad view?
god's own voice: the interpreter and ambassador between god's heavenly ways and our own dull, mortal actions. and now, who would say anything but that you are abusing the holiness of your position, using the outward show of godliness to do terrible things, like a treacherous courtier uses the king's good name? you have pretended to be acting in god's name as you encourage the subjects of god's deputy, my father, to rise up against the peace of both heaven and the king.
hey, let's bet. which one will start yammering first, gonzalo or adrian?
i'm not insane, sir topas. i'm telling you, this house is dark.
good lord of lancaster, i am not here as an enemy your father's peace. but, as i told westmoreland, these tumultuous times have forced us to behave in these monstrous ways, out of common sense and a regard for our own safety. i sent you a detailed list of our grievances, but you angrily shoved it aside. that's why this hydra of a war the hydra was a monster with many heads; each time a head was cut off, a new one would grow in its place. hydra of a war has broken out. you can get rid of it by agreeing to the just and right things we demand. if you do that, this disease of war will be cured, and the monster will bow at your feet, tame and obedient.
the old guy.
you're wrong, you madman. there's no darkness except ignorance, and you're more ignorant than the egyptians during the plague of fog.
if you don't, we're ready to fight to the last man.
i pick the younger one.
i tell you, this house is as dark as ignorance. and i tell you, no man has ever been treated worse than me. i'm no more insane than you are, and i'll prove it. ask me any commonsense question.
and if those of us who are here should fail, we have reinforcements standing by. if they fail, they have reinforcements to back them up,
you're on. what's the prize?
what was the philosopher pythagoras's belief about wild birds?
and in this way the fight will go on from father to son for all time until england itself has no more new generations.
a good laugh.
that our grandmother's soul could end up inhabiting a bird.
you're not wise enough, hastings, not wise enough at all to see into eternity.
it's a deal!
what do you think of his belief?
your highness, why not tell them directly what you think of their list of grievances.
though this island may appear desolate, 
i respect the soul very much, so i disagree with his belief.
i agree with all of them, and i admit that they're legitimate. i swear, on my family's honor: my father's intentions have been misunderstood, and some of his subordinates have overstepped their authority in executing his orders. (to archbishop) sir, we will make good on the wrongs that have been done to you, i swear on my soul. if this pleases you, then disperse your armies and send them back where they came from; we shall do the same. and here, where both armies can see us, we'll embrace and drink a friendly toast to one another. the soldiers will go home with evidence that we're friends once again.
(to sebastian) ha, ha, ha!
well then, goodbye. stay in the dark. i'll only admit that you're sane when you agree with pythagoras and hesitate to kill a bird because it might contain your grandmother's soul. goodbye.
i'll take your word as a prince that you'll make good on these things.
fine, you win.
sir topas, sir topas!
i give you my word, and i'll keep it. and with that, i drink a toast to you.
uninhabitable and almost inaccessible, as it were, 
the brilliant sir topas!
go, captain. tell the army this news of peace. pay them, and send them away. i know it will make them happy. hurry, captain.
now he's going to say "but", 
i can do anything!
here's to you, good lord westmoreland.
but, 
you could've done this without your beard and gown. he couldn't see you.
i drink to your grace. if you knew how hard i've worked to bring about this peaceful resolution, you'd really drink up. but my love for you will be more apparent from now on.
he had to say it, it was unavoidable.
now talk to him in your own voice, and tell me how he is. i wish this trick would be over. if we can find a convenient way to let him go, i want to do it. i'm in so much trouble with my niece that it wouldn't be safe to let this prank go to its conclusion. come to my room later on.
i don't doubt it.
the island must be mild, and have a temperate climate.
(he sings in his own voice) hey, robin, jolly robin, tell me how your lady is.
i'm glad. and here's to your health, my gentle cousin lord mowbray.
i knew temperance, she was a fine girl.
fool!
you wish me good health at a very good moment, because for some reason i'm suddenly feeling ill.
yes, and she was mild too.
(singing) my lady's mean, and that's a fact.
men are always merry in the face of bad situations, but a heavy heart predicts a happy event.
there's always a breath of fresh air here.
fool!
so be happy, kinsman. a sudden feeling of melancholy is just a sign that says, "something good is coming tomorrow."
a breath from rotten lungs, maybe.
(singing) oh, i'm sorry, why is she mean?
believe me, i'm in really good spirits.
stinking like a swamp.
fool, i say!
which is not a good thing, if your own rule is correct.
this island contains everything beneficial to life.
(singing) she loves someone else, who's shouting?
the news of peace has been announced. listen to them shout!
true. everything except something to live on.
good fool, good jester, i'll make it worth your while if you get me a candle, and a pen, ink and paper. you have my word as a gentleman that i'll always be grateful to you.
they sound like they are cheering a victory.
there's little or nothing of that.
master malvolio?
peace is a victory of sorts: both sides stop fighting honorably, but neither loses.
look how lush and healthy the grass is! how green!
yes, good fool.
go and disperse our army, too, lord westmoreland.
the ground is brown.
poor man, how did you go insane?
good archbishop, let's have both our troops march past us here so that we can see the men we would have fought against.
with a touch of green in it.
fool, no one has ever been as mistreated as i am. i'm completely sane, fool. i'm as sane as you are.
go, lord hastings, and have them march past before they're dismissed.
he doesn't miss a thing.
as sane as me? then you really are insane, if you're no saner than a fool.
i hope, sirs, that we'll spend tonight in the same camp.
no, he just gets reality completely wrong.
they treat me like garbage here. they keep me in darkness, and send idiotic priests to talk to me, those asses!, and do everything they can to insist i'm insane.
cousin, why is our army still standing?
but the really unbelievable thing is, and this is incredible, 
be careful what you say, the priest is here. (in the voice of sir topas) malvolio, malvolio, may heaven make you sane again! try to sleep, and stop your pointless babbling.
the leaders have orders from you to stand fast, and they won't disperse until they hear you give the order.
as most unbelievable things are.
sir topas!
they know how to follow orders.
that our clothes were drenched with sea water, but they came out looking brand-new.
(as sir topas) don't talk to him, my friend. (in his own voice) who, me, sir? not me, sir. god be with you, sir topas, goodbye. (as sir topas) well then, amen. (in his own voice) goodbye, sir.
our army is already dispersed. they've headed off to the east, west, north, and south like young bulls whose yokes have been removed. the men are like children after school, each hurrying toward their homes or the playground.
listen to him. if his clothes could talk, they'd call him a liar.
fool, fool, hey, fool!
that's good news, lord hastings. and hearing it, i now arrest you, traitor, for high treason. and you, archbishop, and you, lord mowbray. i arrest you both for capital treason.
or stuff what he says into their pockets.
please, sir, be quiet. what do you want to say, sir? i've just been scolded for speaking to you.
is this action just and honorable?
seriously, i think our clothes are as fresh now as they were the day we put them on in africa, when we attended the marriage of the king's daughter claribel to the king of tunis.
be a nice fool and help me find a candle and some paper. i tell you, i'm as sane as any man in illyria.
was your rebellion just and honorable?
it was a lovely wedding, and we're doing really well on our trip home.
if only you were, sir.
will you break faith with us like this?
tunis has never had such a beautiful queen.
i swear i am. get me some ink, paper, and a candle. i'll write a letter and you'll take it to my lady. you'll get a bigger reward than you ever got delivering a letter before.
i never promised you my faith. i promised to make good on the grievances you complained of. and, on my honor, i will do that as carefully as possible. but now, you rebels will get exactly what you deserve for the things you've done. you raised armies over nothing, brought them here stupidly, and then foolishly sent them away. bang on our drums! capture the soldiers who are scattering away. god, not we, has fought today and won. guards, escort these traitors to the place of their death. that's where treason belongs, and where they'll draw their last breath.
not since the days of widow dido according to greek legend, dido was the founder of the city of carthage, on the coast of africa dido .
i'll help you. but tell me honestly, are you sure you're not insane? or are you just pretending?
what's your name, sir? what's your rank, and where are you from?
widow? why the hell is he calling her "widow dido"?
believe me, i'm not. i'm telling the truth.
i am a knight, sir. my name is coleville of the valley.
next thing you know, he'll be saying "widower aeneas."
i'll never believe a madman until i can see his brains. but i'll get you a candle and paper and ink.
well, then, coleville is your name, your rank is knight, and the valley is where you're from. coleville will still be your name now that "traitor" is your rank, and the dungeon is where you'll be. it's a place so deep that you'll still be in a kind of valley.
"widow dido," did you say? i'm not sure about that. dido was from carthage, not tunis.
fool, i'll repay you for this favor. please, hurry.
aren't you sir john falstaff?
tunis gonzalo is mistaken in identifying carthage with tunis. tunis was carthage, sir.
(he sings) i'm going now, sir, but soon i'll be with you again, to help you resist the devil, like the sidekick in the old plays who shakes a wooden dagger, fumes in rage and wrath, and shouts "whoa!" to the devil. he yells, "trim your nails, old man. and goodbye, satan, you peasant."
i'm as good a man as falstaff, whoever i am. will you surrender? or am i going to have to break a sweat making you surrender? if i sweat, the drops will be the tears of your loved ones, weeping over your death. so you'd better get scared and start to shake, and start praying to me for mercy.
carthage?
this is the air, that's the glorious sun. i can feel and see this pearl she gave me. i may be dazed and confused, but i'm not insane. where's antonio, then? i didn't find him at the elephant. but he'd been there before me, and they told me he'd gone out looking for me. i could really use his advice right now. i feel sure this situation is due to some mistake, and i don't think i'm crazy. but this sudden flood of good luck is so unbelievable that i'm ready to distrust my own eyes and my own rational mind when they tell me i'm not insane, maybe the lady's insane. but if that were the case, she wouldn't be able to run her house, command her servants, listen to reports, make decisions, and take care of business as smoothly as she does. there's something going on that's not what it seems. but here she comes.
i think you are sir john falstaff, and so i surrender.
i'm telling you, it was carthage.
(to sebastian) don't be angry with me for acting so quickly. if your intentions toward me are honorable, come with me and this holy man into the chapel over there, where you can soothe all my worries by making your marriage vows to me. the priest will keep it secret until you're ready to make the news public and we can throw a full marriage celebration that befits my social standing. what do you say?
my enormous belly can speak in many languages, and each language proclaims my name and my name alone. if i had a moderately sized belly, all i'd be is an anonymous but very successful soldier. but my belly, my belly, my belly blows my cover. here comes the general.
gonzalo is a miracle-worker. if he says carthage was here, then carthage must be here.
i'll follow the priest and go with you; and after i've sworn to be faithful, i'll be faithful forever.
the danger's over: let's stop here.
what miracle will he work next?
then lead the way, father. i want the skies bright and shining to show its approval of our wedding.
call off the operation, westmoreland.
i think he'll carry this island home in his pocket and give it to his son like an apple.
if you're my friend, you'll let me see his letter.
falstaff, where have you been all this time? when everything is over, that's when you start. this habit of laziness of yours will bust a gallows to bits one of these days, mark my words.
and then throw the seeds in the sea, to make more islands grow.
dear mr. fabian, do me another favor first.
i'm sorry to hear you say that: i never realized that brave behavior should be rewarded with scolding and admonishing. do you think i'm a bird, or an arrow, or a bullet? with this old, broken-down body, do you think i can move as fast as thought? i've gotten here as fast as humanly possible. i've burned out more than horses, and, even though i'm spent from all that travel, i've managed, with my extraordinary bravery, to capture sir john coleville of the valley, a brave knight and terrible enemy. but so what? he simply saw me and surrendered. so i can say, just like julius caesar, that "i came, i saw, i conquered."
yes indeed.
anything.
he was just being polite; it's not as if you did something to deserve it.
absolutely, yes indeed.
don't ask to see this letter.
i don't know about that. here he is: i turn him over to you. please, sir, have it added to the record of things accomplished today. if you don't, i'll have a ballad printed about it, with a picture of coleville kissing my foot on the cover. and if i'm forced to do that, and i
(to alonso) sir, we were saying that our clothes seem just as fresh as they did when we attended the wedding of your daughter, who's now queen of tunis.
that's like giving someone a dog as a present, and then asking for the dog back in return.
don't make you look like counterfeits next to me, and if my fame doesn't outshine yours like the full moon outshines the stars (which look like pin pricks in the sky next to the moon), well then, you can call me a liar. now give me what i deserve, and let my merits mount on top of each other, in a great pile.
the most beautiful queen they ever had.
my friends, are you all lady olivia's servants?
your pile would be too heavy for me to bear.
i beg your pardon, except for the widow dido.
yes, sir, we're part of her entourage.
let my merits shine, then.
oh, except for the widow dido? that's right, except for the widow dido.
i know you. how are you, my friend?
you're too dense to shine.
isn't my vest just as clean and fresh as the day i put it on? in a way, i mean.
i'm better off because of my enemies, and worse off because of my friends.
then let it do something that will do me good, whatever you want to call it.
"in a way" is the right way to go.
you mean it the other way around. you're better off because of your friends.
is your name coleville?
i mean when i wore it at your daughter's wedding.
no, sir, worse off.
it is, sir.
you keep cramming words into my ears that i don't want to hear. i wish that wedding had never happened, since i lost my son because of it, and i lost my daughter too in a way, since she's moved so far from milan that i'll never see her again., oh, dear son of mine and heir of naples and milan, what strange fish has made a meal of you?
how can that be?
you're a famous rebel, coleville.
sir, he may still be alive. i saw him swimming strongly, almost as if he was riding the waves. he treaded water and kept his head well above the wild waters coming at him, swimming with his strong arms toward the shore, which almost seemed eager to welcome him. i have no doubt he got ashore alive.
well, my friends praise me and make me look like an idiot, while my enemies tell me straightforwardly that i am an idiot. my enemies help me understand myself better, which is an advantage, and my friends help me lie about myself, which is a disadvantage. so if four negatives make two affirmatives, i'm worse off because of my friends and better off because of my foes.
and a famous and loyal subject captured him.
no, no, he's dead.
that's excellent.
i'm now in the same situation as my superiors, who led me here. but if i had been in charge, your victory would have cost you more than it has.
sir, you can thank yourself for this great loss, because you wouldn't bless europe with your daughter, but instead pimped her out to an african. at least you can be thankful that she won't be around to remind you of your loss.
don't say that, unless you want to be one of my friends.
i don't know how much your superiors cost us, but you, like a generous man, gave yourself away for free, and i thank you for it.
please be quiet.
(he gives him a coin) you won't be worse off because of me: here's some money.
have you called off the troops?
we all begged you not to go ahead with those marriage plans, and your lovely daughter struggled between disgust at marrying an african and the desire to obey you. now i'm afraid we've lost your son forever. our shipwreck has made more women widows in milan and naples than there are survivors to comfort them. and it's all your fault.
that's a nice hand you dealt me. but if it's not double-dealing, sir, i wish you'd deal me another.
the order to pull back has been given, and the slaughter has been stopped.
and the greatest sorrow is mine too.
oh, you're a naughty one, encouraging double-dealing.
send coleville and his confederates to york, to be put to death immediately. blunt, lead him away, and guard him carefully.
my lord sebastian, even though what you say is true, your way of saying it is tactless and comes at the wrong time. you're rubbing salt in his wounds when you should be applying bandages.
ignore your virtue and nobility just this once, sir, go ahead.
and now, let's get going back to the royal court: i understand that the king, my father, is gravely ill. send news of our victory ahead of us. (to westmoreland) you, cousin, will bring him this news and comfort him with it. we'll follow you as quickly as we can.
all right, i'll stop.
well, i'll commit the sin of double-dealing, and deal you a second coin. here it is. (he gives him another coin)
sir, please give me permission to go via gloucestershire. when you get to the court, please vouch for my good work here.
like a good doctor.
and maybe a third? you know, there's a game called "third time's the charm," which is fun to play, and they always say that three's a magic number. the three-beat rhythm is a good for dancing, and the church bells chime, one, two, three.
goodbye, falstaff. by speaking on your behalf as a prince, i'll be speaking better of you than you deserve.
(to alonso) it's bad times for all of us, sir, when you're feeling gloomy.
you can't get any more money out of me right now. if you tell your lady i'm here to speak with her, and bring her out with you when you come back, you might make me more generous.
i wish you had the wit to accomplish that: it would be worth all your land. my goodness, this young, serious-minded boy doesn't like me, and no one can make him laugh. but i guess that's not surprising; after all, he doesn't drink any wine. none of those prim boys ever amount to anything: weak beer and too many fish dinners makes their blood cool. they all turn anemic, like young girls. and then, when they finally get married, they can only father girls because they don't have the stuff to produce sons. non-drinkers are all generally fools and cowards. the rest of us would probably be
bad times?
well then, sing a lullaby to your generosity: it'll nap until i come back. but don't think i'm doing this because i'm greedy. i'll be back soon to wake up your generosity.
the same way, except that we're always drunk. a good sherry wine operates in two ways. first, it rises into the brain and dries out all the foolish, dull, clogged-up fogs that have gathered there. it makes the brain sharp, quick, and inventive; full of nimble, fiery, and beautiful ideas. the voice and tongue give birth to those ideas which, when they grow up, become excellent wit. the second power of good wine is the warming of the blood. before wine, the blood is cold and sluggish, and this makes the liver, the organ of passion, chilly and pale. a chilly, pale liver is the sign of cowardice and faint-heartedness. but wine warms the blood, making it course from the inner organs to all the extremities. the blood brightens the face, and the rest of the body, which is like a little kingdom in itself, takes that brightening as a signal. then the spirits of the blood and all the internal organs gather together behind their captain: the heart. the heart draws strength from these followers and, enlarged by them, can accomplish any courageous deed. this is the bravery that comes from wine. without wine, skill in weaponry doesn't matter. wine is what sets that skill in motion. education is nothing more than idle gold in the devil's hands, until wine rouses it and puts it to good use. that's how prince harry became valiant. he's taken the cold blood he inherited from his father and, like unproductive farmland, he fertilized it, planted it, and cared for it, through the hard work of drinking vast amounts of good and potent wine. and so now, he's become hot and courageous. if i had a thousand sons, the first rule of behavior i would teach them would be to avoid weak drinks, and get themselves addicted to wine.
yes, very bad.
here comes the man who rescued me, sir.
what is it, bardolph?
if i could colonize this island, my lord, 
i remember his face well. though the last time i saw him it was black from the smoke of war. he was the captain of a flimsy boat that was practically worthless because it was so small. but with that tiny boat he fought such a fierce battle against the largest warship in our fleet that we had to admire his courage and skill even though he caused us a lot of damage., what's going on?
the army is dismissed, and everyone's gone.
he'd cultivate weeds on it.
orsino, this is the same antonio who took the phoenix and her cargo from crete and captured our ship the tiger during the battle where your young nephew titus lost his leg. we arrested him here for fighting in the streets. it's as if he didn't care we were on the lookout for him here.
let them go. i'll head to gloucestershire. i'll visit master robert shallow, esquire. i've already got him under my thumb, as soft as wax. soon i'll seal the deal. let's go.
or thorn-bushes.
he was kind to me and took my side in the fight. but then he said strange things to me. he might be insane. i don't know what else it could be.
now, my lords: if god grants us a victory in this violent civil war that bleeds at our very doorsteps, i will lead our young people in a greater cause, and fight nothing but holy wars. our navy is ready, our army is assembled, the leaders who are my subordinates have their orders, and everything is standing by to achieve my main aim. the only drawback is that i'm feeling a little weak. so let's wait a short while, until the rebels, now on the run, are brought back in line and are made obedient again.
and if i were king of it, you know what i'd do?
but you're a famous pirate! a master thief of the seas! what made you stupid and careless enough to come visit the people you robbed and slaughtered?
we are sure that you'll soon enjoy both good health and the rebels' defeat.
he wouldn't get drunk much, since there's no wine here.
orsino, sir, please don't call me those names. i was never a thief or a pirate, though i admit i was your enemy for good reasons. i came here because someone put a spell on me. i rescued that ungrateful boy next to you from drowning. he was a wreck, almost past hope. i saved his life and gave him my love, without reservation. i dedicated myself to him. for his sake i ran the risk of revisiting this unfriendly town, and i drew my sword to defend him when he was in trouble. but when the police caught us, he was clever and treacherous enough to pretend he'd never met me before. he acted like someone who barely knew me. he refused to give me my own wallet, which i had lent him only half an hour before.
my son humphrey of gloucester, where is your brother, prince hal?
in my kingdom i'd do everything differently from the way it's usually done. i wouldn't allow any commerce. there'd be no officials or administrators. there'd be no schooling or literature. there'd be no riches, no poverty, and no servants, none. no contracts or inheritance laws; no division of the land into private farms, no metal-working, agriculture, or vineyards. there'd be no work. men would have nothing to do, and women also, but they'd be innocent and pure. there'd be no kingship, 
how is that possible?
i think he's gone hunting at windsor.
he wants to be king in a place with no kingship.
(to antonio) when did he come to town?
who's with him?
yes, he's getting a bit confused.
today, my lord. and for three months before that, we spent every day and night together.
i don't know, father.
everything would be produced without labor, and would be shared by all. there'd be no treason, crimes, or weapons. nature would produce its harvests in abundance, to feed my innocent people.
ah, the countess is coming! an angel is walking on earth. but as for you, mister, what you're saying is insane. this young man has worked for me for three months; but more about that later. (to an officer) take him away.
isn't his brother, thomas of clarence, with him?
there'd be no marriage?
what can i give you that you want, my lord, except the one thing you can't have? cesario, you missed your appointment with me.
no, father. he's here.
no. everyone would have nothing to do. they'd all be whores and slackers.
madam?
what is it you'd like, father?
i would rule so perfectly that my country would outshine the golden age they had in ancient times.
dearest olivia, 
only good things for you, thomas. why aren't you with the prince, your brother? he loves you and you are neglecting him. he cares more about you than any of his other brothers, thomas; cherish that fact, my boy. after i'm dead, you'll be in a strong position to help maintain good relations between prince hal and his brothers. so don't ignore him. don't turn away his love, and don't ruin your good relationship with him by seeming cold or distant. he's kind if he gets his way; he has compassion for others, and he's generous with charity. but despite all this, once he gets angry, he becomes like a stone. he can be as tempestuous as winter, and can change himself as suddenly as snowflakes at dawn can turn to hail. so watch his temper. when he does something wrong, let him know it, gently, and when he's in a happy mood. but when he's ornery, give him room. wait till his bad mood works itself out, like a beached whale that kills itself by struggling to return to sea. if you can do this, you'll be a shelter for your friends, and a golden chain that links your brothers together. once they're united, the poison of criticism and rumor, which in this day and age is sure to be aimed at them, can't do them any harm, no matter how explosive and destructive it may be.
long live his majesty!
what do you have to say for yourself, cesario?, my lord, please, 
i'll watch over him with as much care and love as possible.
all hail gonzalo!
my lord wants to speak. it's my duty to be quiet.
then why aren't you with him at windsor?
(to alonso) are you listening to me, sir?
if what you have to say is anything like what you used to say, it'll be as repulsive to my ears as wild screams after beautiful music.
he's not there today. he's in london.
oh, please be quiet. you're spouting empty words.
are you still so cruel?
who's with him? do you know?
you're absolutely right, your highness. i talked like that to give these gentlemen here a chance to have a good laugh. they love to laugh at empty words.
i am still so faithful, my lord.
poins, and the usual suspects.
it's you we were laughing at.
what, faithful to being mean and nasty? you're not polite! i breathed from my soul the most faithful offerings to your ungrateful altars that any devoted person has ever offered, what more am i supposed to do?
weeds grow best in the richest soil, and he, like myself at that age, is overrun by them. my sadness, then, cannot end with my death. when i imagine the lawless days and rotten times that you will face when i am dead and sleeping with my ancestors, the blood weeps from my heart. when hal's headstrong wildness has free rein; when aggression and passion are his advisors; when he has full opportunity to indulge in his riotous inclinations, then, oh!, his criminal desires will fly like a bird towards danger and ruin.
but from your perspective i don't matter, so i'm just an empty nobody for you. go ahead and laugh at my empty words some more.
you can do whatever you want as long as it's socially appropriate.
your highness, you've got him all wrong. the prince is only studying his criminal companions, the way one studies a foreign language. in order to truly learn a language, one must learn even the most immodest curse word, which, as you know, is only learned in order to be identified and, thereafter, avoided. so, like vulgar language, the prince will get rid of his followers when the time is right. then they'll live on in his memory as guidelines, by which he'll judge the conduct of others. in this sense, he'll change his past bad deeds to good ends.
ouch, what a comeback!
maybe i should act like the egyptian thief who kills the woman he loves before he dies? that kind of savage jealousy sometimes seems noble. but listen to me. since you keep denying the love i feel for you, and since i know who's stealing my place in your heart, you can go on being cold-hearted, but i'm going to take this boy from you. he knows his master loves you. i'm doing this, even though he's dear to me, because i know you love him. come with me, boy. i'm ready to do something extreme. i'll sacrifice this boy i care for, just to spite a beautiful woman with a heart of stone.
it's rare that a bee builds its nest in a dead animal's carcass. the prince won't leave his current company.
he sure did. too bad it fell flat.
and i would die a thousand deaths cheerfully, if it made your life easier.
who's there? westmoreland?
you're brave gentlemen. you'd give the moon a shove if it got stuck five weeks in its orbit.
where's cesario going?
i wish your highness good health, and happy news beyond the report i have to deliver! prince john sends his respects: mowbray, the archbishop, hastings and the rest are under arrest. there are no more rebels anywhere; the olive branch of peace has been extended everywhere. here's a letter explaining what happened. when you have time, you can read it and learn every detail.
that's right, and then after we fixed the moon, we'd go bird-hunting.
following the one i love more than my eyes or my life. more than i will ever love a wife. that's the truth. the angels in heaven are my witnesses, and can see how pure my love is.
oh westmoreland; you're like a summer bird, which sings the dawn in as winter ends.
(to gonzalo) don't be angry with us, my lord.
ah, how awful, i feel so used! i've been tricked!
look, here's more news.
i'm not. i've got good judgment, and i know you've got nothing against me. will you laugh me to sleep? i'm feeling very sleepy.
who tricked you? who treated you badly?
may heaven protect your highness from all enemies, and when they do rise up, may they fall just like the ones i've come to tell you about. the earl of northumberland and lord bardolph, with their mighty armies of englishmen and scotsmen, were defeated by the sheriff of yorkshire. this letter will tell you the details.
go to sleep, and listen to us laughing.
have you completely forgotten? has it been so long? call the priest.
why am i sick at this good news? why can't life ever bring you things with their appropriate complements? why is good news so often conveyed in ugly terms? life either gives you hunger but no food, which is the
what, everybody falls asleep so fast? i wish i could sleep too, it would stop me from thinking. come to think of it, i am feeling sleepy.
(to viola) come on, let's go!
experience of poor, healthy people, or it gives you a feast with no appetite, which is how the rich live, who have wealth and abundance but cannot enjoy it. i should be celebrating this good news, and yet my eyesight is failing, and my brain is delirious. oh god! come to me, i'm very sick.
in that case you should sleep. people in grief need a good sleep. it doesn't come to them often, but when it does come they should enjoy it.
go where, my lord?, cesario, my husband, stay here.
take care, your highness!
the two of us will guard you while you sleep, my lord, and keep you safe.
husband?
oh, my royal father!
thank you. i'm terribly sleepy.
yes, husband. can he deny it?
my lord, feel better; take courage.
how strange that they all got so sleepy!
are you her husband, boy?
wait a minute, princes. you know his highness has these episodes all the time. move away from him. give him air; he'll be all right soon.
there must be something in the air here.
no, my lord, not me.
no, no, he can't survive these attacks much longer. his mind's endless worry and concern have so shaken his body that it can barely hold together.
so why aren't our eyelids heavy? i'm not sleepy at all.
you're afraid, so you hide your identity. but don't be afraid, cesario. accept the good luck that's come your way. be the person you know you are, and you'll be as powerful as this person you fear.
the people are frightening me. they've seen terrible omens: children who seem to have supernatural fathers, and gruesomely deformed infants. the weather is in disarray, as if the calendar discovered some months were fast asleep, and decided to skip over them.
me neither. i'm wide awake. they all fell asleep together, as if they'd planned it. like they'd all been struck by lightning. what might happen, sebastian, what might happen if, no, it's time for me to shut up., but still, i think i can see in your face what you ought to be. opportunity's knocking for you, and in my imagination i see a crown dropping onto your head.
oh, hello, father! father, could i please ask you to tell these people what happened between me and this young man? (i know we wanted to hide it, but now the situation demands that we reveal everything.)
the river has flooded three times, without receding between floods. the old people, those living history books, say that the last time this happened was when our great-grandfather, king edward, fell ill and died.
are you dreaming or awake?
they were joined in an eternal bond of love and matrimony, and it was confirmed by a holy kiss and an exchange of rings. i witnessed it all as priest. it took place just two hours ago.
speak more softly, princes: the king is recovering.
don't you hear me speaking?
(to viola) oh, you little liar! how much worse will you be when you're older? maybe you'll get so good at deceit that your tricks will destroy you. goodbye, and take her. just never set foot in any place where you and i might happen to meet.
these attacks will be the death of him.
i do, and it sounds like you're talking in your sleep. what did you say? it's weird for you to be dreaming with your eyes wide open, standing, talking, moving, but sound asleep.
my lord, i swear to you, 
please, carry me into another room. quietly. please.
good sebastian, you're the one who's sleeping if you let this opportunity pass you by without acting on it.
oh, don't swear! keep a little bit of honesty, even if you're afraid.
please be silent, my friends, unless someone can play some restful, whispering music for my exhausted spirit.
you're snoring, but it sounds like you're talking. there's meaning in your snoring.
for the love of god, call a doctor! sir toby needs help right away.
call the musicians in from the other room.
i'm not kidding when i say this, i'm not joking around like usual. you should be serious too when you listen to what i'm saying. you can become a great man if you listen to me.
what's the matter?
put the crown here on my pillow.
i'm hanging on every word you say.
he cut my head and gave sir toby a bloody head, too. for the love of god, help us! i'd give forty pounds to be safe at home right now.
his eyes are sunken, and he seems very pale.
you need to do more than hang around, you have to act. i'll show you how.
who did this, sir andrew?
less noise, less noise!
you need to. i'm lazy by nature.
the count's messenger, cesario. we thought he was a coward, but he fights like a devil.
has anybody seen the duke of clarence?
oh, if you only knew how close to success you are, even while you make fun of what i'm telling you! the more you joke about it, the more clearly i feel how serious it is! lazy people end up at the bottom, and you deserve to be at the top.
my cesario?
i'm here, brother, full of sadness.
please, tell me more. there's something in your expression that tells me you have something serious to say, and you're having a lot of difficulty saying it.
oh, no, there he is! , you cut my head for no reason. anything i did to you, i did it because sir toby made me.
what's going on? raining inside while it's dry outside? how's the king?
this is what i'm saying. (points at gonzalo) although this lord who has such a bad memory, and who will be forgotten by the world when he's dead and buried, almost succeeded in convincing the king that his son's alive, it's impossible that he survived. it's as far from the truth as saying this sleeping man is swimming.
why are you talking like this? i never hurt you. you waved your sword at me for no reason, but i was nice to you. i didn't hurt you.
extremely sick.
yes, i'm sure he's dead. i've got no hope that he survived.
if a bloody head counts as a hurt, then you hurt me. apparently you think there's nothing unusual about a bloody head.
has he heard the good news yet? tell him.
but in that "no hope" there are great hopes for you! that "no hope" means you're on the way to glory so brilliant you couldn't even imagine it, no matter how ambitious you were. do you agree that ferdinand must have drowned?
here comes sir toby, limping. he'll tell you more of the story. if he hadn't been drunk, he would've really roughed you up.
yes, he heard it, and it affected him deeply.
he's dead.
hello, sir! how are you?
if he's sick from joy, then he'll get better without medicine.
so, in that case, tell me who's next in line to inherit the kingdom of naples?
it doesn't matter how i am: he hurt me, and that's that. (to fool) fool, have you seen dick the surgeon?
not so loud, sirs. prince, speak more quietly. your father the king is trying to sleep.
claribel, his daughter.
oh, he's drunk, sir toby, for a whole hour now. his eyes started glazing over around eight in the morning.
let's go into the other room.
the one who's now queen of tunis, living at the edge of the world, out of reach of mail service. it takes a letter longer to reach her than it takes a baby boy to grow old enough to shave. claribel who was the cause of our shipwreck, which a few of us survived, she was destined to give us an opportunity that we are destined to act on.
then he's no good. i hate no-good drunks.
will you come with us?
what in the world are you talking about? it's true that my brother's daughter is queen of tunis, and heir of naples. and it's true those two places are far apart.
take him away! who did this to him?
no. i'll stay here with the king.
so far that every foot of distance between them seems to shout, "it's too far for claribel to come back to naples. let her stay in tunis and give sebastian a
i'll help you, sir toby. they'll treat our wounds together.
why does the crown lie there on his pillow, when it's such a troublesome bedfellow? oh polished aggravation, golden anxiety! you keep the eyelids open wide, to face countless sleepless nights. you sleep with the crown now, father, but you don't sleep as soundly, or half so deeply, as that man whose head is bound with nothing more than a cheap nightcap, who snores through the night. oh, you crown! when you pinch the person wearing you, you're like a great suit of armor worn on a hot day, you burn the person you're protecting. there's a feather near my father's lips, and it's not moving: if he were breathing, that light, weightless thing would move. my gracious lord! father! this is a deep sleep indeed, this is a sleep that has removed the golden ring from the heads of many english kings. father, i owe you tears and a deep grief, and my love, the bonds of family, and a son's tender feelings will make sure that i pay you lavishly. your debt to me is this kingly crown, which i am owed as your heir-apparent.
chance to start living." if these sleeping men were dead instead of sleeping, they'd be no worse off than they are now. there are a lot of men who can rule naples just as well as this sleeping guy here can. there are a lot of men who babble nonsense as well as gonzalo. i could do it myself. oh, i wish you understood what i'm saying, you'd see how you're missing out on a great opportunity for yourself! do you even get what i'm saying?
will you help me?, what an ass and a fool, a gullible no-good idiot!
(he puts the crown on his head) look, here it sits, and god will guard it. even if all the strength in the world were gathered into a single, giant arm, it wouldn't be able to force this inherited honor from me. i will leave this to my son as you've left it to me.
i think i do.
get him to bed and make sure his wounds are treated.
(waking) warwick! gloucester! clarence!
and does this prospect of good fortune make you happy?
i'm sorry, madam. i wounded your relative. but i would've been forced to do the same thing to my brother, since my safety was at stake. you're looking at me strangely, so i guess you're offended. but please forgive me, darling, for the sake of the vows we made to each other so recently.
did you call, sir?
i remember you took the throne from your brother prospero.
one face, one voice, one way of dressing, but two people! it's like an optical illusion. it is and isn't the same person!
what can we do for you, your highness? how are you feeling?
yes i did, and look how good i look in my new role, much better than before. my brother's servants used to be my equals. now they work for me.
antonio, oh my dear antonio! i've been so tortured since i lost track of you!
why did you leave me alone, sirs?
but what about your guilty conscience?
are you sebastian?
we left my brother, prince hal, here. he decided to sit with you.
yes. what guilty conscience? i don't feel anything. if my feet were cold, i'd put my slippers on, but i don't feel any pangs of guilt. if there were twenty guilty consciences between me and the dukedom, they'd melt away to nothing before they caused me any trouble. here's your brother sleeping, worth no more than the dirt he's lying on. if he were as dead as he appears to be now, and i could quickly make him dead with this sword of mine, he wouldn't stand in our way. as
do you have any doubts, antonio?
the prince of wales? where is he? i want to see him. he's not here.
for the other men, we can make them believe anything we choose. they'll set their watches to whatever time we say.
how did you divide yourself in two? these two people are as identical as two halves of an apple. which one is sebastian?
this door's open. he went this way.
you'll be my role model. just as you got milan, i'll get naples. take out your sword. with one cut you can be through paying money to naples. and as king i'll love you forever.
how unbelievable!
he didn't come through the room we were in.
you take out your sword too. when i raise my hand, you do the same, and bring it down on gonzalo's head.
(looking at viola) is that me standing over there? i never had a brother, and i'm certainly not a god who can be in two places at once. i had a sister who drowned. please tell me, how am i related to you? are you from my country? what's your name? who are your parents?
where's the crown? who took it off my pillow?
oh, but there's one more thing to tell you. (he speaks quietly to antonio)
i'm from messaline. sebastian was my father's name, and my brother was named sebastian too. he was dressed just like you are when he drowned. if ghosts can take on someone's body and clothes, you must be a spirit who's come to frighten us.
when we left, sir, it was here.
(to gonzalo) with his magic powers my master can see the dangers that you are in, my friend. so he sent me to make sure these men survive, and to guarantee his plans succeed. (sings in gonzalo 's ear) while you lie here snoring, men are plotting against you. if you want to stay alive, wake up and beware. wake up, wake up!
i am a spirit, yes, since i have a soul. but my spirit has a body attached to it, one that i've carried since i was in the womb. if you were a woman, i'd hug you now and cry, and say "welcome back, drowned viola!"
the prince has taken it. go, find him. is he in such a hurry that he thinks my sleep is my death? find him, lord warwick. rebuke him, and bring him here.
let's act quickly.
my father had a mole on his forehead.
henry's actions join forces with my illness, and together they will kill me. sons, look at what things you are. see how quickly blood bonds are broken, once money's involved. this is what happens to foolish, overly concerned fathers who ruin their sleep with worry, burden their minds with anxiety, and break their bodies with hard work. this is what happens to fathers who amass vast amounts of money, earned in unsavory ways. this is what happens to fathers who have taken care to give their sons good educations, and train them in matters of war. fathers are like bees, collecting sweet pollen from all the flowers in the world. we pack our thighs full of wax and our mouths full of honey, only to be killed when we return to the hive. this is the bitter fate of the dying father, no matter what he has accumulated in his life.
(waking and seeing them) god help the king! save him!
mine did too.
where is that impatient man who can't even wait for his friend, sickness, to put an end to me?
(waking up) hey, what's this, what's going on? wake up!
he died on viola's thirteenth birthday.
sir, i found the prince in the next room, with tears flowing down his cheeks. he looked so sorrowful that a tyrant, who never drank anything but blood, would, upon seeing him, have washed the blood from his knife with tears. he's on his way.
why are your swords out? why do you look like that?
oh, i remember that very clearly! it's true, he died on the day my sister turned thirteen.
but why did he take away the crown?
what's this all about?
if the only thing keeping us from rejoicing is the fact that i'm wearing men's clothes, then don't hug me till i can prove beyond the shadow of a doubt that i'm viola. i'll take you to a sea captain here in town who's got my women's clothing in storage. he saved my life so i could serve this noble count. everything that's happened to me since then has involved my relationship with this lady and this lord.
look, here he comes. come here, harry. (to the rest) leave the room, and leave us here alone.
while we were here guarding you as you slept, we heard a loud roar that sounded like bulls, or lions. didn't you hear it? we heard it very clearly.
(to olivia) so you got it wrong, my lady. but nature fixed everything, turning your love for my sister into a love for me. if you hadn't, you would've married a maiden. but that's not completely wrong. i'm still a virgin, so in a sense i'm a maiden too.
i never thought i'd hear you speak again.
i didn't hear anything.
(to olivia) don't be shocked. his blood is noble. if this is all as true as it seems to be, then i'm going to have a share in that lucky shipwreck. (to viola) boy, you told me a thousand times you'd never love a woman as much as you love me.
you thought that because you wished it to be true. i live too long for you; you're tired of me. are you so desperate for my throne that you would take the honors of kingship before it's your time? oh you foolish youth! you long for power that will end up overwhelming you. wait a little while. what power i have left is held together so weakly that the lightest breeze would blow it away: my life is fading. you stole something from me that would freely have been yours in just a few hours. on my deathbed, you've confirmed all my expectations. all your life you showed that you didn't love me, and now i will die certain of it. there are a thousand daggers in your thoughts, which you've sharpened on your stony heart with the hopes of stabbing me in the little time i have left. what? couldn't you endure me for half an hour? then go and dig my grave yourself, and ring the bells to mark your coronation, not my death. let all the tears that should be shed on my hearse be drops of holy water to bless your head.
oh, it was a monstrous roar, to make the earth tremble! i'm sure there was a herd of lions nearby.
everything i said before i'll say again. i swear i meant every word.
just mix me up with the forgotten dust, and give my body, which gave you life, to the worms. fire my officers, undo my laws; for now the time has come to jeer at authority. henry the fifth is crowned: up with foolishness! down with decorum! be gone, all you wise advisers! assemble lazy apes from every region, and make them the royal court of england! now, you neighboring countries, get rid of your scum. do you have a criminal who swears, drinks, dances, parties all night, robs, murders, and commits the oldest sins in the newest ways? then be happy: that man won't trouble you any longer. england will paint over his guilt with gold. england will give him a position, honor, power. because henry the fifth has removed the barriers to anarchy: he's taken the restraining muzzle off the dog of misbehavior, and that wild dog will sink his teeth into the flesh of every decent person. oh my poor kingdom, sick from this civil war! when all my hard work couldn't keep disorder at bay, what will you do when disorder becomes your caretaker? oh, you'll be a wilderness again, and all the wolves who lived here once will once again be your only citizens.
did you hear this, gonzalo?
give me your hand and let me see you dressed in woman's clothing.
oh forgive me, your highness. if it weren't for these tears, which are impeding my speech, i would have stopped this harsh scolding before you, in your grief, had spoken and before i had listened so long. there's your crown. may god, who wears the crown eternally, guard it as yours for a long time. if i care for the crown in any way other than as a symbol of your honor and reputation, let me never rise from this kneeling position. it is my deepest and most dutiful feelings which teach my body to bend and bow to you, causing my outer body to reflect my inner feelings. may god be my witness: when i came in here and saw that you weren't breathing, my blood ran cold. if i'm lying,
it's true i heard a humming sound, a strange one, which woke me up. i shook you and shouted at you, sir. when i opened my eyes, i saw their swords out. there was a noise, that's certainly true. we should either be on guard here constantly or move to a different camp. let's draw our own swords too.
the captain who brought me to shore has my women's clothes. for some reason he's in prison now on some legal technicality, on malvolio's orders. malvolio is a gentleman in my lady's entourage.
may i die as the wild youth i was before, and never live to show the dubious world the transformation i have been planning. coming to see you, thinking you were dead, and being nearly dead myself, just thinking that you were, i spoke to this crown as though it were alive. i scolded it like this: "the worry you've caused has eaten my father alive. so you, the best piece of gold, are actually the worst piece of gold. other gold, perhaps worth less, is more precious, since it at least brings us health when mixed in our drinks. but you, the best, the most honored, the most famous, have consumed the person wearing you." and as i accused it, i put it on my head, to fight against it as an enemy who'd killed my father before my very eyes. it was the fight of a loyal child. but may god keep it from me forever, making me like the poorest servant bowing down before it in awe and terror, if it in any way made me happy or arrogant, or if any part of me was the least bit pleased to welcome it and the power it brings.
lead us away from this area. we can search for my poor son while we're at it.
he'll release him.
oh my son, god made you take it from me so that, in pleading your case so beautifully, you would make me love you more! come here, harry. sit by my bed and listen to what i think will be the last advice i ever give. god knows the unusual paths and indirect, crooked ways that led me to this crown. and i know very well how much anxiety it has caused as i've worn it. it will fall to you in bitter peace, with
i hope those lions stay far away from him. i'm sure he's somewhere on the island.
go and get malvolio, but, oh no! now i remember, they say the poor man is mentally ill. i was so crazy myself that i forgot all about him. (to the fool) how is malvolio doing, do you know?
better support and stronger approval. the stain of its obtainment dies now, with me. on me, the crown seemed like an honor grabbed with a violent hand, and many people lived to remind me that they had helped me take it. eventually, those daily reminders grew into war and bloodshed, doing damage to the peace. you can see how much pain it's caused me as i've fought my foes. my entire reign has been like a play, in which we rehash that disagreement. now my death changes the show. what i bought, you will inherit. you'll wear the crown by right of succession. but even though you have a firmer claim to the crown than i had, it's not firm enough. anger is still fresh, and my former friends, whom you must make into your friends, have only recently been disarmed. it was their power that first got me the crown, and i feared that same power could take me down. to avoid that, i defeated their rebellion, and planned to lead an army to the holy land. i thought that, with nothing to occupy themselves, they'd start eyeing me and my crown. therefore, my harry, make it your policy to focus the distracted minds of the people with foreign wars. military actions abroad will make people forget about troubling matters in the past. i'd say more, but my lungs are so worn out that i don't have the strength to speak. god forgive me for how i came by the crown, and may he grant that you enjoy it in peace.
get us out of here.
well, he keeps the devil away as well as a man can in his situation. he's written you a letter. i would've given it to you this morning, but a madman's letters aren't gospel, so it doesn't matter much if i'm a bit late.
my gracious lord, you won it, wore it, kept it, then gave it to me. my possession of it must therefore be honest
(to himself) my lord prospero will know what i've done. so go ahead, king, and look for your son.
open it and read it.
and lawful. and i will work as hard as i can to defend this crown against any man.
i hope all the diseases that breed in swamps and marshes infect prospero, inch by inch, until he's nothing but a walking disease! his spirits are listening to me, but i can't help cursing him anyway. they won't pinch me, frighten me, push me in the mud, or mislead me unless he tells them to. but he sends them to punish me for every little thing. sometimes his spirits take the form of apes, grimacing and chattering at me and then biting me; sometimes they come like porcupines, my feet as i walk. sometimes snakes wrap around me, hissing at me with their forked tongues till i go crazy.
there's a lot to learn when a fool recites the words of a madman. (he reads) "i swear to god, madam,", 
look, look, here comes my son, john of lancaster.
hey, look over there! here comes one of his spirits to torture me for taking so long to bring the wood back. i'll lie down and hide. maybe he won't see me. (he lies down and covers himself with his cloak)
why are you talking like that? are you insane?
health, peace, and happiness to my royal father!
there are no bushes or shrubs to protect me from the weather here. and there's another storm brewing, i can hear it in the way the wind whistles. that huge black cloud over there looks like a filthy liquor jug that's about to pour out its contents. it won't be able to help pouring rain down by the bucket-full. (he sees caliban)
no, madam, i'm just reading an insane letter. if you want things done in the right way, you'll have to let me read a crazy letter in a crazy voice.
you bring me happiness and peace, john. but health, unfortunately, has flown from this shrunken body. now that i've seen you, i have nothing more to do in this world. where is lord warwick?
what do we have here, a man or a fish? whew, he stinks like a fish, an old salted fish, not a fresh-caught one. a strange fish. if i were in england now, like i was once, and i had even a painted picture of this fish, every fool there would give me a piece of silver to look at it. in england this strange monster would be just like a man. any strange beast there can be considered a man. the men there won't give a penny to a lame beggar, but they'll pay ten cents to look at a freak show exhibit. this guy has legs like a man but fins for arms! and he's still warm, by god. i guess this is not a fish, but a native who got struck by lightning just now.
no, please, read it like a sane person.
lord warwick!
oh, here comes the storm again. the best thing to do is crawl under his cloak. there's no other shelter around here. in emergencies you meet the strangest folks. i'll just stay here till the storm passes. (he crawls under caliban 's cloak)
i will, my lady, but a sane person reading this would make it sound crazy. so listen up, princess.
does the room i first collapsed in have a name?
(sings) i'll never go to sea again, i'll die here on shore, this is a rotten song to sing at a man's funeral. at least i've got some booze to comfort me. (he drinks and sings) the master, the deck-washer, the boatswain, and i, the gunman and his friend, we loved moll, meg, marian, and margery but none of us cared for kate. kate had a gutter mouth,
(giving the letter to fabian) oh, you read it, sir.
it's called the jerusalem room, your highness.
and would shout to sailors, "go to hell!" she didn't like ship smells like tar, but liked it okay when a tailor took her to bed. so go to sea, boys, and let her go to hell! that's a rotten song too. but here's something to comfort me.
(he reads) "i swear to god, madam, you've wronged me, and i'll tell the whole world. you've shut me up in a dark room and given your drunken cousin authority over me, but i'm as sane as you are. i've got a letter from you encouraging me to act the way i did. if i didn't have it, i couldn't prove that i'm right and you're wrong. i don't care what you think of me. i'm going to forget my duties to you a little bit and complain about the injuries you've caused me. signed, the poorly treated malvolio."
praise be to god! that's where i must die. for years it's been predicted that i would die in jerusalem; i foolishly thought that meant the holy land. but carry me to that room, and there i'll lie. in that jerusalem will harry die.
don't hurt me. oh!
did he write this?
by gum, sir, you will not leave tonight. hey, davy!
what's going on? do we have devils on the island? are you playing tricks on me by showing me savages and uncivilized men from the indies, ha? i didn't survive a shipwreck so i could be scared of your four legs now. i'll never run away from any ordinary man who walks on four legs like the rest of us. stephano speaks nonsense because he is drunk.
yes, madam.
please excuse me, master robert shallow.
the spirit is torturing me. oh!
it doesn't sound like an insane person's letter.
i will not excuse you. you will not be excused. excuses will not be allowed. no excuse will do. you will not be excused. hey, davy!
this is some monster of the island, with four legs, who seems to me to have some kind of ache. how the hell does he know our language? i'll help out, if only because he speaks the same language as me. if i can cure him from his fever and tame him, and get him back to naples, he'd make a great present for any emperor.
set him free. fabian, bring him here.
here, sir.
don't hurt me, please. i promise i'll carry the wood faster.
my lord, i hope that after you think things over a bit you'll come to like the idea of having me as a sister-in-law instead of a wife. we can have the weddings tomorrow if you want, here at my own house. i'll pay for everything.
davy, davy, davy, davy, let's see, davy, let's see, davy, let's see. oh yes, right: tell william the cook to come here. sir john, you will not be excused.
he's having a fit and talking nonsense. i'll give him some liquor. if he's never drunk it before, it'll help soothe his fever. if i can tame him, i'll charge as much as i can get for him. he'll bring a lot of money to the person who owns him, that's for sure.
i accept that offer happily, madam. (to viola) so you're free now. i'm offering you my hand in marriage because of your loyal service to me, which was far from what any woman should be expected to do, especially a noble woman. you've called me "master" for so long. and now you'll be your master's mistress.
well sir, here's the thing. those warrants couldn't be served. and once more, sir, should we plant wheat at the field's edges?
you haven't hurt me much yet, but you will soon, i can tell by your trembling. prospero sent you here.
(to viola) you'll be my sister-in-law!
plant red wheat, davy. but as for william the cook, aren't there any young pigeons?
(trying to make caliban drink) come on, open your mouth. this'll help you talk. open up. this'll stop you from trembling, i can tell you that for sure. (caliban drinks) you don't even know who your friends are. open up that mouth again.
is this the madman?
yes, sir. here's the bill from the blacksmith for horseshoes and plow blades.
i almost recognize that voice. it's, but he's drowned, and these guys are devils. oh, god help me!
yes, my lord. how are you, malvolio?
check the figures and then and pay it. sir john, you will not be excused.
four legs and two voices, a very special monster. one voice speaks well and talks about his friend. the other voice is harsh and abusive. i can charge even more for this. if it takes all the wine in my bottle, i'll cure him. come on. caliban drinks that's good! now i'll pour some in your other mouth.
madam, you've treated me badly, very badly.
now, sir, we need some new chain for the bucket. and sir, do you plan to dock william's pay for the wine he lost at the hinckley fair?
stephano!
i did, malvolio? no.
he'll pay for that. some pigeons, davy; a couple of short-legged hens, a leg of lamb, and any fun little fancy dishes. tell william the cook.
is your other mouth calling my name? mercy, mercy! this isn't a monster, it's a devil. i'll leave him alone. i have no interest in getting mixed up with the devil.
(he hands olivia a paper) you did. please have a look at this letter. you can't deny that it's your handwriting. go ahead and try to write differently, and try to pretend that's not your seal with your design on it. you can't. so just admit it. and tell me honestly, why did you show me such fondness and asked me to smile at you, wear yellow stockings and crisscrossed laces for you, and be rude to sir toby and the servants?
is the soldier staying all night?
stephano! if you're stephano, touch me and speak to me. i'm trinculo, don't be scared, your good friend trinculo.
and then tell me why you imprisoned me in a dark house after i followed your instructions perfectly. you made me look like the biggest fool that anybody ever tricked. tell me why you did it.
yes, davy. i'll take good care of him. a friend at court is better than money in your pocket. take good care of his men, davy. they're good-for-nothings, and they'll bite you.
if you're trinculo, then come out. i'll pull on these smaller legs. if any legs here are trinculo's, these are. (he pulls trinculo out from under the cloak) well,
i'm sorry, malvolio, but this isn't my writing, though i admit it looks like mine. it's definitely maria's handwriting. now that i think about it, maria was the one who first told me you were insane. that's when you came in smiling at me, dressed up like the letter said, and acting just like it told you to act. someone has played a very mean trick on you, but when we find out who's responsible, you won't just be the victim, but the judge who sentences the culprit. i promise.
no worse than they're bitten, sir. their clothes are full of lice.
what do you know, you are trinculo! how did you end up as this monster's dung? does he crap trinculos?
madam, let me say something. please don't let squabbles ruin this beautiful and miraculous moment. i confess that toby and i were the ones who tricked malvolio because we hated his strict and heavy-handed ways. sir toby had maria wrote that letter, and he married her as a reward. we should just laugh about the whole thing rather than get upset about it, especially if we consider that each of the two parties offended the other equally.
good one, davy. get on with your work, davy.
i thought he was dead, struck by lightning. but aren't you drowned, stephano? i hope you're not drowned. has the storm passed? i hid under this monster's cloak to get out of the storm. are you really alive, stephano? oh, stephano, two men from naples survived! (trinculo dances stephano around.)
(to malvolio) oh, poor fool, they've really humiliated you!
please, sir, rule in favor of william visor of woncot in his lawsuit against clement perkes of the hill.
please stop turning me around. my stomach's a little upset.
well, you know, "some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon them." anyway, i was part of the trick, sir. i pretended to be a priest named sir topas. but what does it matter? (he imitates malvolio) "i swear, fool, i'm not crazy.", but do you remember what he said about me before? "i'm surprised you enjoy the company of this stupid troublemaker, unless he's got somebody laughing at him, he can't think of anything to say." what goes around comes around.
davy, there are a lot of suits against that visor. that visor is a good-for-nothing, as best i can tell.
(to himself) these are beautiful creatures, if they're not spirits. he's a good god, who brings liquor from the heavens. i will worship him.
i'll get my revenge on every last one of you.
i agree with your honor that he's a good-for-nothing, but god forbid that a good-for-nothing should be denied a favor when his friend asks for one on his behalf. an honest man can speak for himself, but a good-for-nothing can't. i've worked for you for eight years, sir. if i can't get you to rule in favor of a good-
(to trinculo) how did you survive? how did you get here? tell me the truth, swear on this bottle of wine. i made it out of tree bark after i washed ashore. i myself floated here on a barrel of wine that the sailors tossed overboard.
he really was tricked horribly.
for-nothing once in a while, then obviously you don't think very much of me. that good-for-nothing is my good friend, sir. so i ask you, please: rule in his favor.
(to stephano) i'll swear by that wine bottle to be your true subject. you must be a god, since your liquor is out of this world.
go after him and try to calm him down a little.
stop now; i tell you he won't be wronged. now get going, davy.
(to trinculo) here. swear, and tell me how you survived.
he still hasn't told us about the captain. when that's been taken care of and the time is right, we'll all get married. until then, we'll stay here, my dear sister-in-law. cesario, come here. i'll keep calling you cesario while you're still a man, but when we see you in women's clothes you'll be the queen of my dreams, orsino's true love.
where are you, sir john? come, come, come. take your boots off. let me shake your hand, master bardolph.
i swam ashore like a duck. i can swim like a duck, i swear.
(he sings) when i was a tiny little boy, with, hey, ho, the wind and the rain, a foolish thing didn't matter much, because the rain it rains every day. but when i became a man, with, hey, ho, the wind and the rain, people stopped talking to bad guys and thieves. because the rain it rains every day. but when i got married, ah, too bad! with, hey, ho, the wind and the rain, it did me no good to boast and show off, because the rain, it rains every day. but when i had to go to bed with, hey, ho, the wind and the rain, with idiots drunk out of their minds, because the rain it rains every day. the world began a long time ago, with, hey, ho, the wind and the rain, but that doesn't matter, our play is done, and we'll try to please you every day.
i'm glad to see you, your honor.
here, kiss the bible stephano jokingly describes taking a drink from the bottle as "kissing the bible." kiss the bible and swear. you may swim like a duck, but you look more like a goose.
i thank you with all my heart, master bardolph. (to the page) welcome, you tall fellow. come, sir john.
oh stephano, do you have any more of that wine?
come on, don't tell me that. i don't like it that you knew about this, iago. all this time i've thought you were such a good friend that i've let you spend my money as if it was yours.
i'll be right behind you, master robert shallow.
i've got the whole barrel, man. i live in a cave by the seaside, where i keep the barrel hidden., hey, monster, how's your fever?
damn it, you're not listening to me! i never dreamed this was happening, if you find out i did, you can go ahead and hate me.
bardolph, get our horses ready.
you come from heaven, don't you?
you told me you hated him.
if i were cut into pieces, i'd make four dozen bearded broomsticks like this master shallow. it's amazing to see the similarity between his men's dispositions and his own. they watch him and behave like foolish judges, and he, by associating with them, turns into a judge-like workman. their spirits are so closely joined by their intimate involvement, they're like a flock of wild geese that fly in formation. if i needed a favor from judge shallow, i would make his men think that i'm a close friend of his. if i needed something from his men, i would flatter shallow by telling him that no one commands servants better than he does. one thing's for sure: the behavior of a wise man and that of an idiot are contagious, like diseases. they spread from person to person, which is why people must be careful about
no, from the moon, i'm telling you. i used to be the man in the moon a long time ago.
i do hate him they\'re talking about othello, though they never mention his name. him , i swear. three of venice's most important noblemen took their hats off to him and asked him humbly to make me his lieutenant, the second in command. and i know my own worth well enough to know i deserve that position. but he wants to have things his own way, so he sidesteps the issue with a lot of military talk and refuses their request. "i've already chosen my lieutenant," he says. and who does he choose? a guy who knows more about numbers than fighting! this guy from florence named michael cassio. he has a pretty wife but he can't even control her. and he's definitely never commanded men in battle. he's got no more hands-on knowledge of warfare than an old woman, unless you count what he's read in books,
the company they keep. i'll come up with enough material about this shallow to keep prince hal laughing nonstop for a year. that's how much time it takes for the current fashion to change six times, or for two lawsuits to be completed. he'll laugh with no intermission. oh, a lie told with a measure of truth, or a joke told with a serious face, will go far with a young fellow, who has never had his shoulders weighed down by old age or worries. oh, he'll laugh until his face looks like a wet coat that was hung poorly, it'll be all wrinkled from laughter.
oh, i've seen you in the moon, and i worship you. my mistress showed me you in the moon and your dog and your bush.
which any peace-lover can do. his military understanding is all theory, no practice. but cassio's been chosen over me. my career is cut short by some bookkeeper, even though the general saw my fighting skills first-hand in rhodes and cyprus. this accountant is now lieutenant, while i end up as the moor's moor = north african moor's flag-bearer.
(offstage) sir john!
come on, swear to it. kiss the bible and swear it. i'm going to fill the bottle up again soon.
by god, i'd rather be his executioner.
coming, master shallow! coming!
when you get a good look at him, you see he's not much of a monster. i can't believe i was scared of him! a pretty pathetic monster. the man in the moon! what a poor, gullible monster., that was a nice big gulp, monster!
and there's nothing i can do about it. that's the curse of military service. you get promoted when someone likes you, not because you're next in line. now, you tell me: should i feel loyal to the moor?
what's happening, my lord chief justice? where are you going?
(to stephano) i'll show you every inch of the island, and i'll kiss your feet. i beg you, please be my god.
if you don't like him you should quit.
how's the king doing?
what a lying, drunken monster. when his god falls asleep, the monster will snatch his wine bottle.
no, calm down. i'm serving under him to take advantage of him. we can't all be masters, and not all masters should be followed. look at all the devoted servants who work for their masters their whole lives for nothing but their food, and then when they get old they're terminated. they ought to be whipped for being so stupid. but then there's another kind of servant who looks dutiful and devoted, but who's really looking out for himself. by pretending to serve their lords, these men get rich, and when they've saved up enough they can be their own masters. guys like that have soul, and that's the kind of guy i am. let me tell
very well. all his worries are ended now.
(to stephano) i'll kiss your feet. i'll vow to be your faithful subject.
you, as sure as your name's roderigo, if i were the moor i wouldn't want to be iago. i may seem to love and obey him, but in fact, i'm just serving him to get what i want. if my outward appearance started reflecting what i really felt, soon enough i'd be wearing my heart on my sleeve for birds to peck at. no, it's better to hide it. i'm not who i appear to be.
not dead, i hope.
come on, then. get down and swear it.
thick-lips "thick-lips" is a racial slur toward the moor, othello. thick-lips sure is lucky if he can pull this off!
he's gone down nature's path; for our purposes, he is no longer living.
i'm going to laugh myself to death over this silly monster. a rotten, foolish monster. i could find it in my heart to beat him, 
let's shout up to desdemona's father, wake him, pester him, spoil his happiness, spread rumors about him in the streets, enrage his relatives, and irritate him endlessly. however real his happiness is, it will vanish in light of this.
i wish his majesty had brought me with him. the work i did for him while he was alive makes me very vulnerable, now that he's dead.
come on, kiss my feet.
here's her father's house. i'll call out.
indeed, i think the young king has no love for you.
except the poor monster's drunk. an awful monster!
do it, and shout like the city's on fire.
i know he doesn't. i'm preparing myself to deal with whatever happens, which can't be any worse than what i've imagined.
i'll show you where to get fresh water. i'll pick berries for you. i'll fish for you and get you plenty of firewood. the tyrant i'm serving now can go to hell! i won't get any more wood for him. i'm serving you now, you wonderful man.
hey, brabantio! signor brabantio, hey!
here come the heavy-hearted children of dead harry. if only the living harry had the character of the worst of these three young men. then a lot of noblemen would remain secure, instead of having to step aside to make room for lowlifes.
what a silly monster, to think a poor drunk is wonderful.
wake up, brabantio! wake up! thieves! thieves! check on your daughter, your house, your money! thieves! thieves!
oh god! i'm afraid everything will be turned upside-down.
(to stephano) i beg you, let me show where you can find crabs to eat. i'll use my long fingernails to dig edible roots for you, find you a bird's nest, and teach you how to catch a nimble monkey. i'll take you to clusters of hazelnuts, and sometimes i'll catch birds for you on the rocks. will you come with me?
what's the reason for this horrible shouting? what's the matter?
good morning, cousin warwick, good morning.
show us the way without further delay., trinculo, since the king and all our comrades are drowned, we're the heirs of this place., here, carry my wine bottle., trinculo, my buddy, we'll get that bottle refilled soon enough.
sir, is everyone in your family at home?
good morning, cousin.
(sings drunkenly) goodbye, master! goodbye, goodbye.
are your doors locked?
we're all like men who don't remember how to speak.
a loud-mouthed, drunken monster.
why are you asking me that?
we remember how, but what we have to say is so sad that we cannot speak.
(sings) i won't build you any more dams to catch fish, or fetch you firewood when you order me to, or clean the plates, or wash dishes. 'ban, 'ban, ca-caliban has a new master. so get a new servant. freedom, what a wonderful day, wonderful day, freedom, freedom, wonderful day, freedom!
for god's sake, sir, you've been robbed. get dressed. your heart's going to break. it's like half your soul's been ripped out. at this very minute an old black ram is having sex with your little white lamb. wake up, wake up, ring a bell and wake up all the snoring citizens. if you wait too long you'll have black grandchildren. get up, i tell you!
well, peace be with the man who has made us sad.
good monster! show us the way.
are you crazy?
peace be with us, or else we'll be even sadder!
some games are painful, but their discomfort makes them more fun. some kinds of lowly activities are done for noble reasons. and you can do poor things that lead to rich results. this hard work would be boring and nasty to me, but i'm working for a mistress who makes me enjoy my labor. oh, she's ten times nicer than her father is mean, and he's the height of crabbiness. i have thousands of logs to take away and pile up, on strict orders from him. my sweet darling cries when she sees me work and tells me that such a wonderful man never performed such lowly tasks before. these sweet thoughts relieve me and refresh me, especially when i'm slaving away busily.
do you recognize my voice, noble lord?
oh, my good lord, you've lost a friend, indeed. i'm sure you're not borrowing that sorrowful face; it's certainly your own.
now, please, i beg you, don't work so hard. i wish the lightning had burned up all those logs that you've been ordered to stack! please put that log down and rest a while. when this wood burns, it'll weep for making you tired. my father's studying hard, so he won't see you. so please rest. we're safe from my father for at least three hours.
not me. who are you?
even though no man can know what blessings will come his way, he must expect the worst. i am sorry; i wish it were otherwise.
oh, my dear mistress, i won't be able to finish this work until sunset at the earliest.
my name's roderigo.
well, now you are only allowed to speak well of sir john falstaff, which goes against the nature of a man of your quality.
if you sit down, i'll carry your logs a while. please give me that. i'll take it over to the pile.
i told you not to hang around my house. i've already told you quite plainly that my daughter will never marry you. now you come here drunk to make trouble and startle me out of a sound sleep?
sweet princes, what i did, i did honorably, impartially, and with a clear conscience. you won't see me begging vilely for a pardon, which is sure to be withdrawn as soon as it is given. if truth and honest innocence don't help me, then i'll join my dead king and tell him who sent me.
no, my darling, i'd rather strain all my muscles and break my back than let you do work like this while i lounge around nearby.
sir, sir, sir, 
here comes the prince.
i'd be as right for the job as you are, and i'd do it more easily, since i'd have good will on my side.
you know i'm powerful enough to make you pay for this.
good morning, and god save your majesty!
(to himself) you poor weak thing, you're in love! i can see it clearly now.
please wait, sir.
this new and gorgeous robe of majesty doesn't fit me as comfortably as you think. brothers, your sadness is mixed with fear. this is the english court, not the turkish one. i'm not amurath, who had his brothers killed when he inherited his father king amurath's crown; i'm a harry, following another harry. but be sad, brothers, because truly, it suits you. you look so regal in your sorrow that i will solemnly put it on as well, and wear it in my heart. be sad, but don't let it be anything more than a burden we all share jointly. i want you to rest assured that as far as i'm concerned, i'll be both your father and your brother now. just trust me with your love, and you can trust me to care for you. keep weeping for harry, who is dead; i will, as well. but one harry still lives, and he will convert those tears one by one into hours of happiness.
you look tired.
why are you talking about robbery? this is venice. my house isn't in some remote countryside.
we hope that's exactly what you'll do.
no, noble mistress, i'm as fresh as morning when you're near me, even at night. i beg you to tell me your name so i can use it in my prayers.
brabantio, with all due respect, i'm here out of courtesy and good will. i've come to tell you, 
you're all looking at me strangely. (to the chief justice) you, most of all. i think you're certain that i don't love you.
miranda., oh father, i've disobeyed you by telling him that!
my god, sir, you're stubborn and suspicious. we come here to help you and you treat us like thugs, but you let an african horse climb all over your daughter. your grandsons will neigh to you like horses. your whole family will be ruined.
i'm certain that, if my actions are fairly considered, your majesty will find no just reason to hate me.
miranda, the very name means "admired!" you are indeed admired, more than anything else in the world! i've looked at many ladies with pleasure, and been
what kind of crude jerk are you?
no? how can a great prince like me forget the terrible wrongs you did me? what were you thinking, to scold, punish, and violently imprison the heir to the english throne? was this nothing? should this be dipped in the river of forgetfulness and simply ignored?
seduced by the sweet nothings they said to me. i've liked several women for their good qualities, but there was something wrong with each one that blotted her excellent qualities and cancelled them out. but with you it's different. you're perfect, without a rival in the world, made up of the best qualities of every creature.
the kind that tells you that the moor is having sex with your daughter right now.
i acted with the authority of your father, whose power was vested in me. and when it came to the law, which i was busy enforcing, for the good of the country, you chose to ignore my rank, and the majesty and power of law and justice which i bore as a representative of the king. you struck me in the head, the very location of my judgment. with that action, you committed a crime against your father's own laws. so i did what my power demanded, and imprisoned you. if that was wrong, then, now that you wear the crown, i hope you'll someday be satisfied with a son who mocks your laws, who scorns the judges who rule in your authority, who disrupts the course of law, and blunts the swords that guard your personal peace and safety. no, even worse than that: a son who disrespects your deputies, and the officers you appoint in your name. question yourself, and imagine being in your father's position. be a father, and imagine a son. listen to your own dignity being profaned. watch as your most solemn laws are laughed at so lightly. behold yourself being so disdained by a son. and then imagine that i take your side, and that in your name i gently silence your son. soberly consider this, and then pronounce my sentence. as king, tell me
i've never known any woman or seen a woman's face, except my own in the mirror. and i've never met any men besides you and my father. i have no idea what people look like in other places, but i swear by my modesty, which i value above everything else, that i'd never want any companion in the world but you. i can't even imagine one. but listen to me chattering like crazy, and father always told me not to.
you're a villain!
what i have done that was so unseemly for my station, myself, or my king's authority.
i'm a prince by birth, miranda, maybe even a king now; though i wish i weren't, and normally i wouldn't put up with carrying these logs any more than i'd let flies breed in my mouth. but i'll tell you something from my soul. the second i saw you, my heart rushed to serve you and be your slave, so here i am now, a patient log-man.
you're a senator!
you're right, chief justice, and you have considered this well. therefore, keep your position as judge and enforcer. i hope that your honors increase, and that you live to see a son of mine offend and then obey you, as i have. i will live to speak my father's words: "i am a happy man, to have a man brave enough to punish my own son; and i'm no less happy to have a son that would surrender his greatness, and put himself in the hands of the law." you imprisoned me, and for that i charge you to continue in my service, with this reminder: you must always be as courageous, just, and impartial as you were with me. shake my hand. you'll be like a father to me, and i will say whatever it is you whisper in my ear. i will bow to you, and keep myself humble in the face of your wisdom and experience. and princes, believe me, please: my father lies wild in his grave, for he took my recklessness with him when he died. his sober spirit survives in me, and i will flout the world's expectations. i will prove their prophecies false, and flush out the rotten opinions of those who judged me based on what i once seemed to be. my behavior, the tide of my blood, used to flow proudly and vainly. but now, it ebbs and turns back toward the sea, where it will mingle with the ocean's majesty and flow back through my body with formal dignity. now i will assemble my parliament, and choose such noble officers and advisors that our great country will be able to march alongside the best governed nations. we'll become acquainted and familiar
do you love me?
you're going to pay for this, roderigo. i know who you are.
with the states of war, peace, or both at once; in this, chief justice, my new father, you will be my closest advisor. once my coronation has been completed, i will, as i said before, summon all the nobility. and if god endorses my good intentions, no prince or lord will have reason to say that he wishes god would shorten my happy life by even a single day.
oh heaven, oh earth, witness what i'm about to say, and reward me if i tell the truth! if i'm lying, then
i'll answer for everything. i don't know if you know or approve of this, but in the wee hours of the morning your daughter left your house, with no better escort than a hired gondolier, to go into the rough embrace of a lustful moor. if all of this happened with your
no, you're going to see my orchard. we'll sit in an arbor and eat some of the pippin apples i cross-bred last season, along with some caraway seeds and so on. come on, silence. then we'll go to bed.
destroy all my prospects in life! more than anything else in the world, i love you, value you, and honor you.
approval, then we've been very rude to bother you like this. but if you didn't know about it, then you were wrong to get mad at us. i'd never play pranks on you. if you didn't allow your daughter to do what she's doing, then she's rebelling against you. she's throwing her life away on some stranger. go ahead, see for yourself if she's in her bedroom. if she is, you can sue me for lying to you.
i swear, you have a good-looking place here, and it's fancy.
look at me crying, what a fool i am to cry at what makes me happy.
light the candles! wake up my whole household! i dreamt about this. i'm starting to worry it's true. give me some light!
cheap, cheap, cheap. we're broke, broke, sir john. but one thing we do have is good air. set the table, davy, set the table. good job, davy.
(to himself) what a pleasant meeting between two people truly in love! may heaven bless the feelings growing between them!
(to roderigo) it's time for me to say goodbye to you. it would be inappropriate, dangerous, even, for me to be seen working against the moor, as i would if i stayed. the venetian government might reprimand him for this, but it can't safely get rid of him, since it needs him urgently for the imminent cyprus wars. they couldn't find another man with his abilities to lead their armed forces, not if their souls depended on it. i hate him, but i've got to show him signs of loyalty
this davy does a lot for you. he's your right-hand man as well as your steward.
why are you crying?
and affection, even if it's just an act. if you want to find him, send the search party to the sagittarius inn. he and i will be there.
a good servant, a very good servant, sir john. by god, i had too much wine with dinner. a good servant. now sit down, sit down. come on, cousin.
i'm crying at how unworthy i am to give you what i want to give you and to take what i'm dying to have. but it's a waste of time to say so. the more i try to hide what i'm feeling, the bigger it gets. oh, stop being so bashful and tricky, miranda, just be straightforward and innocent! i'll be your wife if you'll have me. otherwise, i'll die a virgin, devoted to you. you can refuse to make me your spouse, but i'll be your servant whether you want me to or not.
it's true. she's gone. the rest of my life will be nothing but bitterness. now, roderigo, where did you see her?, oh, that miserable wretch!, you say you saw her with the moor?, oh, who would want to be a father?, how did you know it was her?, to think she tricked me so easily!, what did she say to you?, get me more candles, and wake up all my relatives. do you think they're married?
ah, sirrah, he said. we will: do nothing but eat and celebrate, (sings) and praise god for this happy year, when flesh is cheap but women are costly, and lusty men roam here and there, so merrily, and always so merrily.
you'll be my wife, dearest, and i'll serve you forever.
yes, i really think so.
that's a merry heart! master silence, i'll drink a toast to you in a minute.
will you be my husband, then?
oh, heaven, how did she get out? my own flesh and blood rebels against me! fathers, never trust your daughters just because they act obedient and innocent. are there magic spells that can lead young virgins astray? have you ever heard of anything like that, roderigo?
davy, get master bardolph some wine.
yes, with a heart more eager to bear a husband's responsibilities than a slave ever wanted freedom. take my hand, darling.
yes, sir, i have.
sit, kind sir; i'll be with you in a second. very kind sir, please sit. here's to you! what we lack in food, we make up for in drink. you must endure it; good intentions are what count.
here's my hand, and my heart. and now goodbye. i'll see you again in half an hour.
call my brother., now i wish you'd married her!, some of you go one way, some the other way., do you know where we can find her and the moor?
enjoy yourself, master bardolph, and you, my little soldier, enjoy yourself.
a million goodbyes to you.
i think i can find him. get together a group of armed men and follow me.
(sings) enjoy, enjoy! my wife has it all, women are shrews, whether they're short or they're tall, it's a merry party when men laugh and joke, so let's enjoy ourselves this shrovetide shrovetide = the period of merrymaking before the christian season of lent (a time of penance and self-denial) shrovetide , enjoy, enjoy!
i can't be as happy as they are at this moment, but nothing could make me any happier. now it's time to get back to my studying, since i have a lot of serious business to take care of before dinner.
lead the way. i'll stop at every house. i'm respected enough that most of them will do what i say., get your weapons! and get the officers who guard the city at night., let's go, roderigo. i'll reward you for your troubles.
i didn't think master silence had this in him.
don't tell me that. when the barrel's empty, we'll drink water. not one drop sooner. therefore, drink up., servant-monster, drink a toast to me.
i've killed many men in battle, but i still believe it's deeply wrong to murder someone. sometimes i worry i'm not cruel enough for this job. nine or ten times i wanted to stab him under the ribs.
who, me? i've let loose once or twice in my life.
"servant monster"? what a crazy island this is. they say there are only five people on it. we're three of them. if the other two are as loopy as we are, our country's in bad shape.
it's better that you didn't kill him.
(to bardolph) here's a dish of red apples for you.
drink when i order you, servant-monster. your eyes look like they've sunk into your head.
but he kept chattering so foolishly, talking about you in such insulting and despicable terms, that it was hard for me to restrain myself. but please tell me, sir, is your marriage secure iago may be asking whether othello has consummated his marriage by sleeping with desdemona yet. a marriage could be annulled if it had never been consummated. secure ? brabantio is an important man in this city, almost as powerful as the duke himself. he'll try to annul your marriage, or else inflict whatever punishment the law and his power will allow him to.
davy!
where else should his eyes be, if not in his head? he'd be quite a monster if his eyes were in his tail.
let him do his worst. the services i have done for the venetian government will count for more than his complaints will. no one knows this yet, and i don't like to brag, but i come from a royal family, and i'm as noble as the woman i've married. and let me tell you, iago, if i didn't love desdemona as much as i do, i'd never agree to get married and lose my freedom at all. but look at those lights. who's coming?
yes, sir! i'll be with you in a second. (to bardolph) a cup of wine, sir?
my man, monster is so drunk he can't talk. as for me, no liquid can harm me, neither booze nor the whole sea itself. before i could get to shore, i swam thirty-five leagues league = miles leagues in it and still survived., monster, you'll be my lieutenant, or my flag-bearer.
that's her father and his friends, who've been roused out of bed. you'd better go inside.
(sings) a cup of wine that's fresh and fine, and drink to you, darling mine, and a happy heart lives long!
lieutenant is better. he's not standing straight enough to hold a flag.
no, i must let them find me. my good qualities, my legal status as desdemona's husband, and my innocence will protect me. is it them?
well said, master silence.
we're not going to run in our army, monsieur monster.
i don't think so.
and we will enjoy ourselves. now's the best time of night.
or walk either. you'll just lie there like sleeping dogs and say nothing.
the servants of the duke and my lieutenant? hello, everyone! what's going on?
here's to your health and long life, master silence.
monster sweetie, be a good monster and just speak once.
the duke sends his regards. he needs to see you right away.
(sings) fill the cup, and pass it here, i'll drink it to the bottom, even if it's a mile down.
how is your highness? let me lick your shoe. (he points to trinculo) i'll never serve that guy there. he's not courageous like you.
what do you think he wants?
welcome, honest master bardolph. if you want something and don't ask for it, that's your tough luck. (to the page) welcome, my little tiny thief, welcome indeed. i'll drink to master bardolph, and to all the good sports around london.
(to caliban) you're a liar, you ignorant monster. i'm courageous. i could shake up a police officer right now. you drunken fish, you, how could you call me a coward after all the booze i've drunk today? do you tell such monstrous lies because you're half fish and half monster?
something about cyprus. i think it's important. the warships have sent a dozen messages tonight, one after the other, and many of the senators have been awakened and are at the duke's already. they're very anxious for you to get there. when you weren't at home, the senate sent out three different search parties to find you.
i hope to see london once before i die.
(to stephano) look how he's making fun of me! will you let him talk to me like, my lord?
it's good you found me. i'll just speak a word or two here in the house and then i'll go with you.
if i see you there, davy, 
"lord," he calls you? what an idiot that monster is!
ensign, what's he doing in there?
by god, you'll break open a quart bottle together, ha! won't you, master bardolph?
(to stephano) there he goes again! please, bite him to death, i'm begging you.
tonight he boarded a treasure ship. if he can keep it, he'll be set forever.
yessir, in a two-quart glass.
trinculo, speak politely. if you mutiny against me, i'll hang you from the next tree. this poor monster is my subject, and i will not allow him to be insulted.
i don't understand.
by god's fingers, i thank you. this rogue will stick with you, i promise you that. he won't fail, he's true blue.
thank you, my noble lord. now would you please listen once again to the request i made to you earlier?
he's married.
and i'll stick with him, sir.
indeed, i will. kneel and tell me again. i'll stand, and so will trinculo.
to whom?
spoken like a king. take whatever you want: enjoy yourselves! knocking is heard offstage. hey, see who's at the door there! who's knocking?
(kneeling) as i told you before, i'm enslaved to a tyrant, a magician who tricked me with magic spells and took my island from me.
to, 
(to silence) you're really keeping up with me!
you lie.
are you ready?
(sings) keep up with me, then dub me a knight! samingo samingo = lyric from "monsieur mingo," a drinking song. in latin, mingo means "i urinate." samingo ! right?
(to trinculo) you're the liar, you big fat monkey. i wish my courageous master would kill you. i'm not lying.
yes, i'll go with you now.
right.
trinculo, if you interrupt him any more, i swear i'll knock some teeth out of your head.
here comes another group looking for you.
right? then you've got to admit that an old man can do some things.
i didn't say anything.
it's brabantio. look out, sir. he intends to do something bad to you.
sir, if i may say so, there's someone named pistol here from the royal court. he's got news.
okay, just stay quiet. go on.
hey! stop right there!
from the royal court? let him in.
i was telling you he used witchcraft to take this island. he stole it from me. if your highness is willing, take revenge on him for that, because i know you're brave enough, i don't dare to, 
sir, it's the moor.
what's up, pistol!
that's for sure.
get him, he's a thief!
god save you, sir john.
you'll be lord of the island then, and i'll be your servant.
you, roderigo! come on, i'll fight you.
what wind blew you here, pistol?
and how would we go about doing that? can you bring me to him?
put away your swords. they'll get rusty in the dew. sir, your age and status inspire more respect than your weapons do.
not the evil wind that blows no one toward any good. sweet knight, you are now one of the hugest men in the country.
yes, yes, my lord. i'll take you to where he sleeps, and you can pound a nail into his head.
you evil thief, where have you hidden my daughter? you devil, you've put a spell on her! anybody with eyes could tell you that a beautiful and happy young girl like her, who's refused to marry all of the handsome young men of the city, wouldn't run off with a black thing like you unless she'd been bewitched. you're something to fear, not to love. it's obvious to everyone that you've tricked her, drugged her, or kidnapped her. that's probably what happened, so i'm arresting you., arrest this man as a practitioner of black magic. grab him. if he struggles, use force!
i swear, i think he is, except for the good fellow puff, from barson.
you lie. you can't do that.
just a minute. i don't need anyone to tell me when to fight. you've accused me of some serious crimes. where do you want me to go to respond to these charges?
puff? puff in your face, you degenerate coward! sir john, i'm your pistol and your friend, and i rode at full tilt to find you here. i bring you reports, and good luck, and golden times, and happy, valuable news.
what an idiot this guy is!, you're a rotten piece of work!, i beg your highness, beat him up and take his wine bottle from him. when he loses that, he'll be drinking salt water, since i'll never tell him where the freshwater springs are.
to prison, until you're called into court.
then please, deliver this news like a human being who lives in this world.
trinculo, watch out. if you interrupt this monster with one more word, i'll beat you like a piece of salted fish.
what if i do what you say? how would i satisfy the duke then? his messengers are waiting here to take me to him immediately, on pressing state business.
damn this world, and the vile little people who live in it! i'm talking about africa, and its golden joys.
what did i do? i didn't do anything. i need to get away from you.
it's true. the duke's in a meeting right now, and he's sent for you too.
oh, you vulgar assyrian knight, what is your news? convey to king cophetua falstaff is aping pistol's high-flown style. cophetua was an african king who married a beggar. king cophetua the story therein.
didn't you call him a liar?
the duke's in a meeting? at this time of night? bring him with us. the law's on my side. the duke and any of my fellow senators will take this wrong as seriously as if it were their own. if we let crimes like this happen, slaves and heathens will be our rulers.
(sings) and robin hood, scarlet, and john a lyric from a popular song and robin hood, scarlet, and john .
you lie.
these reports are inconsistent. you can't trust them.
will junkyard dogs attack the muses, goddesses of poetry? will my good news be thwarted this way? then pistol, go ahead and plead with the furies, the goddesses of revenge.
(to trinculo) oh, i did? take that, then. (he beats trinculo) if you want more beatings like that, just accuse me of lying again.
it's true, they're inconsistent. my letters say there are a hundred and seven ships.
honest gentleman, i don't know what kind of family you're from.
i didn't accuse you of lying. are you out of your mind and deaf too? damn your wine! this is what happens when you drink too much. your monster can go to hell, and you can too!
and mine say a hundred and forty.
that's your loss.
ha, ha, ha!
and mine say two hundred. but often in these cases, reports are just estimates. the important thing is that they all say a turkish fleet is approaching cyprus.
forgive me saying so, sir, but if you've got news from the court, then you have only two choices: you can either tell it or not tell it. i have some authority from the king, you know.
now go ahead and tell me the rest of your story., please go stand farther away.
yes, we get the idea. the inconsistency doesn't make me think that the reports are all wrong. i have no doubt about what they're basically saying, and it's frightening.
from which king, you beggar? speak, or die.
beat him up. after a little while, i'll beat him too.
(offstage) hello! hey, hello!
for king henry.
stand farther away., come on, continue your story.
it's a messenger from the warships.
henry the fourth, or fifth?
just as i told you, he usually sleeps in the afternoon. at that time you can smash in his skull after seizing his books; or you can bash his skull with a log; or you can stab him in the belly; or cut his windpipe. just remember to grab his books first, since without them he's just a poor fool like me, and can't command a single spirit. all the spirits hate him as much as i do. be sure to burn his magic books. he has some wonderful home furnishings, that's what he calls them, that he'll use to decorate his house when he gets one. the most important thing for you to think about is how beautiful his daughter is. he says she has no equal. i never saw a woman except her and sycorax, my mother. but miranda is so much more beautiful, you can't even compare the two.
why are you here?
henry the fourth.
is she really that wonderful?
signor angelo told me to come here and tell you that the turkish fleet is heading for rhodes, not cyprus.
then screw your position! sir john, your tender little lamb is now the king. henry the fifth's the man, and i speak the truth. when pistol tells a lie, do this (he makes an obscene gesture) and tell me to go screw myself, like some crazy spaniard.
yes, my lord. she'll look good in your bed, and she'll produce some fine children too.
what do you think about this change?
what? is the old king dead?
monster, i'll kill this man. his daughter and i will be king and queen, god protect us!, and you and trinculo will be our governors., do you like that idea, trinculo?
they can't have changed; there's no way this could be true. it's a trick to confuse us. think about how important cyprus is to the turks, and remember that they could capture cyprus more easily, since it isn't as well protected as rhodes is. if we keep these things in mind, we can't possibly imagine that the turks would be so incompetent as to put off for last what they want to achieve first, setting aside something easy and profitable to do something dangerous and pointless.
as a doornail: these things i say are true.
excellent.
no, i think we can be confident that the turks aren't really headed for rhodes.
get going, bardolph! saddle up my horse. master robert shallow, pick whatever job you want in the whole country: it's yours. pistol, i'll pile honors on you.
give me your hand. i'm sorry i hit you. but try to control your speech.
here's some more news coming in.
oh happy day! i wouldn't even trade a knighthood for my new, good fortune.
in a half an hour he'll be asleep. will you kill him then?
sir, the turks sailed to rhodes, where they joined with another fleet.
there you go! i brought good news!
yes, i swear.
that's just what i thought. how many, can you guess?
carry master silence to bed. master shallow, lord shallow, call yourself whatever you want. i'm in
(to himself) i'll tell my master this.
thirty ships. now they've turned around and are clearly heading for cyprus. signor montano, your brave and loyal servant, gives you this information and asks you to send reinforcements to relieve him.
charge of all the luck in the world! get your boots on. we'll ride through the night. oh sweet pistol! get going, bardolph!
you make me so happy. i'm full of joy. let's be light-hearted. will you sing the tune you taught me just a little while ago?
then it's certain they're heading for cyprus. is marcus luccicos in town?
pistol, tell me more, and help me think of something good we can do for you. boots, boots, master shallow! i know the young king is dying to see me. let's just take anybody's horses; i rule the laws of england now! blessed are those who have been my friends, and watch out, lord chief justice!
i'll do anything you ask, monster, anything reasonable., come on, trinculo, let's sing. (he sings) dismiss 'em and ziss 'em and diss 'em and dismiss 'em. thought is free.
no, he's in florence.
may vultures eat out his lungs, too! you know the old saying, "what happened to the life i used to lead?" well, they're here; welcome to these pleasant days.
that's not the tune i had in mind.
write to him immediately. hurry.
no, you horrible rogue! i wish to god i were dead, so i could have you hanged. you dislocated my shoulder!
what's this song?
here come brabantio and the brave moor.
the street cops handed her over to me, and she'll be whipped through and through, i promise. she's been involved in a couple of murders.
that's the melody, played by nobody.
brave othello, i have to send you right away to fight the turks, our great enemy., (to brabantio) oh, i didn't see you there. welcome, sir. i could have used your wisdom and help tonight.
pig, pig! you lie! come on! i'll tell you what, you damned flabby-faced moron: if i have a miscarriage now, you'll wish you'd hit your own mother, you pasty-faced villain!
(to the invisible musician) if you're a man, then let us see what you look like. if you're a devil, then go to hell.
i could have used yours as well. forgive me, your grace. i didn't get out of bed and come here in the dead of night because i heard about the war or because i was worried about the city's defense. i have a personal problem so painful and gut-wrenching that it overwhelms everything else.
oh god, i wish sir john would come! he'd make somebody bleed for this. i pray to god that she has a miscarriage!
oh, forgive all my sins!
why, what's the matter?
well, if she does, you'll have twelve cushions on your couch again. you have only eleven now, since she's wearing one of them under her dress. i order both of you to come with me: the man that you two and pistol beat up is dead.
dead men have to pay their debts., i challenge you!, god help us.
it's my daughter! oh, my daughter!
i'll tell you what, you stick-figure; i'll have you beaten soundly for this. you blue-coated rogue, you filthy, starving correctioner! if you aren't walloped for this, i'll swear off skirts.
are you scared?
is she dead?
come on, come on, you little night sinner, come on.
no, monster, not me.
she's dead to me. she's been tricked and stolen from me, enchanted by black magic spells. she must've
oh god! i can't believe that right is overcoming might! well, challenges build character.
don't be scared. this island is full of noises, strange sounds and sweet melodies that make you feel good and don't hurt anyone. sometimes i hear a thousand twanging instruments hum at my ears, and sometimes voices that send me back to sleep even if i had just woken up, and then i dreamed of clouds opening up and dropping such riches on me that when i woke up, i cried because i wanted to dream again.
been tricked or drugged, because there's no way she could have made this mistake on her own.
come on, you bastard, come on. bring me to a judge.
this'll be a wonderful kingdom to live in, where they play music for free.
whoever tricked your daughter and stole her from you will pay for it. and you yourself will determine the sentence as you see fit, and impose the death penalty if you choose to, even if the criminal were my own son.
yeah, come on, you starved dog.
as soon as you kill prospero.
i humbly thank you, sir. here is the man, the moor. it seems you had your own reasons for summoning him here.
master death! master bones!
that'll happen soon enough. i remember the plan.
we're sorry to hear this.
you skeleton, you!
the sound is going away. but let's follow it, and then do our dirty work afterward.
(to othello) what do you have to say for yourself?
come on, you thin thing; come on, you lean deer!
lead us, monster; we'll follow. i wish i could see this invisible drummer. he really plays well.
nothing, but this is true.
very well.
i'm right behind you, stephano. are you coming monster?
noble, honorable gentlemen whom i serve: it's true that i've taken this man's daughter from him and married her. but that's my only offense. there's nothing more. i'm awkward in my speech and i'm not a smooth talker. from the time i was seven years old until nine months ago i've been fighting in battles. i don't know much about the world apart from fighting. so i won't do myself much good by speaking in my own defense. but if you'll let me, i'll tell you the plain
more rushes; more rushes.
i swear, i can't go any further, sir. my old bones are tired. we're wandering in a maze. if you don't mind, i need to rest a bit.
story of how we fell in love, and what drugs, charms, spells, and powerful magic, because that's what i'm being accused of, i used to win his daughter.
the trumpets have blown twice.
i can't blame you, old lord. i'm so tired myself that it's bringing me down. sit down and rest. i'm losing hope. the one we're looking for is dead. we're searching on land, but he's lost in the sea. we have to give up and let him go.
she's a good girl, quiet and obedient. she blushes at the slightest thing. and you want me to believe that despite her young age and proper upbringing she fell in love with a man she'd be afraid to look at? the very thought of it is ridiculous. you'd have to be stupid to think that someone so perfect could make such an unnatural mistake as that. the devil must be behind this. therefore i say again that he must have used some powerful drug or magic potion on her.
it'll be two o'clock before they arrive from the coronation. hurry, hurry.
(speaking so that only sebastian can hear) i'm glad he's so depressed. don't back out of our plan just because it didn't work the first time.
your saying this isn't proof. there has to be clear evidence that he's done this, not just these accusations.
stand here near me, master robert shallow. i'll make the king do good things for you: i'll throw him a look as he passes by. just watch the face he'll make at me.
(speaking so that only antonio can hear) the next chance we get, we'll do the deed.
tell us, othello. did you trick or deceive this lady in some way? or did you agree to this as equals?
god bless your lungs, good knight.
(speaking so that only sebastian can hear) let's do it tonight. the men are so tired from traveling that they can't be as careful as they are when they're fresh.
please, send for desdemona to come here from the sagittarius inn and ask her to speak about me in front
come here, pistol. stand behind me. (to shallow) oh, if i'd had time to make new clothes i would have spent the thousand pounds i borrowed from you. but it doesn't matter. these poor clothes are better; it shows how desperate i was to see him.
(speaking so that only antonio can hear) yes, tonight. no more talking about this now.
of her father. if she has anything bad to say about me, then you can sentence me to death.
it does indeed.
what's that music? my friends, listen.
bring desdemona here.
it shows how sincerely i love him, 
what marvelous music!
iago, bring desdemona here. you know where she is.
it does indeed.
heaven help us! what were those things?
in the meantime i'll tell you all, as honestly as i confess my sins to god, how i wooed this beautiful lady, and how she came to love me.
my devotion, 
a puppet show in real life. now i'll believe that unicorns exist, and that there's a tree in arabia where the phoenix lives.
tell us, othello.
it does, it does, it does.
me too. and anything else that's hard to believe, just ask me and i'll swear it's true. travelers have never told lies, no matter what the fools at home accuse them of.
her father loved me and used to invite me to his house often, continually asking me about my life and all the battles i've fought. i told him everything, from my boyhood up until the time when i was talking to him. i told him about unfortunate disasters, hair-raising adventures on sea and on land, and near-catastrophes and dangerous adventures i've been through. i told him how i was captured and sold as a slave, how i bought my freedom, and how i wandered through caves and deserts. i was able to tell him about cannibals who eat each other, and men with heads growing below their shoulders. when i talked about all these things, desdemona used to listen attentively. if she had to go do some household chore, i noticed that she'd always come back quickly to hear more of my stories.
in a word, to ride all night; not to stop and think, not to dawdle, not to take the time to change my clothes, 
if i told them about this back in naples, would they believe me? i'd tell them that i saw natives like these, since they must be natives, who are graceful and well-mannered even if they're monstrous to look at, kinder than most human beings you might find, kinder than almost any human.
when i was relaxing, she'd pull me aside and ask to hear some part of a story she had missed. her eyes would fill with tears at the bad things i went through in my younger years. when my stories were done, she'd sigh and tell me how strangely wonderful and sad my life had been. she said she wished she hadn't heard it, but she also wished there was a man like me for her. she thanked me and told me that if a friend of mine had a story like mine to tell, she'd fall in love with him. i took the hint and spoke to her. she said she loved me for the dangers i'd survived, and i loved her for feeling such strong emotions about me. that's the only witchcraft i ever used. here comes my wife now. she'll confirm everything.
it is best, no doubt about it.
(to himself) my good lord, you're absolutely right, since some of you are worse than devils.
i think a story like that would win my own daughter over. brabantio, i urge you to make the best of this. try to accept what's happened.
standing here filthy from traveling, and sweating with my desire to see him; thinking of nothing else, disregarding everything, as if the only thing in the world that mattered was seeing him.
i can't stop being amazed by these shapes, sounds, and gestures, which express, even without saying anything, a wonderful kind of silent language.
please let her speak. if she admits she wanted this, then i won't blame othello., come here, my child. who do you obey here?
that's how it is. nothing else matters. semper idem. obsque hoc nihil est these latin phrases translate as "ever the same" and "apart from this, there is nothing." semper idem. obsque hoc nihil est .
(to himself) time to go.
father, this isn't easy for me. i'm torn. i owe you respect because you gave me life and education. you're the one i have to obey. i'm your daughter. but this man here is my husband now, and i owe him as much as my mother owed you, just as she preferred you to her own father. so i have to give my obedience to the moor, my husband.
that's exactly right.
they vanished strangely.
i'm finished, then. duke, please go ahead with your state business. i'd rather adopt a child than have one of my own., come here, moor. i'm forced to give my blessing to this marriage. with all my heart, i give you that thing which, if you didn't already have it, i'd try with all my heart to keep from you. desdemona, i'm glad you're my only child, since if i had others i'd keep them all locked up. you would have made me treat them like a tyrant., i'm done, my lord.
knight, i'll fire up your noble liver and make you enraged. doll, the goddess of your thoughts, is imprisoned in a horrible jail, tossed there by a heartless and filthy hand. stoke up dark revenge from your deepest belly and set loose the serpents of hell. doll is in. pistol speaks nothing but the truth.
it's all right, since they left their food behind, and we're hungry. would you like to taste the banquet?
let me refer to a proverb that may help you forgive these lovers: if you can't change something, don't cry about it. when you lament something bad that's already happened, you're setting yourself up for more
i'll set her free.
not me.
bad news. a robbery victim who can smile about his losses is superior to the thief who robbed him, but if he cries he's just wasting time.
that was the roar of the sea. the clanging trumpet sounds!
i assure you, sir, there's nothing to be afraid of. when we were boys, who'd believe that there were mountain people with rolls of skin around their necks, with their throats hanging down? or that there were men with heads in their chests?, nowadays travelers commonly report that these things exist.
so if the turks steal cyprus from us, it won't be bad as long as we keep smiling. it's easy to accept platitudes like that if you haven't lost anything. but i've lost something precious, and i have to put up with the platitude as well as suffering my loss. talk is cheap. i've never heard of someone feeling better because of someone else's words. please, i'm asking you, go ahead and get back to your state affairs.
god save your grace, king hal! my royal hal!
i'll start eating, even if this is my last supper. it's all right, since the best part of my life was over anyway. brother, duke, please have some food.
the turks are heading for cyprus with a powerful fleet. othello, you understand better than anyone how the defenses for cyprus work. even though we have a very good officer in charge there already, everyone says you're the better man for the job. so i'll have to ask you to put a damper on your marriage celebrations and take part in this dangerous expedition.
the heavens guard and protect you, you royal child of fame!
(to alonso, antonio, and sebastian) the three of you are sinners, and destiny made the sea belch you up onto this island, where no men live, since none of you deserve to live. i've driven you crazy, and many mad people are driven to kill themselves in desperation. (some of the courtiers draw their swords) listen, you fools, my fellow harpies a harpy is a mythological creature with a woman's face and breasts and the wings and claws of a bird. shakespeare apparently intended to have ariel appear together with two other harpies. harpies and i carry out fate's orders. your swords are useless against us, you'd be more successful swinging them at the empty air, or stabbing at water, than trying to cut off even one of my feathers. my two companions are just as invulnerable as i am. even if you had the power to hurt us, you'd find your swords far too heavy to lift. but remember, and it's my job to remind you of this, that in milan the three of you stole prospero's throne and threw him and his innocent child into the sea, which has now taken revenge on you. to punish you for this horrible crime, the higher powers, delaying their punishment, not forgetting about it, have stirred up the seas and all the creatures of earth against you., they've taken your only son from you, alonso, and they've ordered me to destroy you slowly, in a way worse than sudden death could ever be. i'll stay with you every step of your way. the only way to protect yourselves from the angry higher powers, which are ready to fall upon your head on this empty island, is for you to be sincerely sorry in your hearts for what you've done, and to live innocent lives from this time forward.
i've gotten used to the hardships of a military life. i rise to the occasion when faced with difficulties. i will take charge of this war against the turks. but i humbly ask you to make appropriate arrangements for my wife,
god save you, my sweet boy!
(to himself) you've played the role of harpy very well, my ariel. you were fierce but graceful. you said everything i told you to say., in the same lifelike way, and with the same attention to detail, my lower-ranking servants have done what they were supposed to do. my magic powers are all in full swing, and my enemies are confused and running around in circles. they're under my control, and i'm keeping them in their crazy fits while i go visit ferdinand, whom they think has drowned, and the young woman he and i both love.
giving her a place to live and people to keep her company that suit her high rank.
my lord chief justice, go speak to that arrogant man.
(to alonso) for the love of god, sir, why are you standing here staring into space like this?
she can stay at her father's house.
(to falstaff) have you lost your mind? do you know what you're doing, talking like that?
oh, it's horrible, horrible. i thought the clouds were talking to me, the winds were singing to me, and the thunder, like an awful organ pipe, roared prospero's name. it sang about my crimes. because of my crimes my son is dead on the ocean floor. i'll go join him there, going down deeper than any anchor ever sank, and lie with him dead in the mud.
i won't allow it.
my king! my god! i'm talking to you, my heart!
i'll fight every one of these devils if i have to, one at a time.
neither will i.
i know you not, old man. get down on your knees and pray, for white hair doesn't sit well on a fool and a clown. i have dreamed about such a man for a long time: a man so swollen with excess, so old and so obscene. but now that i have awakened, i despise that dream. let your body lessen, and your manners increase; leave behind your overindulgence, and know that the grave gapes three times as wide for you than any other man. don't answer me with a foolish joke. do not assume that i am what i was; for god knows, i have turned my back on my former self, and i will do the same to those who were my companions. when you hear that i am as i was, then come to me, and you will once again be what you were: the teacher and nurse to my wild, riotous ways. until then, i banish you, on pain of death, as i have done to the other men who once misled me. do not
i'll back you up.
and i wouldn't stay there. i don't want to upset my father by being in his house. dear duke, please listen to what i have to say.
come within ten miles of me. i'll grant you a modest allowance to live on, so that poverty will not lead you into evil. when i hear that you have reformed your ways, i will promote you as you deserve. (to chief justice) it's your job to see this order carried out. let's go.
all three of them are crazy with despair. their guilt is finally starting to gnaw at them, like a slow-acting poison. those of you who are young and active, i beg you to follow them and keep them from doing the crazy things their guilt might push them to do.
what do you want to do, desdemona?
master shallow, i owe you a thousand pounds.
follow them, please.
when i fell in love with othello i made up my mind that i wanted to live with him. you can see how much i wanted to be with him by how violently i threw away my old life. i feel like i'm a part of him now, and that means i'm part of a soldier. i saw othello's true face when i saw his mind. i gave my whole life to him because of his honor and bravery. if i were left at home uselessly while he went off to war, then i'm separated from my husband in his natural element. i'd be miserable without him. let me go with him.
yes, indeed, sir john. and i'd like to take it home with me.
(to ferdinand) if i've punished you too harshly, i'm ready to make it up to you now, since i've given you a third of my life, everything i live for, my daughter miranda. i put her in your hands. all the trouble i put you through was to test your love for her, and you've passed the test remarkably well. as heaven is my witness, i give you this valuable gift. oh ferdinand, don't smile at me for bragging about miranda, for you'll see soon enough that she outshines any praise of her.
please allow her to do this. i'm not asking to have her near me for sex, i'm too old for that, and my sexual
that can't happen, master shallow. don't let this upset you; i'll get a private invitation to see him. look, he has to appear this way to the world. don't worry about your good fortunes: i'm still the man who will make you great.
i'd believe it even if oracles an oracle is someone who delivers messages from the gods. oracles told me differently.
urges are dead. i want this because she wants it, i love her for her mind. and i'd never want you to think that i'd neglect my serious official duties while she was there with me. if i ever let love blind me so that i choose to lounge around in bed with my loved one instead of going off to war, then you can let a housewife use my helmet as a frying pan. my reputation would be disgraced if i ever acted like that.
i don't know how you're going to do that, unless you give me your jacket and fill me out with stuffing. please, sir john, let me have five hundred of my thousand.
then take my daughter, both as my gift to you and as something you have earned. but if you have sex with her before the marriage ceremony takes place, the heavens will not bless your relationship, but will overwhelm you with hate, contempt, and discord, and will poison your marriage bed so that you both grow to loathe it. so be careful, and make sure you respect the holy institution of marriage.
you can decide that privately. i don't care whether she stays or goes. what's important is the urgency of this mission. you've got to act fast.
sir, i'm as good as my word. what you heard here a minute ago was just a color; it was a pretense.
i want peace, good kids, and a long life. to protect the love i cherish, i won't be tempted by any opportunity to forget my honor and give in to lust. i refuse to give up the joys of my wedding day, when i'll be so eager for my first night of love that i'll wonder whether evening will ever come.
you'll have to leave tonight.
a color that i fear you'll be buried in, sir john.
you've said it well. so have a seat and talk to her. she's yours., come, ariel! my trusty servant, ariel!
with all my heart, i'll go right away.
stop worrying about colors: come to lunch with me. come, lieutenant pistol. come, bardolph. he'll call for me tonight.
what does my powerful master wish for? i'm here.
we'll meet again at nine in the morning. othello, have one of your officers stay behind to bring you your commission and whatever else is important to you.
go, take sir john falstaff away to jail, and take all his companions with him.
you and your fellow spirits did your last assignment well, and now i need your help again. go bring them all here; i give you power over them. make them act quickly. i have to give this young couple here a small display of my magic powers. i've promised them i would, and they're expecting it.
my lord, my ensign is an honest and trustworthy man. he'll accompany my wife, and bring whatever else you think i might need.
my lord, my lord, 
right now?
all right, then. good night, everyone., (to brabantio) sir, if goodness is beautiful, your son-in-law is beautiful, not black.
i can't talk now. i'll listen to you later. take them away.
yes, right away.
goodbye, black moor. treat desdemona well.
si fortuna me tormenta, spero me contenta "if fortune torments me, hope contents me." pistol's motto is a garbled mix of french, spanish and italian. si fortuna me tormenta, spero me contenta .
before you can say "come" and "go," and breathe twice, and shout "so, so!" each one of your servants will rush here,
keep an eye on her, moor. she lied to me, and she may lie to you.
the king's fair dealings please me. he wants to ensure that his old companions are provided for, but he banishes them until they can behave more properly and presentably.
tripping over his own toes, making funny faces. do you love me, master? no?
i'd bet my life she'd never lie to me. iago, i'm leaving my dear desdemona with you. have your wife attend to her, and bring them along as soon as you can. come on, desdemona, i've only got an hour of love to spend with you, to tell you what you need to do. we're on a tight schedule.
that they are.
i love you dearly, ariel. don't come near till you hear me call you.
iago.
the king's assembled his parliament, sir.
all right, i understand.
what do you have to say, noble friend?
he has.
(to ferdinand) make sure you behave honorably. don't go too far with her. if you let yourself get stirred up, you'll forget your promise of good behavior. calm yourself down or you'll forget your vow.
what do you think i should do?
i'll bet that, before the year ends, we'll launch an invasion of france. i heard a little bird singing about it, and i think the music pleased the king. come, will you leave with me?
i assure you, sir, the tender love i feel in my heart is stronger than the sexual passions stirring down below.
go to bed, and sleep.
first, i'll tell you what i'm afraid of. then, i'll bow, and finally, i'll make a speech. i fear that this play displeased you; i bow to you out of duty; and finally, i make this speech to ask you for forgiveness. if you're expecting a good speech now, then i'm in trouble. for i wrote the words i'm about to say, and i'm sure that what i'm about to say will end up getting me in trouble. but i'll get to the point, and thus i'll get to the danger. you should know, as you seem to, that i recently came on this stage at the end of some other lousy play, to ask you to be patient and to promise you a better play the next time. i had intended to pay you back for that play with this one. if you didn't like this play, then, like a businessman who has gambled on a risky venture, i am bankrupt; and you, my sweet creditors, are out of luck. i promised you i would be here, and here i stand to submit myself to your mercy. give me some mercy and i'll promise to pay you back again another time. that's how debtors do it: they always promise to repay. if my talking can't convince you to let me off the hook, then would you like me to dance? and yet, that would be a cheap payment, to dance myself out of debt. but a person with a good conscience will always seek to pay his debts, and i would do the same. all the women here have forgiven me: if the men won't, then the men don't agree with the women, which has never happened in a theater audience before. just one more thing, if you don't mind. if fatty meat hasn't clogged you up yet, our playwright will continue the story with sir john in it, and entertain you with the beautiful princess katharine of france. and speaking of france, as far as i know, falstaff will die there of the sweating disease, unless, that is, he's already been killed by your low opinions of him. oldcastle in an early version of henry iv, the character of falstaff was called sir john oldcastle. the name was changed upon the insistence of the historical sir john oldcastle's descendants, who were highly influential in england at the time. oldcastle died a martyr, and this is not him. my mouth is tired; when my legs are, too, i'll say goodnight and take a bow.
good., now come, ariel! better to have an extra servant on hand than be understaffed. appear before me now quickly, 
i'm going to go drown myself.
no talking. just watch! be quiet.
if you do that, i'll never respect you again. why, you silly man!
now all of my family's troubles have come to a glorious end, thanks to my brother, king edward iv. all the clouds that threatened the york family have vanished and turned to sunshine. now we wear the wreaths of victory on our heads. we've taken off our armor and weapons and hung them up as decorations. instead of hearing trumpets call us to battle, we dance at parties. we get to wear easy smiles on our faces rather than the grim expressions of war. instead of charging toward our enemies on armored horses, we dance for our ladies in their chambers, accompanied by sexy songs on the lute. but i'm not made to be a seducer, or to make faces at myself in the mirror. i was badly made and don't have the looks to strut my stuff in front of pretty sluts. i've been cheated of a nice body and face, or even normal proportions. i am deformed, spit out from my mother's womb prematurely and so badly formed that dogs bark at me as i limp by them. i'm left with nothing to do in this weak, idle peacetime, unless i want to look at my lumpy shadow in the sun and sing about that.
i am the rainbow-bearing messenger sent by my mistress juno, the queen of the sky. i have come to announce that juno has asked you, ceres, goddess of the fields and the earth, to leave your rich farms of wheat, rye, barley, oats, and peas, the hills where the
it's silly to live when life is torture. the only cure is death.
since i can't amuse myself by being a lover, i've decided to become a villain. i've set dangerous plans in motion, using lies, drunken prophecies, and stories about dreams to set my brother clarence and the king against each other. if king edward is as honest and fair-minded as i am deceitful and cruel, then clarence is going to be locked away in prison today because of a prophecy that "g" edward interprets "g" to mean george, duke of clarence, though ironically it could just as well mean richard, duke of gloucester. "g" will murder edward's children. oh, time to hide what i'm thinking, here comes clarence.
sheep nibble, the furrows that april covers with flowers for nymphs to make crowns with. you must leave the groves where the disappointed bachelor lurks, rejected by his love, and the well-pruned vineyards, and the rocky seashore.
oh, how stupid! i've been alive for twenty-eight years, and i've never met a man who knew what was good for him. i'd rather be a baboon than kill myself out of love for some woman i can't have.
good afternoon, brother. why are you surrounded by these armed guards?
you must leave these places and hurry here to this grassy spot, to entertain juno.
what should i do? i know it's foolish to be so much in love, but i can't help it.
his majesty is so concerned about my personal safety that he has ordered them to conduct me to the tower the tower of london, where political prisoners were kept. tower .
greetings to you, rainbow messenger, who never disobeys juno, wife of jupiter; with your golden wings you sprinkle dewdrops and refreshing showers on my flowers, and arch your colored bow over my wooded fields and grassy meadows, like a beautiful scarf to decorate my earth. why has your queen, juno, called me here to this grassy spot?
can't help it? nonsense! what we are is up to us. our bodies are like gardens and our willpower is like the gardener. depending on what we plant, weeds or lettuce, or one kind of herb rather than a variety, the garden will either be barren and useless, or rich and productive. if we didn't have rational minds to counterbalance our emotions and desires, our bodily urges would take over. we'd end up in ridiculous situations. thankfully, we have reason to cool our raging lusts. in my opinion, what you call love is just an offshoot of lust.
you're being arrested? why?
to celebrate a marriage of true love, and give a gift to the lovers.
i don't believe it.
because my name is george.
tell me, rainbow, do you know if either venus, the goddess of love, or her son, cupid, is accompanying queen juno? ever since venus and her blind son plotted a way for the god of the underworld to steal my daughter away for half the year, i swore i'd never speak to them again.
you feel love because you feel lust and you have no willpower. come on, be a man. drown yourself? drowning is for cats or blind puppies, don't drown yourself! i've told you i'm your friend, and i'll stick by you.
that's not your fault! he should imprison the person who named you, instead. maybe the king is sending you to the tower to have you renamed. but, really, what's going on, clarence? can you tell me?
don't be afraid of her company. i met venus as she was with her son on her way to her home on paphos, in a carriage pulled by doves. they were planning to pull a mischievous trick on ferdinand and miranda, who have sworn not to sleep together till their wedding day. but their trick failed. venus went home again, and her little son broke all his arrows, swearing he'll never shoot them again, but play with birds like other little boys.
i've never been more useful to you than i will be now. here's what you'll do. sell all your assets and your land, and turn it into cash. desdemona can't continue loving the moor any more than he can continue loving her. she fell in love with him very suddenly, and they'll break up just as suddenly. moors are moody people., so sell your lands and raise a lot of cash. what seems sweet to him now will soon turn bitter. she'll dump othello for a younger man. when she's had enough of the moor's body, she'll realize her mistake. she'll need to have a new lover. she'll have to have it. so have your money ready. if you want to go to hell, there are better ways to do it than killing yourself. raise all the money you can. i can get the better of religion and a few flimsy vows between a misguided barbarian and a depraved venetian girl. you'll get to sleep with her, just put together some money. and to hell with drowning yourself! that's completely beside the point. if you're ready to die, you can risk death by committing crimes in an attempt to get the woman you want. don't just give up on her and drown yourself.
i'll tell you as soon as i know, richard, because at this point i have no idea. all i've been able to find out is that our brother the king has been listening to prophecies and dreams. he picked out the letter "g" from the alphabet and said a wizard told him that "g" will take the throne away from his children. he thinks "g" is me. i've learned that this, along with other frivolous reasons like it, is what prompted the king to send me to prison.
great queen juno is coming. i know her by her walk.
can i count on you if i wait to see what happens?
well, this is what happens when men let themselves be ruled by women. the king isn't the one sending you to the tower, clarence. it's his wife, lady grey, who got him to do this. remember how she and her brother, anthony woodeville, made him send lord hastings to the tower? hastings was just released. we're not safe, clarence, we're not safe.
how is my generous sister? come help me bless this couple, so they will be prosperous and have many children.
you can trust me. go now and get cash. i told you before, and i'll tell you again and again: i hate the moor. i'm devoted to my cause of hating him, just as devoted as you are to yours. so let's join forces and get revenge. if you seduce desdemona and make a fool out of him, it'll be fun for both of us. many things may happen. go get money. we'll speak again tomorrow. goodbye.
by god, i think the only people who are safe are the queen's own relatives and the late-night messengers the king uses to fetch his mistress, mistress shore. did you hear how lord hastings had to beg the queen to be freed?
(singing) may honor, riches, marriage blessings, long life, and unending joys come to you. juno sings her blessings onto you.
where will we meet in the morning?
hastings got his freedom by bowing down to that goddess. and i'll tell you what. if we want to stay in the king's good graces, we're going have to act like the mistress's richard implies that mistress shore and the queen did not belong to the rank of gentry. mistress's servants, too. ever since our brother made them gentlewomen, mistress shore and the queen have become mighty busybodies in our kingdom.
(singing) growing crops and large harvests, barns and silos full of grain, vines heavy with clustered grapes, plants straining under their fruit, may spring follow directly autumn's harvest, with none of winter's hardships to endure, you will have plenty and want nothing, ceres's blessings on you.
at my house.
i beg your pardon, my lords, but the king gave me orders that no one, however high in rank, should speak privately to clarence.
this is a majestic and harmonious vision. are these spirits we see before us?
i'll be there early.
all right. if you like, brakenbury, you can listen to anything we say. we're not saying anything treasonous, man. we say the king is wise and good, and his noble queen is getting old, pretty, and not jealous. and that mr. shore's wife has nice feet, cherry lips, pretty eyes, and a very pleasant way of expressing herself. and, finally, that the queen's relatives have all been elevated in rank. what do you think? is there anything inaccurate in that?
yes, they're spirits that i've called out of their prisons to perform my whims.
go home. goodbye. oh, and one more thing, 
i have nothing to do with what you're talking about, my lord.
let me live here forever. such a wonderful father-in-law and wife make this place a paradise.
what is it?
"nothing to do" with mrs. shore! i tell you, mister, there's only one man who gets to do "nothing," to do "nothing," or "naught," meant to have sex. richard is playing off brakenbury's innocent, frightened remark. "nothing," with her and not be punished for it. everyone else had better keep their "nothings" to themselves.
now be quiet. juno and ceres are whispering about something serious. there's something else to be done. be silent, or else my magic spell will be broken.
no more talk about killing yourself, okay?
who is that, my lord?
you nymphs who live in the wandering brooks, with seaweed crowns and innocent looks, step out of the water and come join us here on this grassy field. juno
i've changed my mind about that.
her husband, you rascal. are you going to get me in trouble?
orders you. come, sweet nymphs, and help us celebrate the wedding of two true lovers. don't be late.
go then, goodbye. put a lot of cash together.
i beg your grace "grace" is a title of address for nobility and royalty and might apply to a king, queen, duke, duchess, or archbishop. grace to pardon me, and now please stop talking to clarence.
now, you tanned fieldworkers who are so tired of august's labors, get out of the dirt and come rejoice with us here. put your straw hats on, have some fun, and dance with these young nymphs.
i'm going to sell all my land.
we know you have a job to do, brakenbury, and we'll do what you say.
i almost forgot about caliban's horrible conspiracy to kill me. the moment they planned to act is almost here. (to the spirits), good job. leave now, no more!
that's how i always do it, getting money from fools. i'd be wasting my skills dealing with an idiot like that if i couldn't get something useful out of him. i hate the moor, and there's a widespread rumor that he's slept with my wife. i'm not sure it's true, but just the suspicion is enough for me. he thinks highly of me. that'll help. cassio's a handsome man. let's see, how can i
we are required to serve the queen, and we must obey her. farewell, brother. i will go to the king and do whatever you want me to, even if it's to call my brother's wife "sister," in order to set you free. but just so you know, i am very angry about how our own brother has treated you, angrier than you can imagine.
(to miranda) this is strange. something has really upset your father.
get his position and use him to hurt othello at the same time? how? how? let's see. after a while i'll start telling othello that cassio is too intimate with desdemona. cassio is a smooth talker and a good-looking guy, the sort of man that people would expect to be a seducer. the moor is open and straightforward. he thinks any man who seems honest is honest. people like that are easy to manipulate. so it's all decided. i've worked it out. with a little help from the devil, i'll bring this monstrous plan to success.
it doesn't make either of us happy, i know.
i've never seen him like this. he's never been as angry and upset as he is now.
what can you see out on the ocean?
well, your imprisonment won't last long. i will either get you out, lying if i have to, or stay in prison in your place. in the meantime, be patient.
(to ferdinand) you look like something's bothering you. cheer up. our music-and-dance spectacle is over. these actors were all spirits, as i told you, and they've all melted into thin air. and just like the whole empty
nothing. the water's so rough that i can't see any sails, either in the bay or on the ocean.
i have no choice. goodbye.
and ungrounded vision you've seen, with its towers topped with clouds, its gorgeous palaces, solemn temples, the world itself, and everyone living in it, which will dissolve just as this illusory pageant has dissolved, leaving not even a wisp of cloud behind. we are all made of dreams, and our life stretches from sleep before birth to sleep after death. sir, i'm upset. please put up with my weakness. my old brain is troubled. don't be disturbed by my illness. if you like, you can rest a while in my room. i'll go for a short walk to calm down my feverish mind.
it was windy on shore too. a big blast of wind shook our fortifications. how could a ship made out of wood hold together in those mountainous waves? what do you think will be the result of this storm?
go walk the path that you will never return from. dumb, honest clarence. i love you so much that i'll send your soul to heaven very soon, if heaven will accept anything from me, that is. but who's coming? the newly released hastings?
we hope you feel better and find some peace.
the turkish navy will be broken up. the wind's whipping up the waves so high you expect them to reach the clouds and splash against the stars in the sky. i've never seen the waters so disturbed.
good afternoon, my dear lord!
come, ariel, i summon you with a thought. thank you, ariel. come.
if the turkish fleet isn't protected in some harbor, their men must all be drowned. no ship could survive this storm.
the same to you, my lord! welcome to the open air again. how did you tolerate prison?
i obey all your thoughts. what do you wish?
i've got news, boys, the war's over! this terrible storm has smashed the turks so badly that their plans are ruined. one of our ships has reported that it saw most of their fleet shipwrecked.
with patience, noble lord, as prisoners must. but i will live to thank those who sent me there.
spirit, we have to get ready to meet with caliban.
what? is this true?
no doubt, no doubt. and so will clarence, for your enemies are his enemies, and they have gotten the upper hand of him as well as of you.
yes, my master. when i was putting on the ceres show, i thought of reminding you about caliban, but i was afraid of upsetting you.
the ship's sailing into harbor now; it's from verona. michael cassio, lieutenant of the moor othello, has arrived on shore. the moor himself is still at sea. he's been commissioned to come here to cyprus.
it's a shame that we eagles are caged up while the vultures are free to do whatever they please.
tell me again, where did you leave those lowlifes?
i'm happy about that. he'll be a good governor.
what's the news abroad?
i told you, sir, they were totally drunk, so puffed up with courage that they were getting angry at the air for blowing in their faces, and beating the ground for touching their feet, yet even when drunk, they kept their plan firmly in mind. then i beat my drum, at which point they pricked up their ears and opened their eyes, looking around for the source of my music. i enchanted them so thoroughly that they followed me through thorn bushes and prickly shrubs that tore up their shins. in the end i left them standing in the smelly pond behind your room, with the stinking water covering them up to their chins.
cassio brings good news about the turkish defeat, but he's worried about the othello's safety. the two of them were separated during the storm.
no news as bad as the news at home: the king is sickly, weak, and depressed, and his doctors are very afraid he's going to die
good job, my little one. stay invisible. bring the fancy clothes out of my house, to use as bait to catch these thieves.
i hope to god othello's all right. i served under him, and i know what an excellent commander he is. let's go to the shore to get a look at the ship that came in, and to look out for othello's ship. we'll stare out at the sea until the sea and the sky blur together.
now, by george, that really is terrible news. oh, the king has abused his body with bad habits for a long time, and it's finally taking its toll on him. very sad. where is he, in his bed?
i'm going, i'm going.
let's do that. every minute we expect more ships to arrive.
he is.
he's a devil, a born devil, who can never be trained. all my attempts to help him, undertaken with the best intentions, have been wasted. as his body grows uglier with age, his mind rots away as well. i'll torment them all till they roar with pain.
thanks, you brave men who defend this island and respect othello. i hope heaven protects him from the weather, because i lost sight of him on the stormy sea.
you go ahead, and i will follow you.
here, hang them on this clothesline.
is his ship sturdy?
the king won't live, i hope. but he'd better not die till clarence is sent packing to heaven. i'll go see the king and, with carefully argued lies, get him to hate clarence even more than he already does. if my plan succeeds, clarence doesn't have another day to live. then god's free to send king edward to heaven, too, and leave me the world to run around in! i'll marry the earl of warwick's youngest daughter, lady anne. so what if i killed her husband and her father? the best way to make up for the girl's losses is to become what she's lost: a husband and a father. so that's what i'll do, not because i love her but because i'll get something out of it. but i'm running ahead of myself. clarence is still alive; edward is not only alive, he's king. only when they're dead can i start to count my gains.
please walk softly, so not even a mole hears us approach. we're near his room now.
yes, it's well built, and the ship's pilot is very expert and experienced. for that reason i still have some hope for him, even though i don't have my hopes up too high.
set down your honorable load, men, if there is ever any honor in being dead. i want to mourn the cruel death of this good man. look at the noble king's poor cold body, the measly remains of the lancaster family.
hey monster, the spirit you've been talking about, the one you call harmless, has been playing tricks on us.
(offstage) a sail! a sail! a sail!
his royal blood has drained right out of him. i hope i can talk to your ghost, henry, without breaking church laws. i want you to hear my sorrow. my husband anne's husband was prince edward, king henry's son and a lancaster. husband was murdered by the same man who stabbed you. my tears now fall into the holes where your life leaked out. i curse the man who made these holes. i curse the man's heart who had the heart to stab you. and i curse the man's blood who shed your blood. i want the man who made me suffer by killing you to face a more terrible end than i could wish on spiders, toads, and all the poisonous, venomous things things alive. if he ever has a child, let it be born prematurely, and let it look like a monster, so ugly and unnatural that the sight of it frightens its own mother.
monster, i smell like horse piss, which is making my nose pretty upset.
what's all that shouting about?
and if he ever has a wife, let her be more miserable when he dies than i am now. guards, let's continue on to chertsey monastery, carrying this holy burden you picked up at st. paul's monastery.
mine too., are you listening, monster? if i decide to get angry at you, just watch out, 
everybody in town is down at the shore shouting "a sail!"
when it gets too heavy, rest, and i'll lament over king henry's corpse some more.
you'd be done for then, monster.
i hope it's othello.
halt, corpse bearers, and put down your load.
my good lord, i still need you to like me. be patient, because the prize i'm leading you to will make you forget how smelly you are now. so be quiet. it's as silent as a graveyard here.
they've fired a greeting shot, so at least it's a friendly ship.
what wicked magician has conjured up this devil to interrupt this sacred burial rite?
all right, but i can't get over how we lost our wine bottles in the pond, 
please go find out for certain who has arrived.
villains, set down the corpse, or i'll make a corpse of you.
yes, monster, it's worse than the disgrace of getting drenched and smelly. we lost more than our honor when we lost our wine.
i'll do that.
my lord, stand back and let the coffin pass.
that upsets me much more than getting wet. and you called the fairy creature harmless, monster.
good lieutenant, is your general married?
rude dog! stop when i command you to! and put up your weapon so it's not pointing at my chest, or i'll strike you to the ground and trample on you, you beggar, for being so bold.
i'll get my bottle back if it's the last thing i do.
yes, and he's very lucky to have married the woman he did. his wife defies description. she's god's masterpiece, and she'd exhaust whoever tried to do her justice while praising her.
(to the gentlemen and guards) what, are you trembling? you're all afraid of him? well, i can't blame you. you're only human, after all, and mortals can't stand to look at the devil. (to richard) begone, you dreadful servant of hell. you only had power over my father-in-law's body; you can't have his soul. so get out.
please, my king, be quiet. look here, this is the entrance to his room. be silent and go in. do the deed that will make this island yours forever, and will make me, caliban, your worshipful foot-licker.
who's arrived in the harbor?
sweet saint, for goodness's sake, don't be so angry.
give me your hand. i'm starting to feel murderous urges.
a man named iago, the general's ensign.
ugly devil, for god's sake, get out of here and leave us alone. you have made the happy world into your hell, filling it with cursing cries and lamentations. if you enjoy looking at your awful deeds, take a look at this noteworthy example of your butcheries.
(seeing the clothes) oh, king stephano! worthy stephano, look at the fabulous wardrobe waiting for you here!
he made good time. you see how the storm, the jagged rocks, and the sand banks that trap ships all appreciate a beautiful woman. they let the heavenly desdemona arrive safe and sound.
oh, gentlemen, look, look! dead henry's wounds have opened up and are bleeding again! , shame on you, you deformed lump. it's your presence that draws out this blood from his empty veins. your inhuman and unnatural actions have provoked this unnatural flood of blood. oh god, who made this blood, revenge his death! oh earth, which soaks up this blood, revenge his death! either let heaven send lightning to strike the murderer dead or let the earth open wide and devour him, as it does this good king's blood.
leave it alone, you fool. it's worthless.
who's that?
dear woman, you don't know the rules of charity. when faced with bad, you're supposed to turn it into good, and when subject to curses, you're supposed to convert them into blessings.
oh, monster, we know secondhand clothes when we see them., (he puts on one of the gowns) oh, king stephano!
she's the one i was talking about, the general's wife. the brave iago was put in charge of bringing her here, and he's arrived a week sooner than we expected. dear god, please protect othello and help him arrive here safely, so he and desdemona can be in each other's arms, and othello can cheer us up and bring comfort to cyprus.
villain, you don't know the laws of god or of man. even the fiercest wild animal has some touch of pity.
take off that gown, trinculo. i swear that gown's for me.
look, the precious desdemona has arrived on shore. we should all kneel before her, men of cyprus! greetings, my lady, and may god always be with you.
if i know nothing about pity, that must mean i'm not an animal.
you can have it then, your highness.
thank you, brave cassio. is there any news about my husband?
it's amazing to hear a devil speak the truth!
to hell with this idiot! why are you going crazy over these trashy clothes? leave them alone, and do the murder first. if he wakes up before we kill him, he'll never stop punishing us.
he hasn't arrived yet. as far as i know, he's okay and will arrive here soon.
it's even stranger when an angel is so angry. divine, perfect woman, give me a chance to prove in detail that i'm innocent of the evils you accuse me of.
shut up, monster., madame tree, is this jacket for me? thank you kindly. the tree's lost its jacket. (he takes a jacket hanging on the tree), now the jacket might lose its fur trim and become a bald jacket. stephano makes an elaborate (and untranslatable) pun about the shirt being like a sailor who goes to the tropics and gets a venereal disease.
oh, but i'm worried. how did you two get separated?
contagious infection of humanity, give me a chance to condemn you for the evils i know you've committed.
go ahead, take it. we're stealing things the right way here.
the storm separated us.
you who are beautiful beyond words, calm down and let me explain myself.
thank you for that joke. here, i'll give you some clothes to show my gratitude. as king of this country i like to reward wit when i hear it. "stealing things the right way" is a great line. here's another jacket to say thanks.
(offstage) a sail! a sail!
you who are wicked beyond belief, the only "explanation" i'll accept from you is for you to hang yourself.
come here, monster, put some glue on your fingers, and carry away the rest of these clothes for us.
listen, they've spotted another ship!
such an expression of despair would only prove that i was guilty.
i won't have any of this. we're wasting our time. we'll miss our chance and be turned into geese or apes with low foreheads.
they fired a greeting shot too, so this is also a friendly ship.
maybe, but if you killed yourself, it would also show that you felt some guilt for killing others.
monster, use your fingers. help us carry these clothes to where my barrel of wine is hidden, or i'll kick you out of my kingdom. go on, take them.
go find out the news.
let's say i didn't kill them.
take these too.
ensign iago, welcome., and welcome to you, too, madam. (he kisses emilia) don't be upset that i kissed your wife hello, iago. it's a courtesy where i come from.
then you might as well say they're not dead. but they are dead, and you killed them, you slave of the devil.
yes, and these.
if she gave you as much lip as she gives me, you'd be sick of her by now.
i did not kill your husband.
hey, mountain, hey!
on the contrary, she's a soft-spoken woman.
well, then he must be alive.
silver. there they go, silver!
no, she talks too much. she's always talking when i want to sleep. i admit that in front of you, my lady, she keeps a bit quiet. but she's scolding me silently.
no, he is dead. edward killed him.
fury, fury!, get over there, tyrant, there. listen, listen!
you have no reason to say that.
you're lying. queen margaret saw your sword steaming with his blood. it was the same sword you almost killed her with, and you would have killed her if my brothers hadn't fought you off.
ariel, go order my goblin servants to make these fellows' bones ache, give them muscle cramps all over, and give them more bruises than leopards have spots.
come on, come on. you women are all the same. you're as pretty as pictures when you're out in public, but in your own houses you're as noisy as jangling bells. in your own kitchens you act like wildcats. you make yourselves sound like saints when you're complaining about something, but you act like devils when someone offends you. you don't take your jobs as housewives seriously, and you're shameless hussies in bed.
she provoked me with her lying mouth, accusing me of crimes i didn't commit.
listen they're howling.
shame on you, you slanderer!
no, what provoked you was your own bloody mind, which never thinks about anything but butchering. you killed this king, didn't you?
hunt them down. now all my enemies are at my mercy. soon all my work will be done, and you'll be free. just obey me a little bit longer.
no, it's true, or if it's not, i'm a villain. you wake up to have fun, and you start work when you go to bed.
yes, i'll grant you that.
my plans are almost at their climax. my spells are working well, my spirits are obeying me, and everything is right on schedule. what time is it?
you clearly have nothing good to say about me.
you'll grant me, you hedgehog? then let god grant me that you'll be damned for that wicked deed. oh, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous.
it's after six o'clock, my lord, when you said our work would be finished.
no, i don't.
that will please god, who has him now.
that's what i said when i first conjured the tempest. tell me, spirit, how's the king and his entourage?
but if you had to say something nice about me, what would you say?
he is in heaven, where you will never go.
all cooped up together, just as you ordered, all imprisoned in the grove of linden trees that protects your room from bad weather. they can't move till you release them. the king, his brother, and your brother are all waiting there in a crazed state of mind, and the rest are grieving over them, sad and astonished. "good old lord gonzalo," as you call him, is saddest of all, with tears running down his beard. your magic spell has such an effect on them that if you saw them now, you'd feel sorry for them.
don't make me do it, my lady. i'm critical by nature.
let him thank me, who helped him get there. he's better suited to be there than here.
do you think so, spirit?
come on, just try., by the way, has someone gone down to the harbor?
and you're not suited for any place except hell.
i'd feel sorry for them, if i were human.
yes, madam.
yes, and one other place, if you'll only let me name it.
i will too. you're made of air, so if even you feel sorry for them, imagine the pity that i'll feel, being one of their own human race. i suffer pain just as much as they do, so i'll sympathize far more than you. though i'm indignant about their evil deeds, i'll go with my nobler instincts, which tell me to feel some compassion for them. it's better to act virtuously rather than vengefully. now that they're sorry, i don't want anything more. go release them, ariel. i'll break my spells and bring them back to their senses, and they'll feel like themselves again.
i'm not as happy as i seem. i'm just trying not to show how worried i am about othello's safety. come on, what would you say about me?
some dungeon.
i'll go get them, sir.
i'm trying to think of something, but i'm not good at inventing clever things. it takes time. ah, i've got it. if a woman is pretty and smart, she uses her good looks to get what she wants.
your bedroom.
(drawing a large circle on the stage with his staff) i've darkened the noontime sun with the aid of you elves who live in the hills and brooks and groves, and you who chase the sea on the beach without leaving footprints in the sand, and run away when the waves come back; and you who make toadstools while the moon shines; who make mushrooms as a hobby after the evening bell has rung. with your help i've called up the angry winds, and set the green sea and blue sky at war with each other. i've given lightning to the thunderclouds, and burned up jupiter's beloved oak.
very clever! but what if the woman is smart but ugly?
there is no rest to be had in any bedroom where you are!
with his own lightning bolts; i've shaken up the sturdy cliffs and uprooted pines and cedars; i've opened up graves and awakened the corpses sleeping in them, letting them out with my powerful magic. but i surrender all this magic now, when i've summoned some heavenly music to cast a spell, as i'm doing now, i'll break my staff and bury it far underground, and throw my book of magic spells deeper into the sea than any anchor ever sank.
even if she's ugly, she'll be smart enough to find a guy to sleep with her.
exactly, madam, until i sleep with you.
let this solemn melody comfort your fevered minds, which are now useless, seething inside your skulls., all of you stand there in my spell., (to gonzalo) good gonzalo, you honorable man, my eyes weep for you, since i feel what you must feel now. (to himself) the spell is breaking gradually, and just as dawn creeps in and melts away the darkness, they will slowly return to their senses., (to gonzalo) oh, my dear gonzalo, you're my savior and loyal to your lord, i'll reward you fully, not just with praise but with actions too., 
this is getting worse and worse!
i hope anne assumes that she's never going to sleep with him. hope you're right.
(to alonso) you, alonso, manipulated me and my daughter cruelly, and your brother helped you., (to sebastian) you're paying the price for it now, sebastian., (to antonio) my brother, you were so greedy for power that you forgot natural compassion and our bond as brothers, and were ready to kill your king, i forgive you, though you're a monster., (to himself) look at them, they're starting to understand. soon their confused minds will clear up. but at this point not a single one of them recognizes me., (to ariel) ariel, get me my hat and sword from my room. i'll take off the clothes i'm wearing now, and put on the ones i used to wear in milan., soon, spirit, you'll be free.
what if she's pretty but stupid?
i know i am. but, gentle lady anne, let's stop this rapid-fire argument and move more slowly. isn't the person who caused the untimely deaths of these two plantagenets plantagenet was the name of the royal family that ruled england from the twelfth to the fifteenth centuries. both the lancasters, the family to which lady anne's husband and father-in-law belonged, and the yorks, the family to which richard and his brothers belong, are descended from the plantagenets. plantagenets , henry and edward, as much to blame as the person who actually executed the murders?
 (he sings and helps prospero dress) where the bee drinks, i drink dew. i lie in the cup of a cowslip flower. i sleep there when the owls hoot. i fly on a bat's back, following the summer around the globe. happily, happily i will live now under the blossom that hangs on the bough.
no pretty woman is stupid, because her stupidity will make her more attractive to men.
you're both those people, responsible for both cause and effect.
why, that's my dainty ariel singing now. i'll miss you, ariel, but you'll be free., yes, you will, yes., go to the king's ship in your invisible state. there you'll find the sailors asleep below deck. find the master and
these are stupid old jokes that men tell each other in bars. what horrible thing do you have to say about a woman who's both ugly and stupid?
your beauty caused what i did. it haunted me in my sleep. i would have killed the whole world just to be able spend one hour next to you.
boatswain, who will be awake, and bring them here right away, please.
no matter how ugly or stupid the woman is, she plays the same dirty tricks that the smart and pretty ones do.
if i believed you, murderer, i would take my nails and scratch that beauty right off my cheeks.
i'll go so fast i'll burn up the air, and come back in two heartbeats.
you don't know a thing! you give your best praise to the worst women. but how would you praise a truly good woman, someone who had no reason to worry about what anyone said about her?
i couldn't stand to see you destroy your beauty; you won't touch it as long as i'm standing next to you. just as everyone becomes cheerful from the sun, i'm cheered up by your looks. they are my daylight, my life.
this place is full of trouble, torments, and amazements. please come, heavenly powers, and guide us out of this godforsaken country!
a woman who was beautiful but never proud, who could speak well but knew when to be quiet, who dressed well but was never overdressed, who had self-restraint even when she could get what she wanted, a woman who never took revenge, who overlooked it when people hurt her, who was too wise to do anything stupid, who could think without revealing her thoughts, and who could refrain from flirting with men in love with her, that kind of woman, if she ever existed, would, 
then i hope night shadows your day, and death takes your life!
(to alonso) your highness, you see before you the duke of milan, prospero, who's been wronged. i'll embrace you now so you will know it's really me, a living prince, talking to you. i heartily welcome you and your entourage here. (he embraces alonso)
would do what?
don't damn yourself. you, fair lady, are both my day and my life.
whether you're really him or whether this is some magic trick like i was recently subjected to, i don't know. your heart beats like you were real, and ever since i saw you, i feel my mind becoming sane again, released from its earlier insanity. there must be a strange explanation for this, if it's true. i surrender your dukedom and beg you to forgive me all my crimes. but how is it possible that prospero's alive and well and living on this island?
would raise babies and clip coupons.
i wish i were, so i could deprive you of both day and life.
(to gonzalo) first, my noble old friend, let me embrace you, who are more honorable than i can say.
oh, that's pathetic! don't listen to him, emilia, even though he's your husband. what do you think about him, cassio? isn't he a horrible man?
it's strange that you want to take revenge on the person who loves you.
i won't bet on whether or not any of this is real.
he speaks bluntly, madam. he's more of a soldier than a wise man.
it's just and reasonable that i want to take revenge on the person who killed my husband.
you're still experiencing some of the little quirks of this island, which makes so many things seem uncertain. welcome, my friends. (speaking so that only sebastian and antonio can hear) but you two lords, if i felt like it, i could turn you in as the traitors you are. but as for now, i won't say a word.
(to himself) he's taking her hand. that's right, go ahead and whisper together. this is all i need to get cassio. yes, keep smiling at her, cassio. your fine manners around women will be your downfall. oh, i'm sure you're saying something very clever.
the man who killed your husband, dear lady, only did it to help you get a better husband.
it's the devil speaking through him.
if you lose your job because of little flirtations like this, you'll wish you hadn't been so courteous with her. oh, how nice, you're kissing a gentleman's kissing his own fingers was considered a polite gesture. kissing your own hand, one finger at a time? i wish those fingers were enema tubes!, 
there is no better one on earth.
no., (to antonio) as for you, you evil man that i can't even call brother, i forgive you for even your worst sin, all your sins. i demand my dukedom back from you, which i know you have to give me.
that's the moor! i recognize his trumpet.
wrong. there is a man who loves you better than your husband could.
if you're prospero, give us the details of how you were saved, how you met us here, when we were just shipwrecked here three hours ago, when i lost, how painful the memory is!, my dear son ferdinand
yes, it is.
name him.
i'm sorry about that, sir.
let's go greet him when he lands.
plantagenet.
no one can undo this loss of mine, and trying to endure it patiently doesn't help.
look, here he comes.
yes, that's my husband's name.
i don't think you've tried to endure it. being patient has helped me a lot, for i have suffered a loss similar to yours.
my beautiful warrior!
someone else has the same name, but he's a better man.
you suffered a loss like mine?
my darling othello!
where is this man?
yes, just as great and just as recent. and i have much less to comfort me than you do, since i've lost my daughter.
i'm amazed you got here before me. but i'm overjoyed! my love, if the calm after the storm could always be this wonderful, i'd want the wind to blow until it waked the dead, and whipped up waves as tall as mountains! if i died right now i'd be completely happy, since i'll probably never be as happy as this again in my life.
here.
a daughter? oh god, i wish the two of them were alive and living in naples, as king and queen! i'd give up my life and take my son's place in the mud on the ocean floor if i could see them alive in naples., when did you lose your daughter?
god willing, our love and our happiness will only increase as we get older.
why do you spit at me?
in this recent storm. these lords seem so astonished that they've lost their use of reason and can hardly believe what they see with their own eyes., but whatever the reason for your losing your senses, you can know for sure that i'm prospero, that same duke who was kicked out of milan and landed on this same island where you landed, and became the lord of it. no more of this story now, for it takes days to tell, not just a chat over breakfast or during this first meeting of ours.
amen to that! i can't talk about my happiness anymore. it's too much. i hope these kisses i'm about to give you are the closest we ever come to fighting.(they kiss)
if only i could spit poison.
(to alonso) welcome, sir. this room's my royal court. i have hardly any servants and no subjects outside this room. please, have a look. since you've given my dukedom back to me, i'll give you something equally nice, or at least i'll give you an amazement to satisfy you as much as my dukedom satisfies me.
(to himself) oh, you're happy now, but i'll ruin your happiness, for all my supposed honesty.
poison never came from such a sweet place.
(to ferdinand) my sweet lord, you're cheating.
let's go up to the castle. good news, friends. the war's over and the turks are drowned. how are my old friends from this island doing?, honey, they'll love you here in cyprus. they've been very good to me here. oh, my dear, i'm blabbing on and on because i'm so happy., iago, would you be good enough to go get my trunks from the ships? and bring the ship's captain to the castle. he's a good man., let's go, desdemona. i'll say it again: i'm so happy to see you here in cyprus!
poison never landed on such an ugly toad. get out of my sight! you're poisoning my eyes.
no, my dearest love, i wouldn't cheat you for the whole world.
meet me down at the harbor., come here. they say love makes cowards brave. so if you're brave, listen to me. lieutenant cassio will be on guard duty tonight. but first, i have to tell you that desdemona's completely in love with him.
your beautiful eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine with love.
maybe not the whole world, but you'd cheat for twenty kingdoms. but even then i'd still lie and say you were playing by the rules.
with cassio? that's impossible.
i wish my eyes were basilisks basilisks were mythical creatures whose glances killed the people they landed on. basilisks , so they could strike you dead!
if this dream vision is typical of what this island conjures up, then i'll lose my son twice.
be quiet and listen to me. remember how she fell madly in love with the moor because he bragged and told her made-up stories? did you expect her to keep on loving him for his chattering? you're too smart to think that. no, she needs someone nice-looking. othello's ugly, what pleasure could she find in him? lovemaking gets boring after a while. to keep things hot, she'll need to see someone with a handsome face, someone close to her in age, someone who looks and acts like her. othello isn't any of those things. since he doesn't have these advantages to make him attractive to her, she'll get sick of him until he makes her want to puke. she'll start looking around for a second choice. now, if that's true, and it's obviously true, who's in a better position than cassio? he's a smooth talker, and uses sophistication and fine manners to hide his lust. nobody's as crafty as he is. besides, he's young and handsome, and he's got all the qualities that nave and silly girls go for. he's a bad boy, and desdemona's got her eye on him already.
i wish they were, so that i could die right now, because, at this point, i live a living death. your eyes have made me cry, shamefully, like a child. i never cried before this. i didn't cry when my father, york, and my brother edward both wept at the death of my brother rutland, whom clifford slaughtered. and when your warrior-father recounted the sad story of my father's death, pausing to sob twenty times in the course of the story so that all the bystanders ended up dripping tears like trees in a rainstorm, even then, i refused to cry. but your beauty has made me cry until i couldn't see. i never tried to win over a friend or enemy with sweet words. i'm too proud for that. but if your beauty is the reward for sweet talk, i'll talk.
a wonderful miracle!
i can't believe that. she's not that kind of woman. she's very moral.
don't curl your lips in scorn. they were made for kissing, not for contempt. if your vengeful heart can't forgive me, here, take my sword and bury it in my heart so that my soul, which adores you, can be free. i open myself to being stabbed. in fact, i beg for death on my knees.
(seeing alonso and kneeling) the seas may threaten us, but they show mercy sometimes too. i cursed them for no reason.
like hell she is! she's made of the same flesh and blood as everyone else. if she were so moral, she would never have fallen in love with the moor in the first place. good lord! did you notice how she and cassio were fondling each other's hands? did you see that?
no, don't pause, because i did kill king henry, though it was your beauty that made me do it. go ahead. and it was me who stabbed young edward, though it was your heavenly face that set me to work.
receive all the blessings of a happy father. get up and tell me how you came here.
yes, i did. but that wasn't romantic, it was just polite manners.
take up the sword again, or take me up.
how amazing! how many wonderful creatures there are here! mankind is so beautiful! oh, what a wonderful new world, that has such people in it!
they were lusting after each other. you could tell by how they were acting that they're going to be lovers. they were so close that their breath was mingling. when two people get that intimate, sex will soon follow. disgusting! but listen to me; let me guide you. i brought you here from venice. be on guard duty tonight. i'll put you in charge. cassio doesn't know you. i'll be nearby. make cassio angry somehow, either by speaking too loud, or insulting his military skills, or however else you want.
get up, liar. though i wish you were dead, i'm not going to be the one to kill you.
it's new to you.
all right.
(rising) then tell me to kill myself, and i will.
(to ferdinand) who is this girl you were playing chess with? you can't have known her for more than three hours. is she the goddess that separated us and then brought us back together?
he's hot-tempered, and he might try to hit you with his staff. try to get him to do that. that'll allow me to stir up public sentiment against him here in cyprus. i'll get them so riled up that they'll only calm down when cassio's fired. to get what you want, you need to get cassio out of the way. if you don't do that, things are hopeless for you.
i have already.
no, sir, she's human. but by the grace of god, she's mine. i chose her for my wife when i thought i had no father to ask advice of. she's the daughter of this famous duke of milan i heard so much about but never saw before. he's given me a second life, and marrying her makes him a second father to me.
i'll do it, if you help me out.
you said it when you were furious. say it again, just one word, and my hand, which killed your lover out of love, will kill your far truer lover. you will be an accessory to both crimes.
and i'm her father as well. but oh, how odd it is to have to ask for my child's forgiveness!
i promise i will. meet me in a little while at the citadel. i need to get othello's things from the ship. goodbye.
i wish i knew what was in your heart.
stop right there, sir. let's not get gloomy in our reminiscing, since there's no reason for sadness anymore.
goodbye.
i've told you.
i've been crying to myself just now, or i would've said the same thing. dear gods, bless this couple, since you're the ones who have shown us the path that led us here.
i think cassio really does love her, and it's perfectly likely that she loves him too. i can't stand the moor, but i have to admit that he's a reliable, loving, and good-natured man. he'd probably be a good husband to desdemona. i love her too, not simply out of lust, but also to feed my revenge. i have a feeling the moor slept with my wife. that thought keeps gnawing at me, eating me up inside. i won't be satisfied until i get even with him, wife for wife. if i can't do that, i can at least make the moor so jealous that he can't think straight. if that piece of venetian trash roderigo can do what i need to carry out my plan, i'll have power over cassio. i'll say bad things about him to the moor. i have a feeling cassio seduced my wife as well. i'll make the moor thank me, love me, and reward me, even though the joke will be on him the whole time. i've got a good plan, though i haven't worked out the details yet. you can never see the end of an evil plan until the moment comes.
i fear that your words and your heart are both false.
amen to that, gonzalo.
our noble and courageous general othello having been informed that the turkish fleet has been completely destroyed, invites every man to celebrate our victory. some of you dance, some of you make bonfires, and every man celebrate in whatever way he likes to. for besides the good news, we are also celebrating his marriage. that's the end of the announcement. there will be a feast from five o'clock until eleven. god bless the island of cyprus and our noble general othello!
then no man has ever been honest.
was the duke of milan kicked out of milan so his children could become kings of naples? oh, this is cause for an extraordinary joy that should be engraved in gold on pillars to last forever. on one and the same trip claribel found a husband in tunis, and ferdinand, her brother, found a wife where he was shipwrecked; prospero found his dukedom on a poor island; and all of us found ourselves when we lost control of ourselves.
good michael, keep a careful eye on the guards tonight. let's exercise restraint and not let the party get too wild.
well, then, put your sword away.
(to ferdinand and miranda) give me your hands. may anyone who doesn't wish you joy feel grief and sorrow.
iago has orders what to do. but i'll see to it personally anyway.
tell me that you'll accept my love.
so be it. amen.
iago's a good man. goodnight, michael. come talk to me tomorrow as early as you can., come with me, my dear love. now that the wedding's over, we can have the pleasure of consummating our marriage. good night, everyone.
you'll know about that later.
oh, look, sir, look, sir! more of us are here. i remember i predicted that this guy could never drown, as long as there are gallows around on the land. (to boatswain) hey, you curser, who defiled our ship with your foul language, don't you have any gutter talk for us on shore? what's going on?
hello, iago. it's time for us to stand guard.
but can i have some hope?
the best news of all is that we've located our king and our men. the next bit of good news is that our ship, which we gave up for ruined only three hours ago, is as well-outfitted and seaworthy as it was when we first set sail.
not yet, lieutenant. it's not even ten o'clock. the general got rid of us early tonight so he could be with desdemona., i can't blame him. he hasn't spent the night with her yet, and she's beautiful enough to be jove's jove is the head of the gods in roman mythology. jove's lover.
i'd like to think all men have some hope.
(speaking so that only prospero can hear) sir, i've done all this work for you since i left you last.
she's an exquisitely beautiful lady.
please wear this ring.
(speaking so that only ariel can hear) my clever spirit!
and i bet she's good in bed too.
i'll take the ring, but don't assume i'm giving you anything in return.
these are unnatural events. they get stranger all the time., (to boatswain) tell me, how did you get here?
yes, she's young and tender.
see how my ring encircles your finger? that's how your heart embraces my poor heart. wear both the ring and my heart, because both are yours. and if i, your poor devoted servant, may ask you for one small favor, you will guarantee my happiness forever.
if i were sure i was wide awake, i'd try to tell you. we were fast asleep and somehow, we don't know how, we were stowed below deck, where we heard lots of roaring, shrieking, howling, and jingling chains. the sounds were so horrible that we woke up liberated, and saw our wonderful ship safe and sound. the master was dancing with joy to see it. in an instant we were separated from them, as if in a dream, and brought here in a daze.
and such pretty eyes! like an invitation.
what's that?
(speaking so that only prospero can hear) did i do it right?
yes, she's pretty. but she's modest and ladylike too.
please leave it to me to take care of the burial, as i have more reason to mourn than you do. meanwhile go to my estate at crosby place. after i have performed the solemn burial rites for this noble king at chertsey monastery and cried with regret at his grave, i'll hurry to meet you. for various reasons that must remain secret, please do this for me.
(speaking so that only ariel can hear) you did it perfectly, my little worker. you'll get your freedom.
and when she speaks, doesn't her voice stir up passion?
i'll do it with all my heart. i'm happy to see you've come to repent for what you've done. tressel and berkeley, come with me.
this is a stranger business than men have ever set foot in before, and it's not natural either. we need some oracle to tell us what's going on.
she's a perfect woman, it's true.
say goodbye to me.
sir, my king, don't waste your time mulling over how strange this business is. when the time is right, and it'll be soon, i promise i alone will explain everything that's happened. until then, be cheerful and keep an open mind. (speaking so that only ariel can hear) come here, spirit; set caliban and his fellow slaves free. break the spell that enslaves them to me.
well, good luck to them tonight in bed! come with us, lieutenant. i've got a jug of wine, and these two cyprus gentlemen want to drink a toast to the black othello.
it's more than you deserve. but since you're already teaching me how to flatter you, pretend i've said goodbye already.
how is my lord? there are a few men still missing from the ship, a few odd guys you've forgotten about.
not tonight, iago. i'm not much of a drinker. i wish there was less social pressure to drink.
sirs, take up the corpse.
look out for the other guy, and don't put yourself first, since everything happens randomly. courage! courage, you fine old monster.
oh, but these are our friends. just one glass. i'll do most of the drinking for you.
toward chertsey, noble lord?
if i can believe my eyes, this is a fine sight to see.
i've already had a glass of wine tonight, watered down, but look how drunk i am. i'm not a heavy drinker. i wouldn't dare drink much more than that.
no, to the whitefriars monastery. wait for me there.
oh setebos, these are handsome spirits! how wonderful my master is! i'm afraid he'll punish me.
what are you talking about, man? tonight is for celebrating! the gentlemen are waiting.
has anyone ever courted a woman in this state of mind? and has anyone ever won her, as i've done? i'll get her, but i won't keep her long. what! i, who killed her husband and his father, managed to win her over when her hatred for me was strongest, while she's swearing her head off, sobbing her eyes out, and the bloody corpse, proof of why she should hate me, right in front of her? she has god, her conscience, and my own acts against me, and i have nothing on my side but the ugly devil and my false looks. and yet, against all odds, i win her over! ha! has she already forgotten her brave husband, prince edward, whom i stabbed on the battlefield three months ago in my anger? the world will never again produce such a sweet, lovely gentleman. he was graced with lots of natural gifts, he was young, valiant, wise, and no doubt meant to be king.
ha, ha! what are these things we're looking at, my lord antonio? can you buy them with money?
where are they?
and yet she cheapens herself by turning her gaze on me, who cut her sweet prince's life short and made her a widow? on me, though i am barely half the man that edward was? on me, though i am limping and deformed? i bet i've been wrong about myself all this time. even though i don't see it, this lady thinks i'm a marvelously good-looking man. time to buy myself a mirror and employ a few dozen tailors to dress me up in the current fashions. since i'm suddenly all the rage, it will be worth the cost. but first, i'll dump this fellow in his grave, then return to my love weeping with grief. come out, beautiful sun, until i've bought a mirror to admire my reflection in, i'll watch my shadow as i stroll along.
definitely. the one that looks like a fish is very marketable.
by the door. please invite them in.
be patient, madam. i'm sure his majesty will recover his health soon.
take a look at their servants' name tags, my lords, then tell me what they are. (he points at caliban) this misshapen monster, his mother was a witch so powerful she could control the moon and the tides. these three have robbed me, and this bastard half-devil plotted with them to kill me. two of these men you must recognize and claim as your own. this evil monster i acknowledge is mine.
i'll do it, but i don't like it.
you'll only make him worse with all your worry. for god's sake, let people comfort you. then you'll be able to cheer him up.
he'll kill me with tortures.
if i can just get him to drink one more glass after what he's drunk already, he'll be as argumentative and eager to fight as a little dog. that fool roderigo, all twisted up inside with love, has been drinking toasts to desdemona by the gallon, and he's on guard duty.i've gotten the rest of the guards drunk, as well as several gentlemen from cyprus who are quick to take offense. now i'll get cassio to do something in front of all these drunkards that will offend everyone on the island. here they come. if the future turns out as i hope it will, i'm all set for success.
if he were dead, what would happen to me?
isn't this stephano, my drunken butler?
my god, they've given me a lot to drink.
nothing more than that you'd lose your husband.
he's definitely drunk now. where did he get wine?
no, it was a little one, not more than a pint.
losing this husband will cause me all sorts of harm.
and trinculo's drunk. where did they find the liquor to get drunk on?, (to trinculo) how did you get this way?
bring in more wine! (he sings) and clink your glasses together, and clink your glasses together. a soldier's a man, and a man's life is short, so let the soldier drink. have some more wine, boys!
you have been blessed with an excellent son, who will comfort you when the king is dead.
i've been so wasted since i saw you last that i'm worried i'll never be sober again. but at least i won't rot, being so full of alcohol.
my god, what a great song!
but he's young, and as long as he's too young to become king, richard, the duke of gloucester, has power over him. richard loves neither me nor any of you.
how are you doing, stephano?
i learned it in england, where they have a talent for drinking. the danes, the germans, and the dutch, come on, drink, drink!, are nothing compared to the english.
has it been decided that richard will be protector a "protector" acted for a king until he was old enough to rule on his own. protector ?
oh, don't touch me. i'm not stephano, i'm a walking cramp.
are englishmen really such heavy drinkers?
it's been decided, though not yet officially announced. but that's what will happen if the king dies.
you wanted to be king of the island, sir?
they drink danes under the table, and it takes them no effort at all to out-drink germans. and the dutch are vomiting while the english are asking for refills.
here come lord buckingham and lord derby.
i would've been a sore king then.
let's drink to our general!
(to queen elizabeth) good afternoon, your royal highness!
(pointing at caliban) this is the strangest thing i ever saw in my life.
hear, hear! i'll drink as much as you do!
i hope god makes you happy again, like you once were.
he's as ugly in his manners as he is in appearance., (to caliban) go, sir, to my room, and take your companions with you. if you want me to forgive you, make it neat and tidy.
oh, sweet england! (he sings) king stephen was a good king, and his pants were very cheap, but he thought his tailor overcharged him, so he called him a peasant. and that was a man of noble rank, much higher than you are. so be happy with your worn-out cloak, since pride is ruining the nation. more wine!
my good lord derby, the countess richmond would hardly say "amen" before the countess of richmond was stanley's wife, she was married to edmund tudor. she is the mother of the earl of richmond, the future henry vii, who will prove to be an important character later in this play. "amen" to your kind words. but don't worry. i don't hold it against you, even though she's your wife, that she's so unfriendly and arrogant.
i will indeed. and after this i'll be good and hope you forgive me. what an idiot i was to think this drunkard was a god and to worship such a stupid fool!
god, that song's even better than the other one.
please don't believe the false rumors you've heard about her feelings toward you, or if they're true, then forgive her, since she's only acting that way because she's sick, not because she hates you.
go away, now.
do you want to hear it again?
did you see the king today, lord derby?
(to stephano and trinculo) go, and put your garbage back where you found it.
no, because we shouldn't be doing that, stuff. oh well, god's in charge, and some people have to go to heaven, while other people have to go to hell.
yes, the duke of buckingham and i have just returned from visiting him.
or stole it, rather.
that's true, lieutenant.
what are the chances of his getting better, lords?
sir, i invite your highness and your entourage to my little room, where you can sleep tonight. but for this evening, part of it, at least, i'll tell you tales to make the time pass quickly. i'll narrate the story of my life, and give you all the details of what happened to me since i first came to this island. and in the morning i'll take you to your ship and we'll sail to naples, where i hope to see this loving couple married. after that i'll retire to milan, where i'll contemplate my death, which is soon to come.
speaking for myself, and no offense to the general or anyone else, i hope i'm going to heaven.
madam, keep up hope. he seems cheerful.
i'm dying to hear your life story, which must be a strange tale.
me too, lieutenant.
god give him health. did you talk with him?
i'll tell you everything, and i promise to give you calm seas and favorable winds for your trip. you'll sail so fast that you'll catch up with the royal navy., (speaking so that only ariel can hear) my ariel, baby, that job's for you. after that you'll be free as the air. farewell!, please, all the rest of you, come closer.
okay, but please not before me. the lieutenant has to get to heaven before the ensign. but let's stop this drinking and get down to business., god forgive our sins!, gentlemen, let's get down to business. by the way, i don't want anyone thinking i'm drunk. this is my ensign. this is my right hand, and this is my left hand. i'm not drunk. i can stand well enough, and i can speak just fine.
yes, madam. he wants to patch things up between richard and your brothers, and between your brothers and hastings. he has summoned them all.
now my spells are all broken, and the only power i have is my own, which is very weak. now you all have got the power to keep me prisoner here, or send me off to naples. please don't keep me here on this desert island with your magic spells. release me so i can return to my dukedom with your help. the gentle wind you blow with your applause will fill my ship's sails. without applause, my plan to please you has failed. now i have no spirits to enslave, no magic to cast spells, and i'll end up in despair unless i'm relieved by prayer, which wins over god himself and absolves all sins. just as you'd like to have your sins forgiven, indulge me, forgive me, and set me free.
yes, you're speaking very well.
i wish i could believe you that all was well! but i'm worried that things can only go downhill from here.
yes, very well. so don't think that i'm drunk.
they're out to get me, and i won't stand for it! which of you has been complaining to the king that i don't like them? by god, whoever is worrying the king with these lies doesn't love him very much. just because i don't know how to flatter and act nice, to smile in men's faces and, as soon as their backs are turned, spread rumors about them, to bow and scrape like a nobleman trained in the french court, people have to think i'm their enemy. can't a plain man live and do no harm to anyone without being taken advantage of by a bunch of slick, sneaky lowlifes?
old john of gaunt, did you do as you promised and bring your brave son henry here? i'd like to hear the violent accusation he wanted to make against the duke of norfolk, thomas mowbray, which i didn't have time for earlier.
let's go to the platform where we'll stand guard. come on.
which of us are you referring to?
i've brought him, my lord.
you see that man who just left? he's a good soldier, good enough to be caesar's right-hand man. but he has a serious weakness. it's too bad. i'm worried that othello trusts him too much, and it'll be bad for cyprus eventually.
you, who are neither honest nor good. when did i ever do you any harm? or you? or you? or any of you? damn you all! the king, whom i hope god will protect better than you would like, can't get a minute's rest without you bothering him with your outrageous complaints.
have you asked him if the source of his complaint is an old feud, or if he knows of some treason the duke has committed?
but is he often like this?
brother, you've made a mistake. the king himself noticed your hatred toward my children, my brothers, and myself. no one had to point it out to him, it's obvious. he asked people to visit him. he wanted to find out the reason for your ill will, so he could do something about it.
as far as i could tell, it's not some personal malice. my son believes that the duke means to harm you in some way.
he drinks like this every night before he goes to sleep. he'd stay up all night and all day if he didn't drink himself to sleep.
i can't tell what's going on. the world has become so bad that now little wrens have settled where eagles used to roost. since every peasant has been made into a nobleman, many noblemen have been dragged down to the level of peasants.
then call them both in to see me. i want to hear in person what each has to say. they're both so proud and full of anger that they act recklessly and don't listen to reason.
the general should be informed about this. maybe he's never noticed, or he only wants to see cassio's good side. don't you think so?
come, come, i know what you're referring to, richard. you resent my friends' rise in society, and my own. let's hope we never need your help for anything.
may you have many years of happiness, my gracious and loving lord.
(speaking so that only roderigo can hear) hello, roderigo. please, follow the lieutenant. hurry! go!
meanwhile, we're the ones who need you. my brother is imprisoned because of you, i am disgraced, and the nobility are held in contempt while those who two days ago weren't worth a dime have suddenly been promoted.
may each day be happier than the last, and heaven give you immortality!
and it's too bad that the moor chose a man with such a deep-rooted drinking problem as his second-in-command. we should definitely say something to the moor.
by the lord who raised me to this weighty post from the happy and carefree life i used to enjoy, i promise you i never did anything to get the king to turn against the duke of clarence. in fact, i've always been on his side and have pleaded for him. my lord, you're doing me a huge injustice to suggest otherwise.
thank you both. but i know one of you isn't sincere since each of you accuses the other of treason against me. henry of hereford, what do you have to say against the duke of norfolk, thomas mowbray?
i wouldn't say anything, not if you gave me the whole island for doing so. i respect cassio and i'd like to help cure his alcoholism, 
oh, and i'll bet you'll also deny you were responsible for lord hastings's recent stay in prison.
first, may heaven be my witness! i've come here as an accuser because i am a devoted subject who cares for the safety of my prince, not because of any other prejudice against the duke. now, thomas mowbray, i will turn to you. pay attention to this. i will prove that what i am about to say is true, either with my body here on earth or with my immortal soul in heaven. you are a traitor and a villain, born into too good a family to be so and too bad to live. the more beautiful the sky, the uglier the clouds look. once more, to emphasize my accusation, i call you a traitor. and with my king's permission, i'd like to follow what i say with my sword.
what's that noise?
she may deny that, my lord, because, 
don't let my calm words cast doubt on my loyalty. i know that angry words will not settle this argument, so i'll try to keep myself under control. but i can't be so calm as to not say anything in my own defense. first, my respect for you, my king, prevents me from saying what i want and throwing those charges of treason right back at bolingbroke. i defy him and spit on him as if he weren't your relative, my lord. he's a trash-talking coward and a villain, and i'd back up those charges in a duel, even if i gave him an advantage by handicapping myself. for now, i've defended my loyalty and made it known that he lies.
damn you, you villain, you rascal!
she may, lord rivers? everybody knows she may. she may do a lot more than that, sir. she may help you to get many nice promotions, and then deny she helped you, claiming you won them on your own merits. what can't she do? she could even, 
you pale coward. there i'll throw my glove in challenge to you and set aside my relationship to the king and my royal blood. it's fear, not respect for the king's bloodline, that keeps you quiet. if your guilt has given you the guts to accept my challenge, then pick up my glove. i'll show your cowardice and treason by defeating you in knightly combat.
what's the matter, lieutenant?
she could even what?
i'll take that challenge. and i promise, by my knighthood, that i'll fight you fairly in whatever contest you wish. and when i mount my horse, let me not dismount alive if i'm a traitor or if i cheat in any way!
to think that fool had the nerve to try to teach me manners! i'll beat him until the welts look like basket-weave!
she could even what? she could marry a king, a bachelor, a handsome young lad. certainly, your grandmother had a worse match.
what do you accuse mowbray of, my cousin? it will have to be something terrible if it's going to make me think badly of him in any way.
you'll beat me?
my lord of gloucester, i have suffered your blunt upbraidings and your bitterness toward me for too long. by god, i will tell the king about these taunts. i would rather be a country serving maid than a great queen if it meant i could escape your scorn and constant harassment.
i'll prove with my life that what i say is true. mowbray has received eight thousand gold coins that he was supposed to pay to your soldiers as advances on their wages. but he's used the money improperly, just like a traitor and harmful villain would. even more, i declare and will prove in battle that all treasonous plots over the past eighteen years originated with mowbray. and further, i know that he caused the death of the duke of gloucester by encouraging the duke's easily influenced enemies, like any coward would, to slay the innocent duke. the duke was murdered like abel refers to the biblical story of cain and abel, in which cain kills his brother abel out of jealousy. abel , and his blood demands that i seek revenge and justice. by my own good name, i'll inflict that justice on mowbray or die trying.
are you talking, you villain?(he hits roderigo)
i've had very little joy as england's queen.
he is so determined! thomas, how do you respond?
no, don't hit him, lieutenant! please, sir, restrain yourself. (he restrains cassio)
(speaking so no one else can hear) god, give her even less joy, i beg you! elizabeth, your honor, your high rank, and your position as queen queen margaret is the widow of king henry vi, who was deposed and murdered by the yorkists. queen are all owed to me.
i wish you would turn away and not listen till i've told this fellow, who disgraces his bloodline, how much god and good men hate liars like him.
let me go, or i'll knock you on the head.
(to queen elizabeth) what! you're threatening to tell the king? go ahead, and don't spare a single detail. look, what i have said to you i will repeat in the presence of the king. if it means i'll be sent to the tower, so be it. it's time for me to speak the truth. all the pains i took on king edward's behalf have been forgotten.
mowbray, my eyes and ears are impartial, even if he were my brother, or even my heir, rather than just my cousin. i vow on my scepter that his relation to me doesn't give him any advantage or prejudice me in his favor. he's my subject, mowbray, and so are you, so speak freely and without fear.
come on, you're drunk.
(speaking so no one else can hear) you devil! i remember these pains all too well. you killed my husband, henry, in the tower and my poor son, edward, at tewksbury.
then, bolingbroke, you lie from your heart up through your false throat. i gave three quarters of the money i received to the king's soldiers. the other quarter i had permission to keep, because i was owed the money for my service in going to fetch the queen from france. now take back your lie. as for gloucester, i didn't kill him, but i admit i disgracefully neglected my duty. i once laid in wait to kill you, my noble lord of lancaster, the father of my enemy. it was a terrible sin and troubles me greatly. but i confessed it already and specifically begged your pardon, and i hoped you had forgiven me. that is my fault. as for the rest of the charges, they come from a villain's evil nature, and i'll defend myself against this faithless and cowardly traitor. i'll throw my glove down onto this arrogant traitor's foot, and i'll show that i'm loyal even compared to this member of the royal bloodline. i therefore pray that your highness will assign a day for our duel soon.
drunk?
(to queen elizabeth) before you were queen, in fact, before your husband was king, i was a packhorse for his great affairs, a weeder-out of his proud enemies, a generous rewarder of his friends. in order to make his blood royal, i spent my own blood.
obey what i say, my hot-headed gentlemen. let's settle this feud without violence. such fierce anger causes too great an injury. forget it and forgive each other. come to terms and agree to put this to an end. the astrologers have said that this is no month to shed blood. good uncle, let's end this now. i'll calm down the duke of norfolk. you calm down your son.
(speaking so that only roderigo can hear) go tell everyone there's a riot., 
(speaking so no one else can hear) yes, and you spent better margaret is referring to the deaths of her own husband and son. better blood than his or your own.
for someone my age it is appropriate to make peace. my son, throw down the duke of norfolk's glove.
no, lieutenant, god, gentlemen, help, lieutenant, sir, montano, help, men!, the night guard is coming!
(to queen elizabeth) in all that time, you and your first husband, sir john grey, were fighting for the lancasters., and so were you, rivers., elizabeth, wasn't your first husband killed while fighting in queen margaret's army at saint alban's? in case you've forgotten, i want to remind you where you come from and what side you were on before you arrived here. and i want you to remember whom i fought for, who i have been, and who i am.
and norfolk, throw down his.
who's sounding that alarm? the whole town will riot! god, lieutenant, please stop! you'll be ashamed of this forever!
(speaking so no one else can hear) you were a murderous villain, and you still are.
come on, henry, when are you going to do it? i shouldn't have to ask you again.
what is the matter here?
(to elizabeth) poor clarence in henry vi, part , clarence constantly shifted his loyalties from the yorks (his own family) to th lancasters, to which his father-inlaw belonged. clarence abandoned his father-in-law, a lancaster, and broke his own oath, may jesus forgive him!, 
throw it down, norfolk, i'm telling you. there is no advantage in refusing.
my god, i'm bleeding! i've been mortally wounded. i'll kill him!
(speaking so no one else can hear) may god take revenge on him!
i'll throw myself at your feet, most revered king. you may command my life but not my shame. i owe you my life out of duty, but i cannot, even under pain of death, let you order this dishonor of my good reputation. i am accused and disgraced publicly here, pierced by the venom of slander. the only thing that will ease that pain is to kill the man who uttered these poisonous words.
stop right now!
(to queen elizabeth) , in order to fight on edward's side to help him win the crown. and now he is rewarded by being thrown in prison! i wish to god my heart were made of stone, like edward's is. or i wish edward's were soft and full of feeling, as mine is, so that he would let clarence go. i am too childish, too innocent, for this world.
such rage should be resisted. give me his glove. i, as king, will tame these lesser nobles.
stop! lieutenant, sir, montano, gentlemen! have you forgotten your duty and your sense of decorum? stop! the general is talking to you! stop, for god's sake!
(speaking so no one else can hear) hurry to hell, then, and leave the world alone, you demon! hell is where your kingdom is.
yes, but you won't take away the stain of these charges. if you'll clear my name, i'll give up my glove. my dear, dear lord, the greatest treasure in our earthly lives is to have a good reputation. without that, men are nothing. to have a brave spirit is as valuable as a well-guarded jewel. my honor is my life. one is inseparable from the other. take my honor, and my life is over. so, my lord, let me prove my honor, since i live for it and i will die for it.
how did this all start? have we all become as savage as the turks, treating each other as badly as they would have treated us? for heaven's sake, stop this savage brawl! the next man who swings his sword must not care about his life, because the instant he strikes, he dies. stop that alarm from ringing, it's scaring the islanders. what's the matter here, gentlemen?, honest iago, you look upset. speak up and tell me who started this. answer me.
my lord of gloucester, in those busy days, which you're bringing up now to prove we're your enemies, we followed the lawful king. if you were king, we would do the same.
cousin, take up your glove. be the one to start.
i don't know. we were all having fun until just a minute ago; we were as happy as a bride and groom taking off their clothes. but then the mood suddenly changed. it was as if something had driven the men insane and made them point their swords at one another. i don't
if i were king? i'd rather be a peddler. the thought of being king doesn't appeal to me in the least.
oh, god, keep me from such a terrible sin! should i appear humbled in front of my father? or discredit my rank out of fear before this terrified coward? before i'd let my tongue utter such lies against my honor or make such a false truce, i'd rip it apart with my teeth and spit it into mowbray's shameful face.
know what could have started this. i'd rather have lost my legs in battle than be a part of this!
you're right to imagine that being this country's leader brings no pleasure. as queen, i have felt none.
i was born to command, not to beg. but since i can't order you to be friends, be ready to settle this feud with your lives at coventry on saint lambert's day september . saint lambert's day . then you can let your weapons resolve this hatred, since i can't bring you to terms. justice will be on the side of the winner. lord marshal, tell my officers to be ready to control these domestic disturbances.
how did you manage to lose your self-control like this, michael?
(speaking so no one else can hear) no pleasure for the queen, indeed: i am the real queen, and the experience is completely joyless. i can no longer hold my tongue.
even more than your uproar, it's the fact that the duke of gloucester was my brother that makes me want to act against his murderers. but since it was richard who was responsible for the murder in the first place and also controls how it will be avenged, i'll have to trust in the will of heaven to bring justice to my brother's killers.
please, excuse me, sir. i can't speak.
hear me, you wrangling pirates. you're quarreling over what doesn't even belong to you, you stole it from me! which of you does not tremble when you see me? if you aren't trembling because you know i am queen and you are my subjects, then you're shaking because you threw me from the throne! (to richard) oh highborn villain, do not turn away!
don't you feel compelled to do more since he was your brother? is there no passion in your love for him? your father edward edward iii, who was king of england from to . edward treasured you and your six brothers. some of you died natural deaths, and some of your lives were cut short. but thomas, who was my love and one of edward's precious sons, is dead, killed by people who hated him. oh, gaunt, he was your own blood! the same mother and father who made you made him, and though you live and breathe, a part of you died with him. and because your father was the model for him, by watching him die you have in a sense consented to see your father die. you aren't being patient. you're giving up. in allowing your brother to be murdered, you have shown how you yourself might be killed. what we might call patience in common men is simply cowardice in noble men. what else can i say? the best way to protect your own life is to get revenge for gloucester's death.
montano, you're supposed to be calm and collected. you're famous for it. wise people respect you. what in the world made you risk your reputation like this and become a street brawler? tell me.
ugly, wrinkled witch, what are you doing here?
it's god's quarrel now, because it was his chosen king, who serves as god's deputy on earth, who caused gloucester's death. if it was a crime, let heaven punish it, because i won't raise a hand against god's minister.
othello, i've been seriously hurt. your officer iago can tell you what happened. i should save my breath, since it hurts to talk. i didn't do anything wrong that i know of, unless it was a sin to defend myself when someone attacked me.
only describing what you have ruined. or at least that's what i plan to do before i let you go.
whom should i complain to then?
all right, now i'm starting to lose my cool. by god, if you don't tell me what happened you'll all suffer. tell me how this fight began, who started it. whoever is guilty, even if he were my twin brother, i swear i'm through with him. we're in a town that's just
weren't you banished on pain of death?
to god, who defends widows.
avoided a war, everyone's still on edge, and you're getting into private fights while you're supposed to be on guard duty? that's unbelievably bad. iago, who started it?
i was. but i felt more pain from exile than i would have from being dead here at home. you, richard, owe me a husband and a son. the rest of you owe me a kingdom. and all of you owe me allegiance. the sorrow that i feel actually belongs to you, and the high life you enjoy actually belongs to me. you stole it from me.
why then, i will. goodbye, old gaunt. you are going to coventry to see our kinsman hereford and ruthless mowbray fight. i hope that the weight of the crime against my husband will give force to hereford's spear, letting it pierce the killer mowbray's breast! or, if he misses in the first attempt, that mowbray's sins weigh so heavily on him that his horse's back breaks and throws him to the ground! goodbye, old gaunt. my grief is so great that i must end my life.
i know you're close to cassio, but if you diverge from the truth in any way, you're not a true soldier.
the curse my noble warrior-father richard refers to events shakespeare dramatizes in king henry vi, part (act , scene ). queen margaret has richard's father, the third duke of york, killed. but before she kills him, she sets a paper crown on his head to mock him and hands him a rag soaked in his son rutland's blood. he begs god to destroy her. warrior-father laid on you when you set a paper crown on his head just before slaying him has finally borne fruit. your scorn for him was so shocking that he cried rivers. to stop up his tears, you handed him a rag soaked with the blood of his own child. god, not us, is responsible for punishing you for your bloody deed.
sister, goodbye. i have to go to coventry. may we both fare well!
you're hitting close to home there. i'd rather cut my tongue out of my mouth than say anything bad about michael cassio. but i don't think it'll hurt him to tell the truth. this is what happened, general. montano and i were talking when a man came running, crying for help. cassio was chasing him with his sword out, trying to kill the guy. this gentleman stopped cassio and told him to put away his sword. i followed the guy who was crying for help, to keep him from scaring the public. but he was fast and outran me. when i got back, i heard the swords clinking and cassio swearing. i'd never heard him swear before. they were nearly killing each other, as you saw when you pulled them apart. i can't tell you anything else.
god is just. he rewards the innocent.
just one more word. when grief falls, it rises again, even though it is heavy and not light and empty. i've said goodbye before i said everything that i wanted to say. give my respects to your brother, edmund york. that's all, but wait, don't leave yet! i'll think of something else. tell him, what?, tell him to visit me at plashy soon. alas, what will he see there but empty servants' quarters, bare walls, and floors that no one walks on? what will he hear as a welcome but my groans? so give my greetings, but don't tell him to visit me there, since he can find sorrow easily enough elsewhere. i'll go and die alone, and now i weep, having to finally say goodbye to you.
but nobody's perfect, and even the best man sometimes loses control and strikes out in rage. cassio was wrong to hurt montano, who was only trying to help him, but i'm sure the guy who ran away must have offended cassio in some terrible way, and cassio couldn't let it pass.
oh, killing that child was the dirtiest, most merciless deed there ever was!
my lord aumerle, does harry hereford have his weapons?
iago, i know you're fond of cassio and are downplaying this for his benefit. cassio, i love you, but you're never again going to be one of my officers., 
tyrants themselves wept when they heard about it.
yes, completely, and he wants to begin.
look, you've woken my wife! i'll make you an example for the others to learn from.
everyone understood there would be a heavy payback.
the spirited and bold duke of norfolk is just waiting for his accuser's summons.
what's the matter, dear?
even northumberland the earl of northumberland was an enemy of richard's family, the house of york. northumberland wept to see it.
why, then, they are both ready, and we're only waiting on the king's entrance.
everything's fine, now, sweetheart. go back to bed., (to montano) i'll see to it personally that your wounds are treated. lead him off.
what, were you all snarling before i arrived, ready to catch each other by the throat like dogs, but now that i'm here, you turn your hatred toward me? did the duke of york's terrible curse have so much weight with god that god repaid him not only with henry's death and my lovely edward's death but with the loss of their kingdom and with my banishment, too? all because of what happened to that brat rutland? if curses can pierce the clouds and enter heaven that easily, then open up, thick clouds, and listen to my curses!
marshal, ask the combatant why he's come here with weapons. ask him his name and make him swear in accordance with the rules that his mission is one of justice.
iago, go and calm down the townspeople., come with me, desdemona. unfortunately, it's part of the soldier's life to be woken up by trouble.
(to queen elizabeth) though your king did not die in battle, let him die from overindulging his appetites, as my husband was murdered to make your husband king. may your son edward, who is currently the prince of wales, die young and violently, as payback for the death of my son edward, the former prince of wales. and may you outlive your glory just as miserably as i have, to make up for taking my position as queen. may you live long enough to mourn your children's deaths and watch another woman enjoy the throne, as i now watch you. let your happy days die long before you do. after many extended hours of grief, may you die neither a mother, a wife, nor england's queen. rivers, dorset, and lord hastings, you all stood by as my son was stabbed. for his sake, i pray to god that none of you die a natural death but have your lives cut short by some unforeseen accident.
in god's name and the king's, tell us who you are and why you have come here with armor and weapons. who is your opponent, and what is your quarrel? tell us the truth, as you've sworn on your knighthood. make your defense.
are you hurt, lieutenant?
enough of your magic spells, you hateful, withered hag.
my name is thomas mowbray, the duke of norfolk. i've come as i had sworn to, god forbid a knight breaks his oath! i'm here both to defend my loyalty and the truth of my testimony to god, my king, and any children that i might have. with the grace of god and my ability to fight, i'll prove that my opponent, the duke of hereford, is a traitor to god, the king, and to me. and may heaven protect me, since i fight with honor!
yes, but no doctor can help me.
and leave you out? don't move, dog. it's your turn now. if heaven has any plagues beyond what i can drum up, let it wait until your sins margaret wants richard to die only after committing the maximum number of sins, so he can be guaranteed a greater punishment in hell. sins are piled high and then hurl them down on you, you destroyer of a whole world of peace! may conscience eat away at your soul constantly. may you suspect your true friends of being traitors and take the worst traitors as your closest friends. may you never sleep a wink except to dream of a hell full of ugly devils.
marshal, ask that knight who he is and why he is here armed for war. make him formally testify as to the reason he is here to fight, as our law requires.
oh i hope that's not true!
you deformed, prematurely born, rooting hog, you evil birth defect, you insult to your mother's womb, you hated disgrace to your father's sperm, you disgusting, 
what is your name, and why do you come here in front of king richard? who is your opponent? what is your quarrel? speak like a true knight!
my reputation, my reputation! i've lost my reputation, the longest-living and truest part of myself! everything else in me is just animal-like. oh, my reputation, iago, my reputation!
margaret.
i am harry of hereford, lancaster, and derby. i am ready to prove with my weapons, with god's grace, and with my strength that thomas mowbray, duke of norfolk, is a foul traitor, dangerous to king richard and to me. may heaven defend me, since i fight for truth!
i swear i thought you meant you'd been hurt physically. your physical health matters more than your reputation. a reputation is a useless and fake quality that others impose on us. you haven't lost it unless you think you have. there are lots of ways to get on the general's good side again. you've been discharged because he's angry, and because he's obliged to do so for policy reasons, not because he dislikes you. he's got to beat up the weak to frighten the strong. go to him, petition him. he'll change his mind.
richard.
only the marshal and the appointed officials may direct the proceedings, and any other person foolish enough to enter the field will be put to death.
i'd rather ask him to hate me than ask such a good commander to accept such a worthless, drunk, stupid officer as myself. drunk? babbling senselessly? squabbling? swaggering? swearing? ranting and raving to my own shadow! oh, wine is the devil!
yes?
lord marshal, let me kiss the king's hand and go on my knee before him. mowbray and i are about to undertake a challenge similar to a long and difficult journey, so we should say a formal goodbye to our friends.
who were you chasing with your sword? what did he do to you?
i didn't call you.
the accuser greets your highness and asks to kiss your hand and say goodbye.
i don't know.
i beg your pardon, i thought it was me whom you were calling all those terrible names.
i'll step down and embrace him. cousin of hereford, insofar as your cause is just, i wish you luck in this fight. goodbye, my cousin. if you die in this fight, i will grieve, but i won't take revenge.
is that possible?
yes, i was, but i don't want an answer from you. let me finish my curse.
if i am pierced by mowbray's lance, don't misuse your tears for me. i'm as confident as the hawk is when he hunts the sparrow. my loving king, goodbye, and goodbye my cousin, lord aumerle. i'm healthy, young, and alive now, even if i'm close to death. lastly, i'll say farewell to you, my father, just as at a feast i save the best morsel for the end. oh my creator, your youthful spirit is reborn in me and energizes me to reach for victory. give strength to my armor with your prayers, and harden my lance with your blessing, so it will pierce mowbray's coat of armor. may my brave deeds bring new honor to the name of john of gaunt.
i remember a jumble of impressions, but nothing distinctly. i remember a fight, but not why we were fighting. oh god, why do men drink and lose their minds? why do we party until we're like animals?
i've finished it for you, and it ends in "margaret."
may god give you success in your good cause! strike as quick as lightning, and let your blows fall like thunder on the helmet of your enemy. be courageous and fierce, and stay alive.
you seem all right now. how did you get better?
he's turned your curse against you, margaret.
my innocence and saint george will protect me!
my drunkenness went away when anger took over. one weakness led to another, to make me hate myself.
poor imitation queen, why do you align yourself with this humpbacked spider when he's got you trapped in his deadly web? fool! you're sharpening a knife to cut yourself. the day will come when you'll wish i could help you cast spells against this poisonous, hunchbacked toad.
whatever god or fate has in store for me, i will live or die as a loyal, just, and honest gentleman. i joyfully celebrate this battle against my enemy, as much as any slave celebrates who takes off his chains and becomes free. most powerful king and my friends, i wish you all happiness in the years to come. i go to fight as happily as i would join in a celebration, because knowing that i have truth on my side makes me feel calm.
come on, you're being too hard on yourself. i wish none of this had happened, given the situation here, and your rank. but since this has happened, you should fix it for your own good.
woman, stop your frantic curses and false prophesies before we run out of patience and do something bad to you.
goodbye, my lord. i see both virtue and courage in you. marshal, let's begin.
i'll ask him for my position back again, and he'll tell me i'm a drunk. even if i had a whole bunch of mouths, i wouldn't be able to answer that. i was a reasonable man, then i became a fool, and finally a beast! oh, how strange! every glass of liquor is damned, and the devil's the main ingredient!
shame on you; i've already run out of patience with you all.
henry of hereford, lancaster, and derby, take your lance. may god defend the right man!
come on now, wine is good for you, if you know how to use it. don't say anything bad about wine anymore. lieutenant, i think you know i'm your friend.
if you got what you deserved, you would learn some respect.
with strength and hope, i say, amen.
i know that, sir. imagine, me, a drunk!
what i deserve is that you treat me like a queen, and what you deserve is to act like my subjects. give me what i deserve, and do your duty!
take this lance to thomas, duke of norfolk.
any man can get drunk sometime. i'll tell you what to do. othello's wife has a lot of influence now. he's completely devoted to her. go open your heart to her. ask her to help you get back your position. she is so generous, kind, and ready to help that she thinks it's wrong not to do everything she can, even more than she is asked to do. ask her to help you heal the rift between her husband and you. i'd bet my lucky stars your problem will be forgotten, and your relationship will be stronger than ever.
(to rivers) don't argue with her. she's crazy.
at the risk of being proved false, here stands henry of hereford, lancaster, and derby to demonstrate that the duke of norfolk, thomas mowbray, is a traitor to his god, his king, and to him. he dares him to step forward and fight.
that's good advice.
enough from you, mister, you're being impertinent. unlike those born into nobility, your claim to royalty is so recent that you hardly even know what it means to lose it. people in high positions are shaken by many blasts of wind, and when they fall, they shatter into pieces.
at the risk of being proved false, here stands thomas mowbray, duke of norfolk, to defend himself and to prove that henry of hereford is disloyal to god, his king, and to him. by his own free will and with courage, he waits for the signal to begin.
i'm helping you because i like and respect you.
good advice, indeed. take it to heart, dorset.
trumpets, play. step forward, combatants.
i believe it completely. early in the morning i'll go visit desdemona and plead my case. my situation is desperate.
it applies to you as much as to me, my lord.
stop, the king has thrown down his baton.
you're doing the right thing. good night, lieutenant. i've got to go to the guard tower.
yes, and much more so. but i was born that high. like an eagle, which builds its nest at the top of a high tree, i play in the wind and am not afraid to look at the sun.
tell them to take off their helmets, lay down their spears, and come back to their chairs by me. tell the trumpets to play until i deliver my decree to these men.
good night, honest iago.
but you turn that sun into a shadow. take my son, for example. he is dead now. you put out his bright life forever. you are building your nest in our nest. oh god who's watching, don't let him get away with this! he won his position violently. let him lose it that way, too.
draw near, and listen to what i have devised with my council. our kingdom, where you both grew up, should not be soiled with your blood, and i hate the spectacle of settling such quarrels with swords. i think that pride, ambition, and envy have caused you to disturb the sweet peace of this country. once that peace is broken by war drums and the clash of weapons, relatives will be killing each other. therefore, i'm sending you out into distant territories. you, my cousin hereford, at the threat of execution if you return, are banished for ten years.
who can say i'm evil when my advice is so good? that's really the best way to win the moor back again. it's easy to get desdemona on your side. she's full of good intentions. and the moor loves her so much he would renounce his christianity to keep her happy. he's so enslaved by love that she can make him do whatever she wants. how am i evil to advise cassio to do exactly what'll do him good? that's the kind of argument you'd expect from satan! when devils are about to commit their biggest sins they put on their most heavenly faces, just like i'm doing now. and while this fool is begging desdemona to help him, and while she's pleading his case to the moor, i'll poison the moor's ear against her, hinting that she's taking cassio's side because of her lust for him. the more she
stop, if you can't be kind, at least have some shame.
i will do as you command. my comfort in my banishment will be the thought that the same sun that shines on you will shine on me wherever i am.
tries to help cassio, the more she'll shake othello's confidence in her. and that's how i'll turn her good intentions into a big trap to snag them all.
how dare you talk about kindness or shame. (to the others) you have only been unkind to me, and you have shamefully butchered my hopes. my kindness to you is to be outraged at what has happened, and my sad, sad shame is in what you have done to my life.
norfolk, i reluctantly must give you a harsher sentence. your absence won't be marked by a certain number of hours. i must banish you for life.
hello, roderigo!
enough, enough.
it's a heavy sentence, my lord, and i didn't expect to hear you say that. i deserved to be rewarded, not punished so harshly with exile. i'll have to abandon my native english language, which i've spoken for forty years. my tongue will be of as little use as a broken violin. you've imprisoned it, and ignorance will be my jailer. i'm too old to learn anything new. you've sentenced me to die in silence.
i'm totally worn out. my chase is too much for me. i've spent most of my money, and tonight i got beaten up. the upshot is that i've got a little more experience. so with no money, but a little more wisdom, i'm going back to venice.
oh noble buckingham, i'll kiss your hand to show my friendship and support for you. i wish only good things upon you and your noble family! your clothes aren't spattered with my family's blood, and you aren't affected by my curse.
it doesn't help to despair, and once my sentence is handed out it is too late to lament.
you're a poor man if you're this impatient! if you get hurt, does your wound heal immediately? no, it heals gradually. we achieve things with our intelligence, not by magic, and intelligent planning takes time. aren't things going well? cassio's beaten you up, but with that tiny sacrifice on your part, you got cassio discharged! if we're patient, we'll be rewarded with the fruits of our labors. my god, it's morning. all this excitement has made the time fly by. go back to where you're staying and go to sleep. go on, i'm telling you. you'll understand better later. go.
no one here is affected by your curse, because curses are just words with no power.
then i'll turn away from the light of this country and resign myself to darkness.
now two things still need to be done. my wife has to help make desdemona take cassio's side. i'll put her on that. and i need to take the moor aside right at the moment when cassio's talking to desdemona, so he'll see them together. yes, that's the way i'll do it. let's not ruin a brilliant plan by being slow to act.
i think they rise up to heaven and arouse god from his gentle sleep. (so that only buckingham hears) oh buckingham, watch out for that dog, richard! when he seems to be fawning on you, he's actually about to bite. and his poisonous bite kills. have nothing to do with him. beware of him. all the powers of sin, death, and hell are doing his bidding.
come back, and take an oath. put your hands on my sword and swear this by your duty to god, since your duty to me will end with your banishment, that you will never greet each other in exile, or write to each other, or make up with each other, and that you won't plot any foul deed against me, my country, my subjects, or any of my land.
musicians, start playing here. i'll pay you for your trouble. play something short that will put the general in a good mood.
what is she saying, my lord?
i swear.
your instruments all have a nasal twang. have they been to naples naples was considered a likely place to contract syphilis, which eats away at the bridge of the nose. naples ?
nothing that interests me, my good lord.
so do i.
excuse me?
what, you ignore my kind advice and try to please the devil i'm warning you about? oh, just remember this another day, when he splits your heart in two with sorrow. then you'll say poor margaret was a prophet. richard will come to hate everyone here, as you will come to hate him, and as god will come to hate you all.
if the king had allowed us to fight, norfolk my enemy, one of us would be dead by now. one of our souls would have been banished from its body, just as our bodies are now banished from this country. confess your treason before you go. don't take the cumbersome burden of those sins with you.
are these wind instruments?
her curses have made my hair stand on end.
no, bolingbroke. if i were ever a traitor, may i die and be forbidden from heaven! but you and i and god all know what you are, and i fear that the king will find out all too soon, to his sorrow. goodbye, my lord. now i'm unable to lose my way, since my way is anywhere in the world other than england.
yes, they are.
mine, too. i don't understand why she's not locked up.
uncle, i can see in your eyes how much you are grieving. since you are so sad, i'll reduce your son's exile by four years.
oh, there's the problem.
i can't blame her. she has been wronged too often. i regret what i have done to hurt her.
after six years, you will be welcome to come home.
what's the problem?
i never caused her any harm, as far as i know.
how much time is kept in a word! four slow winters and four lush springs taken away in a word. that's the power of a king.
anyone full of hot air is a problem. but here's some money. the general likes your music a lot, but he asks you to stop playing now.
but you have all the advantages from the harm done. for my part, i was too eager to do king edward good. he doesn't even seem to notice now. and look how he's repaid poor clarence for his loyalty, penned him up like a pig being fattened for slaughter. god pardon those who are responsible for clarence's troubles.
thank you, my lord, for shortening my son's exile for my sake. but i won't gain much by it. by the time six years have passed i will be dead and won't be able to see my son.
well, we'll stop, then.
that's very virtuous and christian of you, richard, to pray for those who have done us harm.
why, uncle, you have many years left to live.
if you've got any music that can't be heard, then play that. but as i said, the general isn't really in the mood to hear music now.
i always pray for them (to himself) because "they" are none other than myself. if i cursed clarence's wrongdoers, i'd be cursing myself.
but you can't give me an extra minute of life. you can shorten my days by adding this sorrow, but you can't add any time. you can cause me to furrow my brow, but you can't stop a wrinkle from forming. you can order my death with a word, but once i'm dead, nothing can be done to give me another breath.
we don't have any music that can't be heard.
madam, his majesty asks for you, and for you, duke of gloucester, and for you, my noble lords.
banishing your son was a good solution, and you agreed to it. why now do you look so gloomy at my justice?
then pack up your instruments and go away. go!
catesby, we'll be there soon., lords, will you come with me?
sometimes a thing that tastes sweet later makes you feel sick. you asked me to be a judge, but i would rather have argued as a father. if it had been a stranger rather than my son, i would have been milder. i wanted to avoid seeming soft, and, in the process, destroyed myself. alas, i expected someone to say i was too strict in banishing my own son, but you let me agree to this terrible decision.
do you hear, my friend?
we will wait on you, your majesty.
cousin, farewell. uncle, say goodbye, too. i've banished him for six years, and he must go.
no, i don't hear your friend. i hear you.
incredible. i do the wrong and am the first to start quarrels. what i did in secret i blame on others. i cry about clarence, whom i had imprisoned, in front of these simple fools, namely, hastings, derby and buckingham, and tell them that the queen and her allies roused the king against my brother clarence. they believe me and urge me to take revenge on rivers, vaughan, and grey. but then i sigh and quote a chunk of the bible, how god says do good in return for evil. ha! dressing my out-and-out wickedness in scraps of scripture, i look like a saint exactly when i'm most like the devil.
cousin, goodbye. send me a letter telling me where you are, since i won't be able to hear it from you in person.
please don't play games. (cassio gives clown money). there's a bit of gold for you. when the woman taking care of the general's wife wakes up, could you please tell her that cassio asks to speak with her?
but quiet. here come the murderers i've hired. how's it going, hardy, reliable friends! are you going to take care of this thing now?
my lord, i won't say goodbye. i'll ride with you as far as i can.
she's awake, sir. if she feels like coming over here, i'll give her your message.
we are, my lord. we've come to get the warrant so we can be let into his cell.
why are you remaining silent? won't you say goodbye to your friends?
good to see you, iago.
good thinking. i have it on me here. (he hands over the warrant) when you're done, go to crosby place. but, sirs, do the job fast. and stick to your mission. don't let him plead for his life, because clarence is a good talker and may make you pity him if you let him get started.
i should be able to tell you in several ways how sad i feel, but i have no words to express how sad i feel in saying goodbye to you.
you didn't go to sleep, then?
tut, tut, my lord, we're not going to stand around chit-chatting. talkers aren't good doers. rest assured that we're going there to use our hands, not our tongues.
your grief is just that you'll be absent for a time.
no. when i left you it was already morning. i've been bold, iago. i've asked to talk to your wife. i'm going to ask her to let me talk to desdemona.
when fools cry, you remain stony. i like you guys. go straight to work. hurry now, get the job done.
with joy gone, grief will take up that whole time.
i'll send her out to you now. i'll think of a plan to get the moor out of the way, so you can speak more openly.
we will, my noble lord.
six years will go by quickly.
i humbly thank you.
why do you look so depressed today, your grace?
to a happy man they would pass quickly, but with sorrow one hour feels like ten.
even for a florentine the citizens of florence (who included machiavelli) were not known for kindness and honesty, but michael cassio seems unaware of florence's bad reputation. florentine , i never knew someone so kind and honest.
oh, i had a miserable night. i had such dark and terrifying dreams that i swear i wouldn't spend another night like that if it guaranteed me a whole lifetime of happy days.
think of it as a pleasure trip.
good morning, lieutenant. i'm sorry about what happened, but i'm sure everything will turn out all right. the general and his wife are talking about it now, and she's defending you strongly. the moor says the man you hurt is very important in cyprus, and that under the circumstances he has no choice but to refuse to reinstate you. but he says he still loves and respects you, and based on his own feelings alone he's looking for an opportunity to safely take you back.
what was your dream? tell me.
to pretend it is a vacation will only make it worse.
please find a way to give me some time alone with desdemona, if you think that's all right.
i thought i had escaped from the tower and was on a ship to france with my brother richard, who persuaded me to leave my cabin and walk on deck with him. looking toward england, we reminisced about the countless frightening experiences we'd had in the wars between the yorks and the lancasters. as we were pacing the deck, which was tipping heavily, richard seemed to stumble, and as i tried to grab hold of him and keep him from falling, he knocked me overboard into the crashing waves. lord, how painful it was to drown. the sound of the rushing water was terrible, and so were the sights. i saw a thousand shipwrecks, a thousand men whom fish had gnawed to the bone, huge anchors, chunks of gold, heaps of pearls, and precious jewels, all scattered on the bottom of the sea.
think of these sorrowful years as a way to make your return home even happier.
please come in. i'll take you to a place where you can speak freely.
some of the gems had wedged themselves like imitation eyes into the dead men's skulls. the fake eyes gazed dully at the bones scattered around.
no, every step i take away will only remind me how far i am from what i love. i'll be serving so many long years in a foreign land, and, other than my freedom, i'll have nothing to show for it at the end.
thank you very much.
so you had time as you were dying to look around?
a wise man knows that anywhere heaven looks down upon is a refuge. force yourself to think this way, because you have to. don't think that the king banished you but rather that you are the king. sorrow weighs heaviest on those who bear it timidly. pretend i sent you to go prove yourself, not that the king banished you. or pretend that there is a plague here and that you are seeking a healthier place. imagine that what you want the most can be found in the direction you are going, not the direction you're coming from. pretend the birds are musicians, and the flowers along your path are fair ladies, and your steps are a dance. sorrow has no power to hurt the man who makes fun of it and who keeps a sense of humor.
iago, give these letters to the ship's captain who brought me here, and ask him to pay my respects to the senate of venice. now that's done, i'm going to walk on the fortification walls. look for me there when you come back.
i thought i did, and i often tried to die. but the terrible water always held me back. it wouldn't let my soul find its way to air but smothered it inside my gasping body. my body wanted so badly to vomit up my spirit that it almost burst.
who can hold a flame by pretending that it is ice? or satisfy hunger just by thinking about a feast? or roll in the snow naked by imagining the heat of summer? oh, no! imagining the best only makes the worst harder to bear. sorrow hurts most when you treat the pain it creates without curing the cause.
i will, my lord.
and didn't you wake up during this terrible agony?
come, come, my son, i'll put you on your way. if i were young enough, i wouldn't remain here.
shall we go see this fortification, men?
oh, no, my dream went on even after i died. in fact, the real nightmare had only just begun. with the help of the grim ferryman according to greek mythology, an old man, charon, ferries the dead across the river styx to hades, the underworld for the good and bad alike. shakespeare adds a certain christian flavor here to alter this tradition: the underworld of clarence's dream is hellish. ferryman that poets like to write about, my soul crossed the river into the kingdom of endless night. the first to greet me there was my great father-in-law clarence abandoned warwick, who fought for the lancasters, to join forces with his own brother king edward iv. father-in-law , the famous earl of warwick. he cried aloud, "what terrible punishment can this dark realm devise for the oath-breaker clarence?" and he vanished. then a ghost like an angel with its hair spattered in blood wandered by, and shieked,
then goodbye, england's earth. goodbye, sweet soil, my motherland. wherever i go, i can boast that i am a true englishman, even if i am banished.
we're at your service, my lord.
"clarence has arrived, lying, cowardly clarence the ghost in clarence's dream was prince edward, queen margaret's and king henry vi's son. clarence helped kill prince edward. clarence , who stabbed me at tewksbury. grab him, avenging spirits, and torment him." with that, a legion of ugly demons surrounded me and howled so loudly in my ears that i woke up trembling and for a long time thought i was still in hell.
how far did you escort proud hereford?
i'll do everything i can for you, cassio.
i'm not surprised it scared you, my lord. it scares me just to hear you talk about it.
i took proud hereford, if you want to call him that, just to the next highway and left him there.
please do, madam. my husband's so upset about cassio's problem you'd think it was his own.
oh, keeper, keeper, the bad things i've done are finally taking their toll. i did them for edward's sake, and look how he rewards me., oh god, if my prayers don't satisfy you, and you have to avenge the wrongs i've done, at least punish me alone! please spare my innocent wife and children!, kind warden, please stay with me for a while. i'm feeling very low, and i need to sleep.
and how many tears were shed?
your husband's such a good man. don't worry, cassio. i'm sure you and my husband will be as friendly as you were before.
i'll stay, my lord. may god bring you sleep!
honestly, none on my part. although the wind was blowing bitterly against our faces, making our eyes water. i suppose by chance that made me shed some tears.
my dear beautiful lady, whatever happens to michael cassio, he'll always be your humble servant.
sorrow interrupts all hours and seasons. it turns everything around, the night into morning and noon into night. the only glory princes have are their titles.
what did my cousin say when you left him?
i know that. thank you. you're my husband's friend and you've known him a long time. i assure you the only reason he's keeping away from you now is political.
instead of the pleasures we think they're enjoying, they experience a whole world of worries. it turns out the only difference between them and peasants is their fame.
"goodbye." but i didn't say it back, because that word has always been a way to disguise my grief when leaving someone, and i certainly didn't have any grief to disguise this time. in fact, if saying goodbye would have made hours longer and added years to his banishment, i would have given him many goodbyes. but i knew that it wouldn't, so i gave him none.
yes, my lady. but those political considerations might last such a long time that the general will forget my love and service, especially if i'm gone and someone else has my job.
ho! who's there?
he is our cousin, cousin. but i doubt that he'll come see his relatives when he returns home from his exile. bushy, bagot, green, and i watched how he courts the common people, and he seems to endear himself to them with humble courtesy. he wasted reverence on slaves and courted poor craftsman with smiles and a patient acceptance of his fate, as though he were hoping to take their affection with him into exile. he took off his hat to a woman selling oysters. several oxen drivers blessed his journey, and he went on one knee and told them, "thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends." it was as though my england were his and my subjects were placing their hope in him.
that'll never happen. emilia here will be my witness: i promise you that you'll get your position back again. and if i promise to help someone, i do everything i can. my husband will never get a moment's rest, i'll keep him up at night talking about you until he runs out
what do you want, fellow? and how did you get in here?
well, he is gone, and any thoughts like that go with him. now we must make an urgent plan to deal with the rebels in ireland, my lord, before giving them time to act gives them an advantage and puts you at a loss.
of patience. he will think that his bed has become a conference table for discussing your problem, he won't be able to get away from it. i'll bring up your name at every moment. so cheer up. i'm your advocate, and i'd rather die than give up on you.
i want to speak with clarence, and i came here on my legs.
lease out our right to tax the people. the revenue from that will keep the country running. if that doesn't bring in enough, then my deputies here will have authority to make the rich lords turn over however much of their gold we choose to supply what we need. i'll leave for ireland at once.
madam, here comes your husband.
that's it? nothing to add?
bushy, what is the news?
madam, i'd better leave now.
well, sir, it's better to say little than to be tedious. (to second murderer) show him our orders and keep your mouth shut.
old john of gaunt is suddenly very ill, my lord. he sent word asking that your majesty visit him as soon as possible.
why not stay and hear me talk to him?
it orders me to hand the noble duke of clarence over to you. i won't ask why because i'd rather not know than feel guilty if you're doing something you shouldn't be. here are the keys, and there is the duke, sleeping. (he hands them the keys) i'll go to the king to let him know i've handed my prisoner over to you.
where is he?
no, madam. i'm very uncomfortable, and that won't help my case.
you may, sir. that's a wise idea. goodbye.
at ely house.
well, do whatever you think best.
what, should i stab him while he sleeps?
god, let the physician help him die quickly! his fortune will pay for the soldiers' coats in this irish war. come, gentleman, let's go visit him. let's hurry, but pray we still arrive too late!
hey! i don't like that.
no. when he wakes up, he'll say we killed him like cowards.
amen.
what did you say?
when he wakes up! why, he won't wake up till judgment day.
is the young, wild king going to come visit me so i can give him my last words of advice before i die?
nothing, my lord, or if i did, i don't know what.
okay, so that's when he'll say we stabbed him in his sleep.
don't waste the little strength you have worrying about that. even if he did come, the king doesn't listen to advice.
wasn't that cassio leaving my wife?
that word "judgment" makes me feel a bit guilty.
also, in general, people pay more attention at the end of somebody's life. it's just like the last bite of dessert, it's the sweetest part, the part you try to make last, and the part you remember most. so, even though king richard ignored me throughout my life, maybe he'll listen to me now that i am dying.
cassio, my lord? no, i don't think so. he wouldn't sneak away looking so guilty when he saw you coming.
what, are you afraid?
no, he won't listen, his ears are stuffed with all the sounds that make him happy, like the flattery and praise he receives, which wise men know to be wary of. he also likes raunchy poems, which immature young people always listen to. and he listens to the fashion reports from italy, which england is always copying and always shamefully trying to catch up to. as long as it is new, no matter how awful it is, it instantly grabs richard's attention. his desire for all of these things doesn't allow him to listen to good advice. don't give him direction, because he chooses his own course. you'll just be wasting your precious breath.
i really think it was him.
not of killing him, because i have a warrant for it, but of being damned for killing him, which no warrant can protect me from.
as i lie here dying, i think that god is suddenly letting me see the king's future. the king can't go on living a wasteful lifestyle forever, in the same way that a raging fire will eventually burn itself out. little rainstorms often go on for a long time, but big, violent thunderstorms come and go quickly. the person who starts off too fast will soon tire out, and the person who eats too fast will choke on his food. the hungry bird that can't get enough to eat will soon eat itself. this kingdom, this majestic earth, this paradise, this fortress that nature built to protect herself against disease and war, this lucky race of people, this little world, this precious jewel of an island sitting in the sea, which protects it like a wall or a moat against the evil intentions of less fortunate countries, this blessed land, this england, this fertile mother of kings who are feared and famous for their christian actions throughout the world, this land of such good people, this wonderful, wonderful land, it is now rented out, and i'm going to have to die watching it happen. england is surrounded by an ocean whose rocky shore has always pushed back the raging waters. now, though, england is bound in shame by legal papers, made of rotting parchment and covered in inky blots, that were signed to rent it out. england, which is used to conquering other countries, has now shamefully conquered itself. oh, how i wish this scandal would die and go away, just like i'm about to die. how happy my death would be then!
what's this, my lord? i was talking to a petitioner here just now, someone who's suffering from your anger.
i thought you were resolved to do this.
(to john of guant) the king is here. go easy with him. he is young and easy to make angry, and if you give him a hard time, you're likely to do nothing but make him angrier.
who do you mean?
i am resolved, to let him live.
how are you, john of gaunt?
your lieutenant, cassio. oh, if i've got any influence over you at all, please patch things up with him. in my judgment, this man truly loves you, and his mistake was innocent rather than wicked. please call him and tell him to come back here.
i'll go back to the duke of gloucester and tell him so.
yes, john of gaunt, tell us how you are.
was that him just now?
please, just wait a minute. i'm hoping my holy mood will pass. it usually only lasts about twenty seconds.
my name is gaunt, and i feel gaunt. i am gaunt because of my old age. and who can go without food and not be gaunt? i have stayed awake and watched england crumble for a long time, and from all the lack of sleep i've grown gaunt. fathers receive nourishment from seeing their children, and since i can't see my child it has made me gaunt. i'm ready for my grave, and when i'm laid in it i'll be nothing but bones.
yes. he feels so bad and humble that i feel bad along with him. my love, call him back in here.
how are you feeling now?
can men who are really sick play so subtly with their names?
not now, my sweet desdemona. some other time.
actually, i'm still feeling some pangs of conscience.
misery likes to make fun of itself. and i thought you might enjoy listening to me make fun of my name since you are banishing my son, who, of course, shares my name.
but will it be soon?
remember the reward we're getting when the deed's done.
should dying men try to amuse the living?
very soon, because you want it.
jesus, let's kill him! i forgot about the reward.
no, no, the living should try to amuse the dying.
will it be tonight at supper?
where's your conscience now?
you, who are dying, tell me that you're trying to please me.
no, not tonight.
oh, in the duke of gloucester's wallet.
oh no! you're the one dying, even though i'm sicker.
then tomorrow at dinner?
when he opens his wallet to give us our pay, your conscience will fly out?
i'm in good health. i'm breathing fine, and i can see that you are the one who is sick.
i won't be eating dinner at home. i'll be meeting the captains at the citadel.
it won't matter. let it fly out. no one will listen to it.
god knows that i can see the sickness in you. you don't realize it, but your deathbed is actually the country that you've been destroying. and you're too stupid to realize that the people you think will cure you are actually the ones making you sick, those flatterers and yes-men you surround yourself with. you don't even see that your subjects are turning on you. you have laid waste to all of england. if your grandfather had been able to see how you were going to destroy this country, he would've reached into the future and stopped you. my brother, it is an utter shame to lease parts of england out to others. you aren't the king of england anymore. you are simply the landlord of england, and you, 
well then, tomorrow night, or tuesday morning. or tuesday noon or at night, or wednesday morning. please just name a time, but don't wait more than three days. he's very sorry. his mistake was hardly worth punishing him for in the first place, though in wartime it is sometimes necessary to make examples out of even the best soldiers. so when should he come? tell me, othello. i can't imagine you asking me for something and me telling you no or standing there muttering. michael cassio came with you when you were trying to win my love. sometimes i'd criticize you to him, and he'd defend you. and now i have to make this big fuss about bringing him back? i swear, i could do so much, 
and what will you do if it returns to you?
you idiot, taking advantage of your illness as an opportunity to criticize me. how dare you anger and embarrass me so much that my face has gone pale. if you weren't my uncle, that is, the uncle to the king of england, that wild tongue of yours would fall from the head that sits on your disobedient shoulders.
please, no more. he can come whenever he wants. i won't refuse you anything.
i won't bother with it. conscience makes a man a coward. if he steals, it accuses him. if he wants to swear, it restrains him. if he sleeps with his neighbor's wife, it exposes him. it blushes, is easily embarrassed, and stages regular uprisings in a man's heart. it's just too much trouble. it once made me return a purse full of money that i found, it turns anyone who treats it decently into a beggar. it has been thrown out of all sorts of towns and cities it visits, and anyone who wants to live well should learn to trust only himself and live without it.
don't do me any favors because i'm your uncle. you have never before hesitated to spill our family's royal blood. my good and simple brother gloucester, who had royal blood and is happily in heaven now, is someone you weren't afraid to kill. like a dead flower, your wicked behavior must be plucked immediately. you have lived a bad life, but you must change your ways before you die. may my words torment you always! (to his assistants) take me to my bed, and then let me die. let only those who are honorable and loving live happily.
don't act like you're doing me a favor! this is like if i asked you to wear your gloves when it's cold outside, or eat nutritious food, or do something that's good for you. if i ever have to ask you for something that will put your luck to the test, it'll be something difficult and terrible.
my god, now the thing is at my elbow, persuading me not to kill the duke.
and let those who are old and gloomy die, and you, john of gaunt, are both.
i won't deny you anything! but in return, please, do one thing for me: leave me alone for a little while.
stop your conscience and don't listen to him. he wants to take over your thoughts and make you sad.
i beg you, your majesty, blame his words on his age and his sickness. i swear that he loves you and holds you as close to his heart as he does harry duke of hereford.
would i ever deny you anything? no. goodbye, my husband.
i'm strong-willed. he won't get the better of me.
right, what you say is true. just as harry holds me close to his heart, john of gaunt must hold me also. and, in turn, i love both of them. that's how it is.
goodbye, my desdemona. i'll come see you right away.
spoken like a brave man who respects his reputation. shall we get to work?
my lord, gaunt sends his regards to you.
come here, emilia., do whatever you feel like doing, my husband, and i'll obey you.
we'll hit him on the head with the handles of our swords, then throw him in the wine barrel in the next room.
what did he say?
what a wonderful girl! god help me, i love you! and when i stop loving you, the universe will fall back into the chaos that was there when time began.
what an excellent idea, he'll soak up the wine!
actually, he didn't say anything. he can't talk. he has died.
my noble lord, 
wait a moment. he's waking up.
i hope that i will be the next to die! death is terrible, but at least it stops the pain of living.
what is it, iago?
strike!
gaunt is the first to die, just like the ripest fruit is always the first to fall off the tree. well, that's over with. now, about the war in ireland. we must get rid of those shaggy-haired irish soldiers who live there. let's seize all of gaunt's money and property to help pay for the war.
when you were wooing desdemona, did michael cassio know about it?
no, first let's talk to him.
how long can i hold out? how long will my obligation to the king make me suffer these wrongs against gaunt? nothing has ever made me show my frustrations, not gloucester's death, nor hereford's banishment, nor gaunt's criticisms, nor the king's bad treatment of england, nor the king's refusal to let bolingbroke marry richard rejected bolingbroke's request to marry the king of france's cousin. king's refusal to let bolingbroke marry , nor my own ill treatment. i am the last of edward's sons. your father, the prince of wales, was the first. there was never anyone more fierce in wartime and more gentle in peacetime than the prince of wales. you look just like him when he was your age. when he got upset, it was against the french, not against his allies. he spent only what he'd earned, and he never spent anything that his father had won. he never did anything wrong to his countrymen, but he punished his enemies. richard, i am too upset, or i would never make these comparisons.
yes, he knew about it the whole time. why do you ask?
where are you, keeper? give me a cup of wine.
why, uncle, what's the matter?
i was just curious. no reason.
you'll have wine enough, my lord, soon.
oh, my lord, forgive me, please. if you won't i'll understand. do you really want to seize all of gaunt's property? he might be dead, but isn't his son still alive? wasn't gaunt a good man, and isn't harry good, too? doesn't gaunt deserve to have an heir? and isn't harry a deserving heir? if you take away harry's right to inherit his father's belongings, then you are going against tradition. it would be like taking away time's authority and rights and preventing tomorrow from following today. remember, you yourself are a king because you inherited the position. now, i swear before god, if you do this, you will bring all sorts of danger to yourself and turn a thousand people against you. you will force me to lose my patience, and i'll think about doing things to you that, because i still honor and obey you, i cannot even think about.
why are you curious, iago?
in god's name, who are you?
think whatever you want, but we're going to seize his money and all of his property.
i didn't realize he knew her.
a man, like you.
i won't stand here and watch. goodbye, my lord. what will happen now, nobody can say. but no good outcome can result from bad decisions like this.
oh, yes. he carried messages back and forth between us very often.
but not a member of the royal family, like me.
bushy, go straight to the earl of wiltshire and tell him to come to ely house to help us. tomorrow morning we'll go to ireland. i believe it's time. i'll make my uncle york the lord governor of england while i'm away. he is fair and has always loved me very much. come, my queen, we must leave tomorrow. be well.
oh, really?
and you're not loyal, like us.
well, lords, the duke of lancaster is dead.
oh, really? yes, really. do you see something wrong with that? isn't he an honest man?
your voice is loud and commanding, but you look like a working man.
but he also kind of lives because his son is now a duke.
honest, my lord?
i'm speaking for the king, but i look like myself.
his son might have the title of duke, but he doesn't have the income of one.
honest, yes, honest.
the things you say scare me! your eyes look threatening. and why are you so pale? who sent you here? why are you here?
if there were justice in the world then he would both have the title and the income.
as far as i know, sir.
to, to, to, 
i have a lot of troubles on my mind. but i must keep silent about them for now.
what are you thinking?
to murder me?
speak your mind. and if anyone uses what you say against you, let that person never speak again!
thinking, my lord?
yes.
are you going to say something about the duke of hereford? if so, say it, man! i am always eager to hear good things about him.
"thinking, my lord?" my god, you keep repeating everything i say as if you were thinking something too horrible to say out loud. you're thinking something. just a minute ago i heard you say you didn't like it when cassio left my wife. what didn't you like? and when i told you he was involved the whole time i was trying to get desdemona, you were like, "oh, really?" and then you frowned and wrinkled up your forehead as if you were imagining something horrible. if you're my friend, tell me what you're thinking.
you barely have the heart to tell me, so you can't possibly have the nerve to do it. besides, how have i offended you, my friends?
i can't do him any good, unless it's good to pity him, since he's now deprived of his inheritance.
my lord, you know i'm your friend.
you didn't offend us, you offended the king.
with god as my witness, i say it's a shame that such wrongs have been done to him and to others of royal blood in this crumbling land. the king is not acting like himself. he's being deceived by his group of flatterers. purely out of hatred they make accusations against us, leading the king to persecute us and our children.
i think you are. and i know you're full of love and honesty, and you think carefully before you speak. that's why these pauses of yours frighten me. if some fool were withholding things from me, i wouldn't think twice about it. if some lying, cheating villain acted like that, it would just be a trick. but when an honest man acts like that, you know he's wrestling with bad thoughts and can't help it.
he and i will make up.
he's taxed the common people heavily, and they've turned against him. he's also fined the nobles for old grudges and turned them against him, as well.
as for michael cassio, i think it would be safe for me to swear that he's honest.
never, my lord. so prepare to die.
every day he devises new ways of forcing people to pay, like mandatory loans and i don't know what else. what, in god's name, is he doing with all of this money?
i think so too.
it's your job in life to kill the innocent? what did i do wrong? where's the evidence against me? where's the jury, the judge, the lawful proceedings, the verdict? who pronounced this death sentence before a court of law could even convict me? for you to threaten to kill me is most unlawful. if you hope to have your sins forgiven by christ's dear blood, which he shed for our terrible sins, you must leave and keep your hands off me. you'll go to hell for the deed you're planning to do.
he hasn't spent the money on wars because he hasn't waged any wars. he has shamefully compromised with our enemies and given away what our ancestors won in battle. he's spent more in peacetime than they did in wartime.
people should be what they appear to be. if they're not honest, they shouldn't look like they are!
what we do we have been commanded to do.
the earl of wiltshire has rented out the land.
absolutely, people should be what they appear to be.
and the one who commands us is our king.
the king is bankrupt.
in that case, i think cassio's an honest man.
wrong-headed slaves, the king of kings says in his ten commandments, "thou shalt not murder." will you defy god and obey a man? be careful. god takes revenge on those who break his laws.
he is disgraced.
no, i think there's more to this than you're letting on. please tell me what you're thinking, even your worst suspicions.
he does, and now he's taking revenge on you, for breaking promises and for murder, too. you took a holy oath to fight for king henry vi.
the only way he can afford to fight the war in ireland, even with all the money that he's collected from these new taxes, is by stealing everything from the duke of hereford.
please don't make me do that, sir. i have to obey all your orders, but surely i'm not obligated to reveal my deepest thoughts, even slaves aren't expected to do that. you want me to say what i'm thinking? what if my thoughts are disgusting and wrong? even good people think horrible things sometimes. who is so pure that they never think a bad thought?
and like a traitor to god, you broke that oath and savagely murdered king henry's young son.
friends, we see this storm coming, and yet we don't seek any shelter to avoid it! we see the wind blowing fiercely upon our sails, and yet we don't lower the sails but recklessly perish.
you're not being a good friend, iago, if you even think your friend has been wronged and you don't tell him about it.
whom you swore you would protect and defend.
we see the shipwreck coming, but the danger is unavoidable now because we sat by and allowed all this to happen.
please don't ask me to tell you. i might be completely wrong. i have a bad tendency to be suspicious of people and to look too closely into what they're doing. often i imagine crimes that aren't really there. you would be wise to ignore my weak guesses and imaginary suspicions, and don't worry yourself about the meaningless things i've noticed. for me to tell you my thoughts would only destroy your peace of mind, and
how dare you tell us about god's laws when you have broken them so savagely yourself?
that's not true. even though we are close to ruin, i can see a way out. but i'm not going to say how near the news of our rescue is.
it wouldn't be wise, honest, or responsible for me to tell them.
but for whose sake did i do that sick deed? for my brother edward's sake. he couldn't be sending you to murder me for that sin, because he's the one who asked me to commit it. he is as guilty as i am. if god will be revenged for this deed, he will do it publicly. god doesn't need to use indirect or illegal means to kill those who have offended him.
please tell us your thoughts, as we have told you ours.
what are you talking about?
then who were you working for when you killed brave, young prince edward?
have the confidence to speak, northumberland. the three of us are just like you. if you speak, you'll most likely say what we're already thinking. be bold.
a good reputation is the most valuable thing we have, men and women alike. if you steal my money, you're just stealing trash. it's something, it's nothing: it's yours, it's mine, and it'll belong to thousands more. but if you steal my reputation, you're robbing me of something that doesn't make you richer, but makes me much poorer.
my brother's love, the devil, and my own anger made me do it.
then here it is: i have learned that the duke of bretagne, in brittany, has given eight large ships to harry duke of hereford as well as rainold lord cobhman, who recently broke his alliance with the duke of exeter, his brother, the former archbishop of canterbury, sir thomas erpingham, sir john ramston, sir john norbery, sir robert waterton, and francis quoint. these men sailed the ships with three thousand soldiers from port le blanc, and right now they are racing to england. they left as soon as the king departed for ireland. if you want to be free of your slavery to the king, help our country to rise again, and restore the honor of our royalty, then come with me right now to ravenspurgh. if you're afraid to do so, then wait here while i go myself.
i'm going to find out what you're thinking.
well, your brother's love, our duty, and your own crimes make us kill you.
to our horses! encourage anyone who is scared.
you can't find that out, even if you held my heart in your hand you couldn't make me tell you. and as long my heart's inside my body, you never will.
if you love my brother, don't hate me. i am his brother, and i love him very much. if you're doing this for pay, go to my brother richard. he will pay you more for saving my life than edward will for killing me.
if my horse holds up, i'll be the first one there.
what?
you're mistaken. richard, the duke of gloucester, hates you.
madam, you are too sad. when we left the king, you promised to stop worrying so much and to try to act more cheerfully.
beware of jealousy, my lord! it's a green-eyed monster that makes fun of the victims it devours. the man who knows his wife is cheating on him is happy, because at least he isn't friends with the man she's sleeping with. but think of the unhappiness of a man who worships his wife, yet doubts her faithfulness. he suspects her, but still loves her.
no, he loves and cherishes me. go to him from me.
i promised that to make the king happy, but for myself i cannot do it. i don't know why i should be so sad, except that i had to say goodbye to my sweet richard. but i also think that something bad is going to happen to me and i'm inwardly grieving. it's making me more sad than the king's leaving does.
oh, what misery!
we will.
when you're already sad it seems like everything is awful and your grief is multiplied. but, in reality, that's not the case. because you're sad, things don't appear to you as they actually are, so in your husband's departure you see many things to grieve. those are just shadows. so don't cry for anything but your husband's leaving. any other causes of grief are just imaginary.
the person who's poor and contented is rich enough. but infinite riches are nothing to someone who's always afraid he'll be poor. god, help us not be jealous!
tell him that when our noble father, the duke of york, gave his three sons his blessing, he never imagined that our friendship would come to this. remind richard of this, and he will weep.
that may be true, but my instinct tells me otherwise. whatever the case, i feel nothing but grief. in fact, i feel so sad that even when i'm not thinking about anything at all i feel woefully faint and weak.
why are you telling me this? do you think i would live a life of jealousy, tormented by new suspicions every hour? no. if there's any doubt, there is no doubt. i might as well be a goat if i ever let myself become obsessed with the kind of suspicions you're implying. if you say my wife is beautiful, eats well, loves good company, speaks freely, sings, plays music, and dances well, you're not making me jealous. when a woman is virtuous, talents like these just make her better. and i'm not going to start feeling inferior. she had her eyes wide open when she chose me. no, iago, i'll have to see some real evidence before i start suspecting her of anything bad, and when i suspect her, i'll look for proof, and if there's proof, that's when i'll let go of my love and my jealousy.
yes, he'll weep stones, as he taught us to do.
that's nothing but your imagination, my queen.
i'm glad to hear you say that. now i can show you my devotion and my duty with more honesty. so please listen to me. i'm not talking about proof yet. watch your wife. watch how she is with cassio. just watch, don't be either completely suspicious or completely trustful. i wouldn't want to see you taken advantage of because you're such an open and trusting guy. watch out! i know the people of venice well. they let god see things they wouldn't show their husbands. they don't avoid doing things that are wrong, they just try not to get caught.
don't lie about my brother. he is kind.
far from it. imaginary feelings of grief are always the result of some real, prior grief. but that's not my situation, as nothing has happened to me to cause my grief. my grief is reversed: i feel a grief whose cause i haven't experienced yet. but i don't know what that is. i can't name it. all i know is that it's a nameless sadness.
do you really think so?
yes, as kind as snow to a harvest. come on, you're fooling yourself. it's richard who sent us here to slaughter you.
god save the queen! and good to see you, too, gentlemen. i hope the king hasn't left yet for ireland.
she lied to her father to marry you. and when she pretended to be afraid of you, she loved you the most.
it cannot be. when i left him, he hugged me in his arms and swore between sobs that he would work to set me free.
why do you hope that? it's better if he has since his plans require that he act quickly, so why do you hope he hasn't sailed?
that's right, she did.
well, that's what he's doing, making you free to enjoy heaven.
our hope is that he might have brought his forces back from ireland and caused our enemy, bolingbroke, to give up. even though he is exiled he has returned to england. he and a strong army have arrived safely to ravenspurgh ready to fight.
well, there you go. she was so young, but she deceived her father so thoroughly he thought it was witchcraft! but i'm sorry i've blurted all this out. i beg your pardon for loving you too much.
make peace with god, for you must die, my lord.
god, no!
i'm indebted to you forever.
you have enough holy feeling to advise me to "make peace with god," but you're willing to go to war with god by murdering me? oh sirs, consider this: those who sent you to do this deed will hate you for doing it.
madam, it's true, and what's worse is that lord northumberland, his young son henry percy, the lord of ross, the lord of beaumond, and the lord of willoughby, along with their powerful friends, have all gone to join him.
you seem a little depressed about this.
(to first murderer) what should we do?
why haven't you proclaimed northumberland and the others traitors?
not at all, not at all.
relent, and save your souls. if either of you were a prince's son, and you were imprisoned as i am now, and two murderers like yourselves came to you, wouldn't you beg for your life? yes, you would beg, if you were in my position.
we did, and that's when the earl of worcester broke his staff, resigned his job a staff is a rod of office and would have been carried by the earl of worcester, as the steward of the king's household. staff, resigned his job , and, along with the king's servants, fled to join bolingbroke.
really, i'm afraid you are. i hope you remember that i said all this because i love you. but i see you're troubled. please don't take what i said more seriously than it deserves to be taken.
relent? no. that's cowardly and womanish.
so, green, you have helped me to give birth: i was pregnant with sorrow, bolingbroke is the newborn child, and i am like a gasping mother who has just delivered her baby.
i won't.
no, sticking to your plan is beastly, savage, devilish. (to second murderer) my friend, i detect some pity in your eyes. please, please take my side and argue for my life. what beggar wouldn't have sympathy for a prince reduced to begging?
madam, do not despair.
if you take it too seriously, it'll have bad effects that i didn't want it to have. cassio's a good friend of mine, my lord, i can see you're upset.
look behind you, my lord.
who's going to stop me? i will despair, and i will not put up with any false hopes. false hope flatters and feeds on us, draws out our pain, and withholds death, which would be gentle otherwise.
no, not too upset. i'm sure desdemona would never cheat on me.
take that, and that. (he stabs clarence) if this won't do the job, i'll drown you in the wine barrel in the next room.
here comes the duke of york.
i hope she never does! and i hope you keep on thinking she wouldn't.
a bloody deed pontius pilate was the roman governor who ordered jesus christ to be crucified. as if to suggest that he was washing away his own guilt, pilate washed his hands in public before the execution. bloody deed , and desperately executed. i wish i could wash my hands of this terrible murder, like pilate.
his old neck shows signs of war. oh, his face is full of anxiety! uncle, for god's sake, give us good news.
but still, it's true that good things can go bad, away from their true natures, 
what's going on? what did you mean by not helping me? by god, i'm going to tell the duke how slack you've been.
if i were to give you good news, i would be hiding my real thoughts. good news is in heaven, and we are on earth, where nothing lives but trials, anxieties, and sorrow. your husband has gone to protect his rule in ireland, while others have come here to take it from him in england. here i am, too old to support myself, left to prop up his country. the bad times that we thought his overindulgent ways would bring have arrived. now his friends will be tested.
that's the point i'm trying to make. if i can be frank with you, she veered away from her own nature in turning down all those young men from her own country, with her skin color, with her status, everything her nature would have drawn her to, ugh! you can almost smell the dark and ugly desires inside her, the unnatural thoughts, but, i'm sorry, i didn't mean to refer to her specifically just now. i only worry that she might snap back to her natural taste in men one day, and compare you unfavorably to other italians.
i wish you could tell him i saved his brother. take the money yourself and tell him what i said. i'm sorry this duke was killed.
my lord, your son was gone before i arrived.
goodbye, goodbye. if you see anything else, let me know. tell your wife to watch her. leave me alone now, iago.
i'm not. go, coward that you are. well, i'll go hide the body in some hole until the duke gives orders for his burial. and when i get my reward, i'll get out of here. the truth about this will come out, and i can't stick around then.
the nobles have fled, the commoners aren't concerned, and they will likely fight on hereford's side. sir, get thee to plashy, to my sister-in-law gloucester. tell her to send me one thousand pounds right away. wait, take my ring to prove the servant comes from the duke of york. ring .
my lord, i'll say goodbye now. (beginning to exit)
well. now i've done a good day's work. you must all keep up this united front. every day i expect a message from god to bring me away from here. now my soul can depart for heaven peacefully, since my friends have made peace here on earth. rivers and hastings, take each other's hand. don't simply hide your hatred. swear your love for each other.
my lord, i forgot to tell you, i went by her house today. but it will upset you if i tell you the rest.
(to himself) why did i ever get married? i'm sure this good and honest man sees and knows more, much more, than he's telling me.
(taking hastings's hand) i swear i have cleansed my heart of all hate. with this handshake, i guarantee my love.
what is it, boy?
(returning) my lord, please don't think about this any more. time will tell. it's right for cassio to have his lieutenancy back, he's very talented. but keep him away for a while, and you'll see how he goes about getting it back. notice whether your wife insists on your
on my honor, i feel the same.
an hour before i got there, your sister-in-law died.
giving it back to him. that will tell you a lot. but in the meantime, just assume that i'm paranoid, as i'm pretty sure i am, and keep thinking she's innocent, please.
make sure you mean what you say. otherwise god, the ultimate king, will uncover your lies and cause you to be the death of each other.
god have mercy! what a tide of troubles comes rushing over this land all at once! i don't know what to do. i wish to god that the king had cut off my head when he cut off my brother's. has no one sent any messengers to ireland yet? how are we going to pay for these wars? come, sister, or i should say, cousin. excuse me. (to the servant) go home, fellow, and find some carts and bring the armor that's there.
don't worry about how i handle it.
on my honor, i swear i love rivers with all my heart.
gentlemen, will you go round up some men? i don't know what i should do now. both richard and bolingbroke are my kinsmen. one is my king, to whom i've pledged allegiance and have a duty to defend. the other is my kinsman, whom the king has mistreated. my conscience and my family bonds tell me to right those wrongs. well, we've got to do something. (to the queen) come, cousin, i'll make arrangements for you. gentlemen, go and round up some men and meet me at berkeley castle. i should go to plashy, too, but there isn't enough time. everything is in chaos.
i'll say goodbye once more.
and i love hastings with all my heart.
the message has probably reached ireland, but no news has come back yet. it's impossible for us to find enough soldiers to match the enemy's force.
this iago is extremely honest and good, and he knows a lot about human behavior. if it turns out that she really is running around on me, i'll send her away, even though it'll break my heart. maybe because i'm black, and i don't have nice manners like courtiers do, or because i'm getting old, but that's not much, she's gone, and i've been cheated on. i have no choice but to hate her. oh what a curse marriage is! we think our beautiful wives belong to us, but their desires are free! i'd rather be a toad in a moldy basement than to have only a part of someone i love, sharing the rest of her with others. this is the plague of important men, our wives betray us more than those of poor men. it's our destiny, like death. we are destined to be betrayed when we are born. oh, here she comes.
(to queen elizabeth) madam, you're not exempt from this, nor are you, dorset, nor you, buckingham. you have had too many separate factions among you. my dear wife, let lord hastings kiss your hand. and don't do it merely for appearance's sake.
besides, our closeness to the king means we are hated by those who hate the king.
if she's cheated on me, then heaven itself is a fake. i don't believe it.
take my hand, hastings. from now on, i'll forget the hatred i used to feel for you.
and that's how the common folk must be. their love depends on who gives them money, and they hate those who take their money away.
what's going on, othello, darling? the nobles of cyprus whom you invited to dinner are waiting for you.
dorset, embrace hastings., hastings, express your affection for the marquess of dorset.
that's why almost all the common folk hate the king.
i'm sorry.
i swear i will never break this promise of love.
if they're to be the judges, then our fate is in their hands, because we've always been on the side of the king.
why are you whispering? are you sick?
and so do i, my lord.
well, i'm going straight to bristol castle to take refuge. the earl of wiltshire is already there.
i have a headache in shakespeare\'s day, cuckolds, or men whose wives cheated on them, were imagined to have horns growing from their heads. othello is alluding to this. headache , right here in my forehead.
now, noble buckingham, seal this alliance by embracing my wife's friends, and make me happy in your unity.
i'll go with you. the hateful common folk won't help us at all but will act like dogs and tear us to pieces. will you come with us?
that's from lack of sleep. it'll go away. let me wrap up your head, and it will feel okay in less than an hour. (she pulls out a handkerchief)
(to queen elizabeth) if i ever turn my hatred toward your majesty, and do not love and cherish you and yours, may god punish me. may i find hatred where i most expect love. when i most need a friend, and when i'm sure i have one, make him treacherous and deceitful to me. i beg god to do all this whenever i fail to show love to you or yours.
no. i'll go to the king in ireland. goodbye. if my instinct is correct, the three of us here will never meet again.
no, your handkerchief's too little. leave my head alone.
noble buckingham, your promise is like medicine to my ailing heart. all we need to put the final touches on this future peace is for richard to appear.
that depends on whether york can defeat bolingbroke.
come on, i'll escort you to dinner.
and just in time, here he comes with sir richard ratcliffe.
oh, poor duke! the task he must begin is as hard as counting the sand in a desert or drinking all the water in the ocean. for every person who fights with him, there will be thousands who will not. goodbye immediately and forever.
i'm very sorry you're not feeling well.
good morning to my sovereign king and queen. noble peers, how nice to see you.
well, we might meet again.
(picking up the handkerchief) i'm glad i found this handkerchief. it's the first keepsake the moor gave her. my stubborn husband has asked me to steal it a
happy indeed, the way we have spent the day. gloucester, we have done deeds of charity, turning enmity into peace and hate into love among these mistakenly angry nobles.
i fear that we won't.
hundred times. but she loves it so much (since othello told her she should always keep it with her) that she always keeps it near her to kiss it and talk to it. i'll copy the embroidery pattern and then give it to iago. heaven knows what he's going to do with it. i only try to satisfy his whims.
what blessed work, my king. if there's anyone among this princely group who mistakes me for an enemy, if by accident or in anger i have done anything to offend you, i want to join with you in peaceful friendship. it kills me to be enemies with you. i hate it and want all good men's love. (to queen elizabeth) first, madam, i want there to be peace between you and me, which i will buy with my obedient service to you. and peace with you, my noble cousin buckingham, if you ever felt any grudge against me; and with you, lord rivers, and, lord grey, with you. in fact, i want to get along with everyone who has frowned on me without good cause, dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen, everyone. there is not an englishman alive with whom i'm at odds, anymore than a newborn baby would be. i thank god for my humbleness.
how much farther is it to berkeley, my lord?
what's going on? what are you doing here alone?
today shall always be remembered as a holy day. if only all struggles ended this well. one more thing, my dear majesty. please pardon our brother clarence.
believe me, my noble lord, i'm a stranger to these parts. these high and wild hills go on for miles and are tiring. and yet your good conversation has been like sugar, making the difficult journey sweeter. but i think it will be a long and hard journey from ravenspurgh to cotswold for ross and willoughby since they won't have your company, which has made my trip easier. but their trip will be made more enjoyable by the expectation that you'll go with them next time. in this way, the journey for those tired lords will seem shorter. that's what has happened to me. my journey has seemed shorter because you've been with me.
don't snap at me. i've got something for you.
why, madam, have i offered you my love only to be flouted in front of the king? who doesn't know that the good duke is dead?
my companionship isn't nearly as valuable as your kind words. who's coming?
you've got something for me? it's a common thing "thing" was slang for vagina. by saying that emilia\'s "thing" is "common," iago implies that she lets anyone have sex with her thing , 
you do him wrong to laugh at his corpse.
it's my son, young harry percy. he was sent by my brother worcester, wherever he may be. harry, how is your uncle worcester?
what?
who doesn't know he's dead? who says he is?
i was thinking, my lord, that you would tell me that.
, to have a stupid wife.
oh my god, what a terrible world this is!
is he not with the queen?
oh, is that so? and what would you give me for the handkerchief?
do i look as pale as everyone else does, lord dorset?
no, my good lord. he has abandoned the court. he broke his staff and let the king's servants go.
what handkerchief?
you do, my good lord. everyone here has turned white.
what was his reason? the last time we were together he hadn't decided to do that.
what handkerchief? the one the moor gave to desdemona, which you asked me to steal so many times.
is clarence dead? but i reversed the death sentence.
he did it because you were proclaimed a traitor. but, my lord, he's gone now to ravenspurgh, to help the duke of hereford, and he sent me to berkeley to discover how large an army the duke of york had there. then he gave me orders to go on to ravenspurgh.
you stole it from her?
well, the poor man died by your first order, which was carried by a winged messenger. some tardy cripple must have taken the counter-order, who came after clarence was already buried. it's clear that someone less noble, less loyal, more bloody-minded than clarence but not a blood relation, deserves as bad an end as my brother, but he goes free.
have you forgotten who the duke of hereford is, boy?
no, actually. she dropped it carelessly, and, seizing the opportunity, since i was here, i picked it up. look, here it is.
(kneeling) i ask a favor of you in return for the service i've done, my king.
no, my good lord, because i can't forget something i never remembered. i don't think i've ever seen him in my life.
good girl, give it to me.
please be quiet. my soul is full of sorrow.
then meet him now. this is the duke.
and what are you going to do with it? why did you want it so much that you begged me to steal it?
i will not rise until your highness hears me.
my gracious lord, i am in your service. i am young, but as i get older, i will demonstrate more impressive abilities.
what's it to you?
then hurry up and tell me what you want.
thank you, kind percy. i count myself happiest when remembering my good friends. i know that the reward for your love will be to witness how it helps me find greater success. my heart makes this promise to you, and this handshake seals that promise.
if you don't need it for some important reason, then give it back to me. poor lady, she'll go crazy when she sees it's missing.
that you lift the death sentence on my servant, who killed a rowdy and belligerent former servant of the duke of norfolk.
how far is it to berkeley? and what events keep good old york there with his soldiers?
don't admit to knowing anything about it. i need it. now go, leave me.
i was willing to condemn my brother to death, but you want me to pardon a peasant? my brother didn't kill anyone. he was only to blame for some thoughts he had. but his punishment was bitter death. who pleaded with me to pardon his life? who, when i was in a rage, kneeled at my feet and told me to reconsider? who talked about brotherhood? who talked about love? who told me how the poor man abandoned the mighty earl of warwick to fight for me? who told me how he rescued me in the field at tewksbury, when oxford had me down, saying, "dear brother, live and be a king"? who told me how, when we both lay in the field freezing to death, he wrapped me in his own clothes and spent a numbingly cold night naked? i forgot all of this in my brutish anger, and not one of you had the grace to remind me. but when your servants get drunk and kill someone, you go right down on your knees for "pardon, pardon." and, though he doesn't deserve it, i have to grant your request. but not one of you would speak up for my brother. and i didn't speak to myself on his behalf, either. the best of you owed something to him in his lifetime, but none of you would plead for his life. oh god, i fear your justice will destroy me and all of these men, and their families and mine, because of this! come, hastings, help me to my room. oh, poor clarence.
there's the castle, over by that group of trees. i've heard that it's protected by three hundred men, and that the lord of york, the lord of berkeley, and the lord of seymour are there. there's no one else of title and noble reputation inside.
i'll leave this handkerchief at cassio's house and let him find it.to a jealous man, a meaningless little thing like this looks like absolute proof. this handkerchief may be useful to me. the moor's mind has already become infected with my poisonous suggestions. ideas can be like poisons. at first they hardly even taste bad, but once they get into your blood they start burning like hot lava.
this is what happens when you act rashly. did you notice how the queen's guilty relatives turned pale when they heard about clarence's death? oh, they continually urged the king to do it. god will revenge it. but come, lords, will you come with me to edward's room to comfort him?
here come the lord of ross and the lord of willoughby. they are bloody from sticking their spurs so hard into their horses, and their faces are red from riding here so fast.
here he comes. no drugs or sleeping pills will ever give you the restful sleep that you had last night.
we'll come with you, your grace.
welcome, my lords. i know that you've followed me here out of love for me. right now i can only pay you with my thanks, but once i have money i'll repay your love and hard work.
argh! she's cheating on me?
tell me, good grandmother, is our father dead?
we are rich enough from just being here with you here, most noble lord.
oh, general, please, no more of that!
no, boy.
and that richness is much more than anything we could earn by working.
get lost! you've tortured me with these thoughts. it is better to be tricked completely than to only suspect a little.
then why do you weep so often, and beat your breast, and cry, "oh clarence, my unlucky son"?
the poor earn their wealth in the form of gratitude. until my young fortune matures, that gratitude will have to take the place of riches. but who's coming now?
what's with you, my lord?
why do you look at us and shake your head, and call us orphans, wretches, castaways, if our noble father is still alive?
i think it's the lord of berkeley.
i had no idea she was cheating on me. i never saw it or suspected it, so it never hurt me. i slept well, ate well, and was happy. i never saw cassio's kisses on her lips. a man who's robbed, but doesn't miss what's stolen, isn't robbed at all.
my pretty children, both of you misunderstand me. i'm lamenting the sickness of the king, because i'd hate to lose him, i'm not mourning your father's death. what would be the point of crying over someone who was already dead?
lord of hereford, i have a message for you.
i'm sorry to hear this.
so you're admitting clarence, my father, is dead. my uncle the king is to blame for this. god will take revenge. i will pray every day that he does.
my lord, i will answer only to my proper name, the duke of lancaster. and i have come to claim that name here in england. i must hear you call me that title before i respond to anything else you say.
i would've been happy if the whole army had had sex with her, the lowest-ranking grunts and all, as long as i didn't know anything about it. oh, goodbye to my peace of mind! goodbye to my happiness! goodbye to the soldiers and to the wars that make men great! goodbye! goodbye to the horses and the trumpets and the drums, the flute and the splendid banners, and all those proud displays and pageantry of war! and you deadly cannons that roar like thunderbolts thrown by the gods, goodbye! othello's career is over.
and so will i.
don't misunderstand, my lord. it's not my intention to deny you your title. i've come to you, my lord, whatever title you want me to use, from the most gracious regent in this land, that is the duke of york. i need to know what has led you to exploit the absence of our king and jeopardize the peace in this land with your armies.
is this possible, my lord?
quiet, children, quiet. the king loves you very much. innocent sweethearts, you have no idea who's responsible for your father's death.
(to lord berkeley) i won't have to pass my message through you. here comes his grace in person. (to the duke of york) my noble uncle!
you villain, you'd better be able to prove my wife's a whore! be sure of it. get me proof i can see. if you can't, trust me, you won't want to feel my rage!
yes we do, grandmother, because my good uncle richard told me. he said the king was forced by the queen to make up charges against my father that would send him to prison. when my uncle explained this to me, he wept and hugged and kissed me. he told me i could rely on him as if he were my father, and he said he would love me as if i were his child.
i don't want to see you kneeling. i know you don't really honor me.
has it come to this?
ah, it's a shame that a liar can seem so nice, hiding his wicked intentions under a mask of goodness. he is my son, yes, and i'm ashamed of him. but he didn't get his deceitfulness from my breast.
my gracious uncle, 
show me, or at least prove it beyond the shadow of a doubt. if you can't, your life is worthless!
you think my uncle was lying, grandmother?
tsk, tsk! don't call me grace, and don't call me uncle. i am not the uncle of a traitor, and it's obscene to use that word "grace" when everybody knows you're ungracious. you were banished, so why have you come back to england? why have you and your army marched miles across peaceful england, scaring villagers with threats of war and displays of hateful weapons? have you come now because the king is away? why, you foolish boy, don't you know that the king has put me in charge while he's away and that i am loyal to him? if i were still the strong young man who, with your father, john of gaunt, rescued the king's father from thousands of french soldiers, i would quickly smack you. but my arm is too weak and shaky to administer punishment in that way.
my noble lord, 
yes, boy.
my gracious uncle, why don't you tell me exactly what i've done wrong?
if you're slandering her just to torture me, then it'll be no use to pray for mercy or say you're sorry. you might as well go ahead and commit every unspeakable crime you can think of, because there's nothing you could that would top what you've already done!
i can't believe that. wait! what's that noise?
you've done the worst that you can: rebellion and treason. you are banished from this country and now you've returned before you are allowed to do so. and you've brought an army to fight against your king.
oh, heaven help me! aren't you a rational human being? don't you have any sense at all? goodbye. i resign my official position. i'm such an idiot for always telling the truth! what a horrible world we live in! listen, pay attention, everybody. it's not safe to be straightforward and honest. i'm glad you've taught me this valuable lesson. from now on, i'll never try to help a friend when it hurts him so much to hear the truth.
no one can stop me now from wailing and weeping about my terrible luck. i don't care if it kills me. i plan to fall into the blackest despair.
i was banished as hereford, but i return as lancaster. and, noble uncle, i beg that you look at my missteps impartially. i think i see my father in you. oh, then, my father, are you going to force me to be a wandering drifter forever, while what is rightfully mine is taken away by force and given to wasteful social climbers? why was i born? if my cousin is allowed to be the king of england, then i must be allowed to be the duke of lancaster. you have a son, aumerle, who is my noble cousin. let's say that you died, and he had been treated this way. his uncle gaunt would have acted as a father to him and fought to correct the wrongs done against him. i'm not allowed to claim my inheritance, though i'm legally entitled to do so. my father's possessions have all been wrongfully confiscated and sold. what do you think i should do? i am a subject of the king of england, aren't i? i claim what is lawfully mine. since i'm not allowed to have attorneys, i must claim my inheritance myself.
no, stop. you should always be honest.
why are you making such a scene?
the noble duke has been abused very much.
i should always be wise. honesty's stupid, it makes me lose my friends even when i'm trying to help them.
i'm simply performing the violent tragedy that is my life: edward, my husband, your son, our king, is dead. why should we live now that our leader is dead? why are the branches still living when the root is gone? why aren't the leaves withering now that the sap is all dried up?
you owe it to him to treat him well.
i swear, i think my wife's faithful, and i think she's not. i think you're trustworthy one minute and then not the next. i need proof! her reputation was as pure as the snow, but now it's as dirty and black as my own face. as long as there are ropes, knives, poison, fire, or streams to drown in by referring to instruments of death, othello implies that he wants to commit either suicide or murder ropes, knives, poison, fire, or streams to drown in , i won't stand for this. oh, how i wish i knew the truth!
if you do intend to live, then mourn. if you're going to die, be quick about it so you can catch the king's departing soul or follow him, like obedient subjects, to his new kingdom of endless night.
his money and property are making lowly men rich.
i see you're all eaten up with emotion. i'm sorry i said anything. you want proof?
as the king's mother, i have a large share in your grief. i have wept at my own good husband's death and only kept myself alive by looking at his sons, the mirror images of him. but now these two mirrors of their princely father have cracked to pieces: my sons are dead. and my only comfort is richard, who is nothing like his father and only causes me shame. you may be a widow, but you're also a mother. you have your children as comfort. but death has snatched my husband from my arms and plucked my two crutches, edward and clarence, from my feeble hands. since your woes are only a portion of mine, i have every reason to surpass your lamentations and drown out your cries with my own.
listen, lords of england: i've known about the injustices done to my cousin, and i have done everything i could to correct them. but because of the way he's returned to england, with an army and all these weapons, there's nothing i can do. and you who are helping him are just lowly rebels.
want? yes, i want it, and i'll get it.
(to queen elizabeth) ah, aunt, you didn't weep at our father's death. how can we help you by crying for your sorrow?
the noble duke has sworn he has come back to england only for his own sake and not for any other reason. we have all sworn to help him, and i hope anyone who breaks that promise never feels joy again.
but how? how will you get proof? are you going to hide and watch them having sex?
you didn't sympathize with us when we became orphans; we won't cry for you!
well, well, i see how this is going to go. i admit i can't change it, because my army is weak. but if god would let me, i'd arrest you all and make you stoop down before our king. but since i can't, i'm going to remain neutral. so, good luck to you. or do you want to come sleep in the castle tonight?
death and damnation! oh!
i don't need your help in grieving. i have my own sources of misery. in fact, all the world's springs and oceans flow from my weeping eyes. i could drown the world. my poor husband, my dear edward!
yes, uncle, we do. but first we must convince you to go with us to bristol castle, which i've heard is being held by bushy, bagot, and their accomplices. they are devouring the kingdom like caterpillars, and i've sworn to eliminate them.
i think it would be very hard to arrange for them to have sex while you watched. if anyone sees them in bed together besides themselves, i guess we could damn them then. so what can we do? what can i say? what proof is there? it'd be impossible for you to watch them, even if they were as horny as animals in heat and as stupid as drunks. but if you would be willing to accept circumstantial evidence as proof, we can get that.
our poor father, clarence!
i might go with you, but let me think about it first. i hate to break our country's laws. i look at you neither as a friend nor a foe, and i don't care about people's past misdeeds that can't be fixed now.
give me one good reason to think she's cheating on me.
my sons edward and clarence!
my lord of salisbury, we've waited here for ten days and have had difficulty keeping our countrymen together. since we've heard nothing from the king, we're going to leave. goodbye.
i don't like what you're asking me to do. but since i've gotten myself involved this far, because i'm so stupidly honest and because i like you so much, i'll keep going. i recently shared a bed with cassio, and i couldn't sleep because of a raging toothache. well, some people talk in their sleep, and cassio is one of them. i heard him saying, "sweet desdemona, let's be careful and hide our love," in his sleep. and then he grabbed my hand and said, "oh, my darling!" and
what support did i have other than edward? and now he's gone.
my trusty welshman, please stay one more day. the king has placed all his confidence in you.
kissed me hard, as if he were trying to suck my lips off. then he put his leg over mine, and sighed and kissed me, and said, "damn fate for giving you to the moor!"
what support did we have besides our father? and now he's gone.
it's believed that the king is dead, and we're not going to stay. the trees in our country are all withered, and there are meteors flashing in the sky and scaring the stars. the moon has turned red, and the fortunetellers say that bad things are going to happen. rich men suddenly look sad because they're afraid they're going to lose their possessions. and criminals are dancing because they know they're going to steal those possessions violently. all of these signs point to the death, or at least the fall, of kings. goodbye. my countrymen have already fled, as they know that king richard ii is dead.
oh, that's monstrous! monstrous!
what support did i have besides my two sons? and now they're both gone.
ah, richard, i can see that your glory, like a shooting star, is falling from the sky to the ground, and the thought is weighing heavily on my mind. your sun is setting in the west and it's crying, which tells me that storms of grief and chaos are coming. all of your friends have left you and pledged allegiance to your enemies, and fortune works against you.
no, it was just a dream.
there has never been a widow who suffered such loss as me.
bring these men to me. bushy and green, i won't torment your souls with too much talk of your wicked lives since your souls will soon leave your bodies. but so no one may claim your execution was murder, i will explain with these men as witnesses why you are legally sentenced to death. you have deceived a king, a man who was happy and attractive until you came along and changed him. through your evil ways, you have driven a wedge between the king and the queen. you've interfered with their happy marriage and caused the queen suffering. i, by the luck of my birth, am a prince. i am closely related to the king, and until you changed his feelings toward me, he loved me. because of your actions, i've had to live in exile in a foreign country, and meanwhile you lived off my wealth and property here, leasing my hunting grounds to others and cutting down my forests. you tore my family's coat of arms out of the windows of my house and destroyed all signs of my family's existence. if not for men's opinions and the fact that i'm still alive, no one would ever know that the property was mine and that i am a member of the nobility. these crimes and at least twice as many more condemn you to death.
but it shows that something has already happened.
there have never been orphans who've suffered what we have.
make sure they are executed soon.
it's a reason for suspicion, even though it's just a dream. and it might back up other evidence that may seem too flimsy.
there was never a mother who suffered so much loss. alas, i am the mother of all these others' griefs. each of them has a single loss, while i share them all. she weeps for edward and so do i, while she does not weep for clarence, though i do. these young children cry for clarence and so do i, though they don't cry for edward, as i do. alas, all of you can turn to me with your sorrow, because i feel all of it. i will comfort you by adding my own grief to your sorrow.
i welcome death more than england welcomes the return of bolingbroke. lords, goodbye.
i'll tear her to pieces!
(to queen elizabeth) calm down, dear mother. god is unhappy that you've responded so unthankfully to his doings. in everyday life, when a person is unwilling to pay back a loan that was generously offered, he's considered ungrateful. how much worse it is when heaven is the lender, as in your case?
i am comforted knowing that our souls will go to heaven and that heaven will give hell to bolingbroke, who committed this injustice.
no, be reasonable. we don't have any proof yet. she might still be faithful. just tell me this: have you ever seen her holding a handkerchief with an embroidered strawberry pattern on it?
be a careful mother, madam, and think about your son, the young prince. send for him right away and have him crowned. your peace of mind depends on him. bury your sorrows in dead edward's grave and plant your hopes in prince edward's rise to the throne.
my lord northumberland, see that they are killed.
yes, i gave her one like that. it was my first gift to her.
sister, calm down. all of us have reason to mourn the dimming of our shining star the king. but no good comes from all this wailing. oh, mother, forgive me. i didn't see you there. on my knee, i humbly ask your blessing.
uncle, you said that the queen is at your house. for god's sake, let her be treated courteously. give her my best, and make sure to deliver my greeting.
i don't know about that, but i saw a handkerchief like that today. i'm sure it belongs to your wife, and i saw cassio use it to wipe his beard.
god bless you and make you obedient, loving, and kind.
i've sent a gentleman to her with the message.
if it's the same one, 
(he stands) amen. (to himself) and make me die a good old man! that should be the point of a mother's blessing. i'm surprised my mother forgot to make it.
thanks, kind uncle. come, lords, let's leave. we've got to fight glendower and his accomplices. first, we'll work, and then we'll be able to rest.
if it's the same one, or any one that belongs to her, then together with the other evidence it's pretty strong.
you mournful princes and grieving gentlemen who have been sharing this burden of grief, now it's time to cheer each other up with love. though we have lost a generous king, we are about to enjoy the benefits of a new king. we must preserve our goodwill toward each other and not break into factions again. i think a few members of the court should fetch the young prince from wales and bring him to london to be crowned our king.
do they call this castle barkloughly castle?
oh, i'd kill that bastard cassio forty thousand times if i could! killing him once is not enough revenge. now i see it's true. oh, iago, all the love i felt is gone, vanished in the wind. welcome, hatred and vengeance! get out of my heart, love! my heart feels like it's full of poisonous snakes!
why only a few courtiers, my lord of buckingham?
yes, my lord. how do you like it here, after you've been tossing about on the open seas?
calm down, 
because if many of us go there, the hostility between us may break out again, which would be very dangerous with the young prince so newly crowned. when you have a situation where everyone seems free to take off on his or her own, it's important that the heads of state keep a low profile. we wouldn't want the prince or his new authority to be undermined by squabbling factions.
of course i like it here. standing here on my kingdom again makes me cry with joy. dear earth, i salute you, even though insurgents are wounding you by riding their horses over you. like a mother who has been away from her child for a long time, i cry and smile and greet you. please, gentle earth, provide no nourishment or shelter for my enemies. instead, let your venomous spiders and your toads get in their way. put stinging nettles a plant with jagged leaves covered with hairs that sting. nettles in their path. and when they pick a flower from the ground, let a poisonous snake bite and kill them. lords, don't make fun of me for asking this. the earth will have feelings, and these stones will turn into armed soldiers, before i, england's legitimate king, let these terrible rebels defeat us.
i want blood!
the king made peace among all of us. i, at least, intend to stick to our agreement to get along.
don't worry, my lord, the power that made you king is the same power that will keep you king in spite of all these troubles. we must embrace the opportunities that god gives us and not neglect them. otherwise, we're rejecting both god's protection from these problems as well as his solution for them.
be patient, i'm telling you. you may change your mind later.
and so do i. i think we all do. but, since our agreement is a recent development, it shouldn't be put to the test, which could happen if the coronation turned into a huge ceremony. so, i agree with noble buckingham, only a few should go to meet the prince.
what he means, my lord, is that we're being neglectful because of overconfidence, while bolingbroke is growing stronger.
never, iago. my thoughts of revenge are flowing through me like a violent river, never turning back to love, only flowing toward full revenge that'll swallow them up. i swear to god i'll get revenge. (he kneels)
i think so too.
you are so discouraging, cousin! don't you know that at nighttime, when the sun has set, thieves roam the earth unseen, boldly committing murder and other crimes? but when the sun comes up and lights the treetops and every dark hole, then those same criminals stand trembling with no way to hide. so when this thief, this traitor bolingbroke, who has been committing all these crimes during the nighttime, sees us coming up with the sun, he'll be ashamed and will tremble at the light of day. all the water in an ocean can't wash away a king's right to the throne. mere mortals can't get rid of someone who has been appointed by god. for every solider bolingbroke has enlisted to fight against me, god has given me an angel. and when angels fight, the weak men fall, since heaven always guards those who are right.
don't get up yet. let heaven be my witness, i'm putting my mind, my heart, and my hands in othello's control. let him command me, and i'll do whatever he asks, no matter how violent.
then we're agreed. now we need to figure out which of us will go to meet him. madam and mother, will you go to offer your support to this weighty business?
welcome, my lord. how far away is your army?
i accept your devotion with my deepest love. i'll put you to the test right away. within the next three days i want to hear you tell me that cassio's dead.
for god's sake, my lord, let's be sure to be part of the group that meets the prince. along the way, i'll find an opportunity to separate him from the queen's proud relatives, as step one in the plan we've discussed.
my army consists only of me, and i am too upset to talk of anything but despair. we are one day too late and have lost our chance of seeing happy times again. oh, i wish it were still yesterday. if we could go back in time, we'd have twelve thousand men ready to fight on our side! today, today, it is an unhappy day. today has taken away any chance for joy, friends, wealth, and power. all the welshmen heard that you were dead, and they've all joined bolingbroke's army.
my friend cassio is dead. it's done, because you request it. but let her live.
you are my other self, my oracle, my prophet, my dear brother! i plan to act like a child and do exactly what you say. to wales then, for we will not be left out.
cheer up, my lord. why are you so pale?
damn her, the wicked whore! oh, damn her, damn her! come away with me. i'm going inside to think up some way to kill that beautiful devil. you're my lieutenant now.
good morrow, neighbor, whither away so fast?
only a moment ago, i had twenty thousand men fighting for me, and now they've all fled. until they return, aren't i allowed to look as pale as if i were dead? anyone who wants to be safe flees from me, as recent events have tarnished my reputation.
i'm yours forever.
i'm telling you, i hardly know myself. did you hear the news that's going around?
cheer up, my lord. don't forget that you're the king.
excuse me, do you know which room lieutenant cassio lies in lies in = sleeps in lies in ?
yes, that the king is dead.
i forgot. i'm the king, aren't i? awake, you cowardly king. you're sleeping. isn't being the king worth as much as twenty thousand men? prepare for action, my name! a young and weak subject is trying to damage your glory. don't hang your head low. you favorite men of the king, aren't we high above them all? then we should aim high as well: i know my uncle york has enough troops for our needs. but who's coming now?
i wouldn't dare say he lies anywhere.
bad news, by god. the news is always bad. but this news is bound to make the world go mad.
i hope more health and happiness come to you, my lord, than my grief-stricken tongue can offer.
why do you say that?
neighbors, hello.
my ears are open, and my heart is ready. the worst you can tell me about are losses for me here on earth. so, did i lose my kingdom? it was my problem, and what loss is it to be rid of a problem? is bolingbroke still trying to overthrow me? if he serves god, we will serve god, too, and then the two of us will be merely equals. are our subjects revolting? we can't fix that. they break their faith with god as well as with us. though you may cry out about woe, destruction, ruin, and decay, death is the worst fate of all, and the time for death will come.
he's a soldier. if i accused a soldier of lying, he'd stab me.
good day to you, sir.
i'm glad that your highness is prepared for the worst. bolingbroke is bursting with rage and his army is attacking all across england. it's like an unexpected flood that makes it seem like the world is crying. even old men with white beards have joined forces against your majesty, and young boys who still speak in high-pitched voices. the men whom we paid to pray for us are also now on their side, and women are fighting against you as well. everything is going far worse for you than i can possibly describe.
oh, come on. where does he sleep?
is it true that good king edward has died?
you are describing these horrible things too vividly. where is the earl of wiltshire? where is bagot? what happened to bushy? where is green? they didn't let the dangerous enemy cross over our territories without any opposition, did they? if we win, they'll pay for their failures with their heads. i'll bet they've made peace with bolingbroke.
telling you where he's sleeping is like telling you where i'm lying.
yes, sir, it's all too true, god help us.
oh, yes, they've made peace, my lord.
what on earth does that mean?
then, gentlemen, we can count on trouble.
oh, they are villains and vipers, damned without any hope for redemption! they're like dogs that will suck up to anyone! they're three judases the disciple who betrayed christ to jewish authorities in return for thirty pieces of silver. judases , but each three times worse than judas! i hope their guilt-stained souls are punished terribly for what they've done!
i don't know where he's staying, so if i told you he's sleeping here or there, i'd be lying.
no, no, with god's help, his son will be king.
i see how your love turns into the deadliest of hatred. please, take back your curses. their peace wasn't made by joining forces with bolingbroke. it was made with god, when they were executed. they are all in their graves now.
can you ask around and find out?
it's bad news when a country is ruled by a child.
are bushy, green, and the earl of wiltshire dead?
i'll go ask questions everywhere.
his counselors will govern as long as he's a minor, and then he'll take over. it shouldn't go so badly.
yes, they were all beheaded at bristol.
find him and tell him to come here. tell him i've spoken to my husband on his behalf, and i think everything will be all right.
that's how it was with henry the sixth, who was crowned in paris when he was only nine months old.
where is my father with his army?
i think i can do that. it's not too much to ask.
really? but at that point, the king had the benefit of excellent counselors. his uncles were good men and protected him.
it doesn't matter where he is. let's not try to cheer ourselves up. we must talk about graves and worms and epitaphs an inscription on a tombstone. epitaphs . we'll make the dust our paper and use our tears to write a message of sorrow on the earth. let's choose our executors a person appointed by another to carry out the terms of his or her will. executors and talk of wills. and, yet, what can we bequeath to anyone other than leaving our rotting bodies to the ground? our lands and our lives now belong to bolingbroke, and we can call nothing our own except for our deaths and that little patch of earth that will cover our buried bodies. for god's sake, let's sit on the ground and tell sad stories of the death of kings, how some were overthrown and others killed in war. some were haunted by the ghosts of the kings they had overthrown. still others were poisoned by their wives, while others were killed in their sleep. all of them, however, were murdered. there is always death around kings, and there's no way to escape it. death laughs at the king's reign and mocks his great ceremonies, allowing him to live a little while and play the monarch. death fills him with pride as if the king's body were immortal, and at the end death comes and with little effort kills the body. then goodbye, king! so stop treating me so respectfully. there's no need to pretend that i am any different than you. you've been wrong about me all this time. i feel all the same things that you do. i have desires and feel sad and need friends, just like you. how, then, can you say that i'm a king?
where could i have lost that handkerchief, emilia?
well, this king has uncles too, on both his father and mother's side.
my lord, wise men never sit and feel sorry for themselves but try to fix the causes of their sorrow. since fear weakens you, fearing your enemy only works against you and helps your enemy. if you're scared, you'll die. that's the worst that can happen in battle. but fighting and dying is a way of beating death, because then you die nobly. but being scared and dying gives death the victory.
i don't know, madam.
it would be better if they were all on his father's side, or that there were none at all on his father's side. as it is, the rivalry between his father's and mother's relatives over who will be closest to the king is likely to endanger everyone, if we're not lucky.as it stands, there's a struggle between the two sides for the prince's attention. richard, the duke of gloucester, is very dangerous, and the queen's sons and brothers are haughty and proud, it would be better for this ailing country if they were subjects, not rulers.
my father has soldiers. let's figure out where he is and make an army out of the men he has.
believe me, i'd rather have lost a purse full of gold coins. this would be enough to make my husband suspect me, if he wasn't so free of jealousy.
come, come, we're worrying about the worst-case scenario. i'm sure everything will be fine.
your scolding does me good. proud bolingbroke, i'll exchange blows with you on our day of destiny. my fit of fear has passed. it should be easy to get our men together. scroop, where is my uncle with his men? tell me good news, man, even though you look bad.
he's not jealous?
when the day turns cloudy, wise men put on their coats. when leaves fall from the trees, it means winter has arrived. when the sun sets, who's too stupid to recognize it's night? when storms arrive early, you can expect the harvest will be damaged. so, if all turns out fine, as you say, it's more than we deserve or i expect.
men often determine what the day is going to be like by looking at the sky, so you should know by my dull and gloomy eyes that i'm about to deliver bad news. i'm acting like a torturer, drawing out the pain of what i have to say. your uncle york has joined forces with bolingbroke. they have possession of all your northern castles now, and all your men of rank in the south are fighting for them, too.
who, him? i think all tendencies to jealousy were burned out of him by the sun of his native land.
it's true, people are really worried. it's hard to find a person who isn't.
you have said enough.
look, here he comes.
it's always like this in times of change. by some sort of deep instinct, we always know when danger is approaching, just as we know that a storm is coming when the sea swells. but leave it all to god. where are you all off to?
i curse you, cousin, for convincing me not to be sad anymore. what do you have to say now? what comforts us now? i swear to god, i will forever hate the man who tells me not to despair now. go to flint castle. that's where i will wait. i am a king, but i am a slave of sorrow, and i will follow sorrow's orders. tell my army that they may leave and go work for some cause that has hope, since i have none. i don't want to hear anyone trying to change my mind. any advice is pointless.
i won't leave him alone until he gives cassio his job back., how are you, my lord?
the court has sent for us.
my lord, may i have a word.
i'm fine, my lady., (to himself) oh, it's so hard to pretend!, how are you, desdemona?
for me, too. i'll go with you.
the person who tries to convince me again not to despair will become the second person to treat me poorly. let my army go. england will be bolingbroke's very soon.
i'm fine, my lord.
last night, i hear, they stayed in stony stratford. tonight they will rest in northhampton. they'll be here tomorrow or the next day.
so we know from this latest news that the welshmen have left the battlefield and that the king has landed with some of his friends on the coast, where salisbury has gone to meet him.
give me your hand moist hands were supposed to indicate a tendency toward love. hand . your hand's moist, my lady.
i'm dying to see the prince. i hope he's grown a lot since i last saw him.
it's good news, my lord. richard is hiding not very far from here.
it's moist because it's still young and inexperienced.
but i hear he hasn't. they say my son york has almost passed him in height.
it would be better for lord northumberland to call him "king richard." we should mourn the day that a king has to hide.
it says you're fertile, and you've got a giving heart. hot, hot and moist. with a hand like this you need to
yes, mother, but i wish i hadn't.
your grace misunderstands me. i only left off his title for the sake of brevity.
fast and pray to stave off temptations. someone with a young sweating hand like this one is bound to act up sooner or later. it's a nice hand, an open one.
why, dear child? it's good to grow.
there was a time when, if you'd been so brief in his presence, he would have made you even briefer, by chopping off your head.
you're right to say that. this was the hand that gave you my heart.
grandmother, one night when we were eating dinner, my uncle rivers mentioned that i had grown more than my brother. "yes," said my uncle gloucester, "small plants are graceful, while ugly weeds grow fast." and since then, i've wished i wouldn't grow so fast, because sweet flowers are slow while the weeds grow in a hurry.
uncle, don't take this misunderstanding too far.
this hand gives itself away very freely. in the old days, people used to give their hearts to each other when they joined their hands in marriage. but these days, people give each other their hands without their hearts.
well, it certainly wasn't true for richard! as a child, he took such a long time to grow up that, according to his rule, he should have grown up into a gracious adult.
good cousin, don't take more than you should, or you may forget heaven rules over us.
i don't know about that. now, don't forget, you promised me something.
and no doubt he is, gracious madam.
i know it, uncle, and won't oppose the will of heaven. but who is coming?
what did i promise, my dear?
i hope he is, but mothers get to have their doubts.
welcome, harry. what, won't this castle give in?
i sent for cassio to come talk with you.
hey, if i'd remembered something about him, i could have had a good comeback for my uncle, touching on his growth worse than he touched on mine.
the castle is guarded by royal soldiers, my lord, and they won't let you enter.
i have a bad cold that's bothering me. lend me your handkerchief.
what would you have said, my young york? do tell.
royal! but there's no king here, is there?
here, my lord.
indeed, they say my uncle grew so fast that he could gnaw on a crust of bread when he was two hours old. it took me two years before i had a single tooth. grandmother, this would have been a biting joke.
yes, my lord, there is a king here. king richard is inside, along with lord aumerle, lord salisbury, sir stephen scroop, as well a holy clergyman whom i don't know.
no, the one i gave you.
pretty york, who told you about his teeth?
it's probably the bishop of carlisle.
i don't have it with me.
his nurse, grandmother.
noble lords, approach the crude walls of this old castle and let the trumpets sound a signal to the king that we want to meet. deliver this message: henry bolingbroke kneels before king richard, kisses his hand, and offers his loyalty and true faith of heart. i come to lay my weapons and my power at his feet, as long as he repeals my banishment and freely gives back all my lands. if he won't, i'll use my power to rain his englishmen's blood on the summer's dust. by kneeling submissively before him i'll show how little i desire to drench his green lands in this way. go, tell him, and meanwhile we'll march here on the plain. let's march without the drums so that they can clearly see our excellent military equipment from the castle's ruined roof. i think king richard and i should meet in the same way that lightning and rain mix in the sky, producing thunder that rips it apart. if he's the lightning, i'll be the rain. he can rage, while i will yield and pour my waters on the earth. but only on the earth, not on him. march along, and notice how king richard looks.
you don't?
his nurse? why, she was dead before you were even born.
see, king richard himself appears, just as the sun rises unhappily in the east when it sees the clouds covering the sky and trying to hide his rays.
no, my lord.
well, if it wasn't her, i don't know.
he still looks like a king. look, his eye is as bright as an eagle's and commands authority. it would be a shame to harm his fair appearance!
that's not good. an egyptian woman gave that handkerchief to my mother. she was a witch, and she could
a mischievous child. come, come, you are too clever for your own good.
i am astonished that i've stood here waiting so long and you haven't yet kneeled,
almost read people's thoughts. she told my mother that as long as she kept it with her, my father would love and desire her. but if she lost it or gave it away, my father would start hating her and looking at other women. when she was dying she gave it to me and told me to give it to my wife when i got married. i did. so pay attention. treat it as something precious. losing it or giving it away would be an unspeakable loss, a loss like none other.
good lady, don't be angry with the child.
since i thought i was still your lawful king. and if i am, how dare you not kneel in my presence? if i am not, prove to me that god has dismissed me from my position. no mortal man, after all, can take away my scepter, unless he steals it or usurps it against the will of god. even if you think that, like you, everyone has put their souls in danger by turning away from me, and that i have no friends, you should know that god, my master, is gathering disease and agony in his clouds on my behalf. they will strike the unborn children of anyone who raises their hands against me and the glory of my crown. tell bolingbroke, for i think he's standing over there, that every step he takes on my land is a dangerous act of treason. he has come to wage war against me. but ten thousand sons will die, faithful englishman's blood will stain the pastures, and peace will turn to anger before he ever gets the crown he seeks.
is that possible?
little pitchers have big ears.
god forbid that anyone would attack the king! your noble cousin harry bolingbroke kisses your hand. he swears by your grandfather's grave, by the royal blood you share, by the buried hand of his father gaunt, and by his own honor that he has no intention of doing anything but kneeling down and asking for his land and money back. once you've given him that, he'll commit to never use his weapons, to put his warhorses in stables, and to dedicate himself to your faithful service. he swears that this is fair to him as a prince. i, as a gentleman, believe him.
yes, it's true. there's magic in its fabric. a two-hundred-year-old witch sewed it while she was in a fevered trance. the silk came from sacred silkworms, and it was dyed with fluid made from embalmed virgins' hearts.
here comes a messenger. what's the news?
cousin, aren't i dishonoring myself by looking so wretched and speaking so kindly? should i call back northumberland and tell him to send only words of defiance to the traitor, and in doing so ensure that bolingbroke's army will kill me?
really? is that true?
my lord, it's news i wish i didn't have to report.
my lord, he waits in the outer court below to speak with you. will you come down?
it's absolutely true, so take good care of it.
how's the prince?
i'm coming down, like shining phaeton son of helios, the sun god, in greek myth. helios allowed him to drive the chariot of the sun, but phaeton was unable to control the horses pulling the chariot. they veered too close to the earth, burning it, until zeus struck phaeton down with a thunderbolt. phaeton unable to control unruly horses. in the bottom court? the bottom court, where kings become common enough to obey a traitor's summons and bow to them. in the bottom court? come down? the bottom court! and now the king is on the bottom! everything is backward, and night owls shriek when mounting larks should be singing.
i wish i had never seen it!
he's fine and healthy, madam.
what does the king say?
ha! why?
what is your news?
his sorrow makes him speak foolishly, like a mad man. but he's coming.
why are you yelling at me so angrily?
lord rivers and lord grey have been imprisoned in pomfret. pomfret was a castle in northern england used for political executions; richard ii was killed there. sir thomas vaughan was a chief member of prince edward's court. pomfret. so has sir thomas vaughan.
stand apart, and show your duty to the king.
is it lost? is it gone? tell me, is it missing?
who sent them there?
my gracious lord.
god help me!
the powerful dukes gloucester and buckingham.
fair cousin, you insult your princely knee by touching it to the lowly earth. i'd rather my heart feel your love than my eyes see your fake courtesy. get up, cousin. your heart is proud, i know, even if your knee is humbled.
what do you have to say for yourself?
what did they do wrong?
my gracious lord, i'm only here to reclaim my own property.
it's not lost, but what if it were?
i've told you everything i know. why the nobles were imprisoned, and on what charges, i don't know, my gracious lord.
your property is yours, and i am your king.
what do you mean?
oh no! i see the downfall of my family. the tiger has seized the gentle deer: a tyrant has begun to attack the weak, innocent king. welcome, destruction, blood, and massacre! i can see how all this will end as clearly as if i was looking at a map.
my dreaded lord, you are my king only if i deserve your love.
i'm telling you, it's not lost.
how many times have i had to live through cursed times of violent struggle? my husband lost his life to get the crown, and my sons' fortunes have been tossed up and down, leaving me to rejoice over their victories and weep over their losses. and once one of them achieved the throne and had taken care of domestic quarrels, they made war among themselves. it's a preposterous outrage. let it end, or let me die so i won't have to watch any more of it.
uncle, give me your hands. no, dry your eyes. tears show love, but do nothing to fix their cause. cousin, i am too young to be your father, even though you are old enough to inherit my kingdom. i'll willingly give you what you want, because you've forced me to do it. so now you'll go to london, cousin?
then bring it here. let me see it.
(to york) come, my boy, let's go to sanctuary taking "sanctuary" meant going into a church, where for a certain length of time people could be free from civil authority. sanctuary . madam, farewell.
yes, my good lord.
i could, sir. but i don't want to now. this is just a trick to take my mind off what i'm asking you for. please hire cassio again.
wait, i'll go with you.
then i can't say no.
bring me the handkerchief, my mind is full of doubt.
you have no reason to.
what game should we play here in the garden to distract us from our worries?
come on. you know you'll never find a more capable man.
(to queen elizabeth) my gracious lady, go, and take your money and belongings the archbishop had both religious and civic duties. by assigning the seal to the queen, he's suggesting that he will treat her, not her son (or her brother in-law richard), as the lawful monarch. it's not really the archbishop's role, though, to reassign the seal. only the king can do that. belongings with you. for my part, i'll reassign the great seal of england to you and will take it upon myself to protect you. come, i'll conduct you to the sanctuary.
madam, let's play bowls a game played by rolling slightly asymmetrical balls as close as possible to a white ball, known as a jack. bowls .
the handkerchief!
welcome, sweet prince, to london, the capital of the king.
it will make me think the world is full of obstacles, and that my fortune sends me the wrong way.
he's counted on your friendship for his success. he's shared dangers with you, 
welcome, dear nephew, king of all my thoughts. the tiring journey seems to have made you gloomy.
madam, we'll dance.
the handkerchief!
it wasn't the journey itself, uncle, but the troubles we encountered that made it wearisome and dull. i want more uncles here to welcome me.
my legs can't move with delight when my heart is so full of grief. therefore, no dancing, girl. let's find some other sport.
really, i don't think you're behaving very well.
sweet prince, you're just an innocent child. you don't really understand how capable people are of trickery. all you know is what a man shows you, which has little to do with what he's really thinking. those uncles that you wish were here were dangerous. your grace heard their saccharine words, but didn't take note of their poisonous intentions. god protect you from them and from other false friends!
madam, we'll tell stories.
damn it!
god should keep me from false friends, but they weren't false.
sad ones or happy ones?
and you say he's not jealous?
my lord, the mayor of london is here to greet you.
either, madam.
i never saw him like this before. there must be some magic in that handkerchief. i'm miserable that i lost it.
god bless your grace with health and happy days.
neither, girl. since i have no happiness, happy stories only remind me of sorrow. since i am full of grief, sad stories only add more sorrow to my lack of happiness. i don't need to add on to what i already have, and it does no good to complain about what i want.
men are all the same, but it takes longer than a year or two to see how bad they are. they're like stomachs and we're just the food. they eat us up hungrily, and when they're full, they vomit us up. look, here comes cassio and my husband.
thank you, my good lord, thank you all. i thought my mother and my brother, york, would have met us on our way here long before now. and what a slug hastings is that he hasn't even arrived to tell us whether they're coming!
madam, i'll sing.
there's no other way. she's the one who's got to do it. and what luck, she's here! go ahead and ask her.
and, just in time, here comes the sweaty lord.
it's wonderful that you are happy enough to sing, but it would make me happier if you wept.
hello, cassio. how are you?
welcome, my lord. what, isn't my mother coming?
if it would do you any good, madam, i could weep.
nothing, madam. just my earlier request. i'm begging you to help me get back on his good side. i'm devoted to him with all my heart. i can't wait any longer. if my wrongdoing was so serious that i can't get back into his good graces either by my past service, or my present situation, or the promise of devoted service in the future, just knowing that would help me. then i could stop wondering, and find some other career.
god knows why, but your mother and your brother have taken sanctuary in westminster abbey. your sweet brother wanted to come meet you, but his mother wouldn't let him.
and if weeping would do me any good, i would do it enough that i'd be able to sing.
i'm sorry, dear cassio, but now is not the right time to bring up your case. my husband's not himself. if his face changed as much as his personality has, i wouldn't recognize him. god knows i have done my best to argue for you, and made him angry at me for being so aggressive. you'll just have to be patient for a little while. i'll do what i can, more than i'd do for myself. let that be enough for you.
damn, what a sneaky and spiteful course your mother is taking!, lord cardinal, will you please persuade the queen to hurry and send the duke of york here?, go with him, lord hastings, and if she refuses, take the boy from her by force.
but stop, here come the gardeners. let's move into the shadows of these trees. i'd only bet my most worthless possessions that they won't talk about politics, since that's what everyone does in anticipation of a change. sorrow is always announced with sorrow.
is othello angry?
my lord of buckingham, if my weak skills of persuasion convince his mother to part with the duke of york, you can expect him here shortly. but if she resists my mild pleas, let god in heaven forbid us from disobeying the holy laws of the sanctuary and taking the child from her. i wouldn't commit so serious a crime for anything.
go, gather up those dangling apricots. the tree is bending under their excessive weight, like a father oppressed by his unruly children. give the twigs some support. cut off the branches that are growing too fast and high in our country. everything must be equal. while you're doing that, i'll go dig up those harmful weeds that are stealing all the nutrients in the soil from the flowers.
he just left, clearly upset about something.
you are too inexplicably stubborn, my lord, too stuck on ceremony. in these less dainty times, you're not breaking the laws of sanctuary to seize him. it's only a sanctuary for those who really need protection or those who are smart enough to claim they do. the prince has done neither; therefore, in my opinion, he isn't really protected by sanctuary. you're not breaking any holy laws to take him away. often i have heard of "sanctuary men," but until now i've never heard of "sanctuary children."
why should we make this garden look like a model of beauty and order when the whole country is in disarray? if england were a garden, it would be full of weeds, with the most beautiful flowers choked to death. all the fruit trees would be torn out of the ground, the hedges would be ruined, the carefully designed flowerbeds would be a mess, and the herbs would be covered in caterpillars.
can he even get angry? it's hard to believe. i've seen him stay calm when cannons were blowing his soldiers to bits, even killing his own brother without him batting an eyelid, is he really upset? it must be about something important. i'll go talk to him. if he's angry, there must be something seriously wrong.
my lord, you've won me over this time. lord hastings, will you go with me?
be quiet. the one who allowed this disordered mess to grow is now withering like a tree in autumn. the weeds that he sheltered with his leaves, and that seemed to prop him up while simultaneously destroying him, have been ripped up by bolingbroke. i'm talking about the earl of wiltshire, bushy, and green.
please, do so.
i'm coming, my lord.
what, they are dead?
there must be some political news from venice, or some dangerous plot here in cyprus has ruined his good mood. men always get angry about little things when they're really worried about bigger ones. that's the way it goes. when our finger hurts, it makes the rest of the body hurt too. we shouldn't expect men to be perfect, or for them to be as polite as on the weddingday. oh, emilia, i'm so inexperienced that i thought he was being unkind, but actually i was judging him harshly.
go as fast as you can.
they are, and bolingbroke has taken the wasteful king into custody. oh, it's too bad that the king didn't take care of his land as carefully as we tend this garden! at this time of year we pierce the bark, so that the fruit trees aren't spoiled by too much of their own rich sap. if he had done the same thing to his men, who were spoiling from too much wealth and power, they might have served him better, and he would have profited. we cut the unnecessary branches off the trees, so that the ones that bear fruit will live. if he had done the same and cut away the unnecessary men in his service, he would still have the crown. but he wasted his time and lost it.
i hope to god it's something political, like you think, and not jealousy involving you.
say, uncle richard, if my brother comes, where will i stay till my coronation?
what, do you think the king will be dethroned?
oh no! i never gave him reason to be jealous.
whatever seems best to you. if i can give you some advice, if i were you, i would stay in the tower for a day or two. then you can stay wherever best suits your health and entertainment needs.
he's already been brought low, and it's feared he'll be dethroned. a dear friend of the duke of york received letters last night with bad news.
but jealous people don't think like that. they're never jealous for a reason; they're just jealous. it's like a monster that just grows and grows, out of nothing.
of all places, i don't like the tower julius caesar conquered britain,which then became a part of the roman empire. tower . didn't julius caesar build it, my lord?
oh, not saying anything is killing me!
i hope god keeps that monster from growing in othello's mind!
he started it, my noble lord, and succeeding generations rebuilt it.
you, gardener, how dare you say such awful things? what snake has tempted you to invent a second fall of man? why do you say that king richard is deposed? do you dare predict his downfall when you are as low as the dirt? tell me where, when, and how you heard these terrible things. speak, you wretch.
amen to that, lady.
is it on record that he built it, or is it just word of mouth?
forgive me, madam. i'm not happy to say it, but it's true. bolingbroke has captured king richard. their fortunes are being weighed out. your lord has only himself and his vanity, which makes him lighter. great bolingbroke has all the english peers with him, and that gives him greater weight than king richard. if you hurry to london, you'll see. i'm only saying what everyone knows.
i'll go look for him, cassio, stay around here. if he's in a good mood i'll mention you again, and do everything i can.
on record, my gracious lord.
why am i the last to hear this bad news that concerns me? i'll feel the sorrow the longest and yet i'm the last to know. come, ladies, let's go. we must go to london to see the king in his sorrow. was this why i was born, to show my sad face while great bolingbroke triumphs? gardener, for telling me this awful news, i pray that your plants never grow.
i thank you, lady.
well, i think that even if it weren't on record, the truth would be remembered from one generation to the next, all the way to doomsday.
poor queen! i wish her curse would strike my skill if it would help her. her tear fell right here. i'll plant rue there, since it is a bitter and sad herb. if only out of pity, rue will soon grow here in remembrance of a weeping queen.
hello, cassio!
(to himself) as the saying goes, "those that are this wise when they're this young won't live long."
call forward bagot. now, bagot, speak freely. what do you know about noble gloucester's death? who conspired with the king to do it, and who actually killed him?
why are you so far from home? how are you, my pretty bianca? to tell you the truth, i was just going to your house.
what did you say, uncle?
bring lord aumerle forward.
and i was just going to yours. you've kept away from me for a week? seven days and seven nights? a hundred and sixty-eight hours? and lovers' hours are a hundred and sixty times longer than normal ones! what a tedious wait!
i said, "when there are no written records, a person's fame lasts for a long time." (to himself) like injustice iniquity, or injustice/wickedness,was a common figure in medieval morality plays, which often personified the seven deadly sins. like richard, iniquity favors double talk to serve his own wicked purposes. injustice , i get two meanings out of one word.
cousin, stand in front and look at that man.
i'm sorry, bianca. all this time i've been depressed and had problems on my mind. when i get some free time i'll make it up to you. (he gives her desdemona 's handkerchief) sweet bianca, would you copy this embroidery pattern for me?
that julius caesar was a famous man. his courage helped his cleverness, and his cleverness made sure that his reputation for being courageous outlived him. death didn't conquer this conqueror, for he lives on in his fame, even though he's dead. i'll tell you what, my cousin buckingham, 
my lord aumerle, i know you're too brave to deny what you've already said. while gloucester's death was being plotted, i heard you say, "isn't my arm long enough to reach from the peaceful english court to calais, to strike at my uncle's head?" at that same time, i heard you say, among other things, that you would rather refuse a hundred thousand crowns than have bolingbroke return to england. and you added that the country would be blessed if bolingbroke, your cousin, died.
oh, cassio, where did you get this? this is a gift from another woman, a new lover! now i know why you've been staying away from me. has it come to this? well, well.
what, my dear lord?
princes and noble lords, how should i respond to this lowly man? should i dishonor my rank as a noble by chastising him on equal terms? i guess i must, or let him ruin my honor with this slanderous accusation. there is my glove, the symbol of your death. i say you lie, and i'll confirm in combat that what you said is a lie, though i won't stain my knightly sword with your common blood.
oh, come on, woman. stop jumping to silly conclusions. now you're jealous, thinking that this is from some mistress of mine, but i swear it's not, bianca.
if i live to be a man, i'll win france in the hundred years war ( , ), the english invaded france in an attempt to make good on hereditary claims to the french throne. france again or die a soldier, as honorably as i lived as a king.
bagot, restrain yourself. you will not retaliate.
well, whose is it?
(to himself) as the saying goes, "short summers often have an early spring." this smarty-pants won't live long.
except for bolingbroke, i wish bagot were the most noble person here to have angered me like this.
i don't even know. i found it in my room. it's pretty. someone is certainly looking for it, and i'll have to give it back. so i'd like it copied. take it and do that for me, and leave me alone for a while.
making good time, here's the duke of york.
if your courage depends on rank, there is my glove, aumerle, to match your glove. i swear by the sun that shows me where you are that i heard you boast that you caused gloucester's death. even if you deny it twenty times, you lie, and i'll put that lie back in your heart, where it came from, with my sword.
leave you alone! why?
richard of york, how are you doing, my loving brother?
coward, you wouldn't dare do it.
i'm waiting here for the general, and i don't want him to see me with a woman.
very well, my supreme lord, that's what i have to call you now.
by my soul, i wish i could do it right now.
and why's that?
yes, brother, i feel bad about that, too. the man who might have kept that title died too soon, and now it isn't worth nearly as much.
fitzwater, you'll be damned to hell for this.
it's not because i don't love you.
how's my nephew doing, noble lord of york?
aumerle, you lie. his accusation is as true as your denial is false. and i'll prove that you lie by throwing down my glove. take it up, if you dare.
but you don't love me. please, just walk with me a little ways, and tell me if i'll see you later tonight.
thank you for asking, uncle. oh, my lord, you once said that lazy weeds grow fast. the prince has far outgrown me.
if i don't, may my hands rot away and never again lift my sword over the helmet of my enemy!
i can only walk a little way with you, since i'm waiting here. but i'll see you soon.
he has, my lord.
i'll throw down my glove to you, too, lying aumerle. and i'll accuse you of lying right in your ear, from sunrise to sunset. there's my pledge of honor. pick it up, if you dare.
all right, have it your way. i have to make do.
does that mean he's lazy?
who else challenges me? by heaven, i'll throw my glove at you all. my breast holds a thousand spirits that can outmatch twenty thousand like you.
do you really think so?
oh, my handsome nephew, i must not say that.
my lord fitzwater, i remember very well when you and aumerle spoke.
what do you mean, do i think so?
in that case, he's more obliged to you than i am.
that's true, you were there. and you can be my witness that this is true.
what, just because they kissed in private?
he may command me as my king, but you still have power over me as a relative.
it's as false as heaven is true.
an illicit kiss!
uncle, please give me your dagger.
surrey, you lie.
maybe she was just naked in bed with him for an hour or so, but they didn't do anything.
my dagger, little nephew? with all my heart.
dishonorable boy! your lie will give such weight to my sword that it will attack you in revenge until you're lying in the grave as quiet as your dead father. as proof, there's my glove. take it up, if you dare.
naked in bed together, but without doing anything? come on, iago. that would be like playing a trick on the devil: they'd make him think they're going to commit adultery, but then back off. anyone who acted like that would be letting the devil tempt them, and tempting god to condemn them.
are you begging, brother?
you taunt me so foolishly! as easily as i dare to eat or drink or breathe or live, i dare to meet surrey in a wild place and spit on him, all the while declaring that he lies. there is my response, so that you can't run away from it. i intend to do well in this new kingdom, and aumerle is guilty. besides, i heard the banished duke of norfolk, thomas mowbray, say that you, aumerle, sent two of your men to kill the noble duke at calais.
as long as they didn't do anything, it would only be a minor sin. but if i gave my wife a handkerchief, 
from my kind uncle, who i know will give it to me, especially as it's not worth much.
someone lend me a glove so i can prove that mowbray lies. here, i throw down this, so that i may test his honor if he's ever brought back.
then what?
i'll give you a greater gift than that, nephew.
all these quarrels will be put on hold until mowbray is recalled from exile, as he will be. even though he is my enemy, he'll be given back his land and titles. and when he comes back, we'll have his trial against aumerle.
then it's hers. and if it's hers, i guess she can give it to any man she wants.
a greater gift? that must mean a sword.
that day will never happen. many times did mowbray fight for jesus christ in battle and raised the christian cross against the black pagans, turks, and saracens. exhausted by war, he retired to italy. he gave his body to its soil in venice and gave his pure soul to christ, under whose banner he fought for so long.
her reputation is also her own. can she give that away too?
yes, gentle cousin, if it were light enough for you.
why, bishop, is mowbray dead?
you can't see a reputation. a lot of people don't even deserve the reputations they have. but a handkerchief, 
oh, i see, you will only part with lightweight presents. for more important things, you'll say no.
as surely as i am alive, my lord.
god, i wish i could forget about the handkerchief! what you told me it haunts me like a nightmare, he's got my handkerchief!
a sword's too heavy for you to wear.
may peace take his sweet soul to abraham! lords, we'll keep all these challenges until we can set days for your trials.
yes, what about it?
i wouldn't think much of it even if it were heavier.
great duke of lancaster, i come to you from humbled richard, who is willing to make you his heir and yields his royal scepter to your hands. take his throne from him, and long live henry, the fourth king with that name!
that's not good.
what, do you want to wear my weapon, little lord?
in god's name, i'll take the royal throne.
what if i'd said i saw him do something to hurt you? or heard him say something about it. you know there are jerks out there who have to brag about bedding some woman., 
i do, so i can thank you for what you called me.
god forbid! i'm the least worthy to speak in this noble company, but it's fitting that i, a clergyman, speak the truth. if only one of the nobles here were noble enough to judge richard! then he would restrain himself from committing such a wrong. what subject can pass judgment on his king? and who here isn't richard's subject? even thieves aren't judged unless they're present, even when they're obviously guilty. shall the image of god's majesty, who is his chosen deputy and caretaker and has been so for many years, be judged by his inferiors without even being present? oh, god, don't allow such refined souls in a christian land to be so obscene. i'm speaking to subjects as a subject, because i've been moved by god to speak boldly for his king. you might call my lord of hereford here king, but he is a traitor to his king. if you give him the crown, i predict that the blood of the english will soak the soil, and future generations will regret this act. peace will leave england and go to the turks and infidels, while we will have terrible wars that will pit families against each other. disorder, fear, mutiny, and horror will live here, and it will be known as a place of terror and skulls. if you pit your family against his that is, lancaster against york. family against his , it will prove to be the worst division ever to take place on earth. prevent it from happening. don't let it be so, or your children and your grandchildren will lament your actions!
has he said anything?
what's that?
you've argued well, and in return we're arresting you for capital treason. my lord of westminster, it's your responsibility to keep him safe until he goes on trial. my lords, please grant the commons' suit.
yes, but he'd deny it all.
"little."
bring richard here, so that he can surrender in public. that way i can proceed without suspicion.
what did he say?
the lord of york is always a bit perverse in his chatter. but, uncle, you know how to bear with him.
i'll escort him.
he said he did, i don't know.
you mean, to bear me, not to bear with me. uncle, my brother makes fun of both of us. because i'm little, like an ape professional jesters often carried apes on their shoulders. york may also be suggesting that richard's humpback would provide a perfect spot for an ape to perch. ape , he thinks you should bear me on your shoulders, like a fool.
you lords who are here under arrest, arrange for someone to pledge that you'll be here for your trial. i don't owe you anything, and i don't expect to receive any love from you.
he what?
(to himself) what a sharp mind this boy has! to make up for his scorn toward his uncle, he makes fun of himself as well. it's amazing that he's so cunning at his age.
alas, why does the king call for me when i've only just resigned myself to give up the throne? i've hardly had time to learn to act like a subject, who has to indulge the king and bow to him. give me some time with my sorrow so that i can learn how to submit to another. i still remember how these men used to serve me. didn't they once cry out, "all hail!" to me? but then so did judas to christ once. but christ had eleven honest followers out of twelve. i don't have one out of twelve thousand. god save the king! won't anyone say amen? do i have to both give the blessing and affirm it? well then, amen. god save the king! even though i am not the king. and yet, i'll say amen in case heaven still considers me the king. why have you sent for me?
he was in bed with, 
(to prince) my lord, will you please continue on your way to the tower? my good cousin buckingham and i will go to your mother and ask her to meet you there.
you have to give up your country and your crown to henry bolingbroke of your own free will, even though you've already given it over through your defeat.
with her?
(to prince) what, you're going to the tower, my lord?
give me the crown. here, cousin, take the crown. here cousin. i'll put my hand on this side of it, and you put yours on the other. now this golden crown looks like a well that has two buckets, and raising one causes the other to drop and fill up. one is empty and dances up in the air, while the other is down in the well and full of water. i'm the bucket at the bottom, full of tears, and you are the one risen to the top.
with her, on top of her, however you want to say it.
my protector, richard, insists on it.
i thought you were willing to give up the crown.
in bed with her? on top of her? i would have thought people were telling lies about her rather than believe he was lying on her. my god, it's nauseating! handkerchief, confessions, handkerchief! i'll kill him first, and then let him confess, i'm trembling with rage. i wouldn't be trembling like this if i didn't know deep down this was all true. noses, ears, lips. is it possible? tell me the truth, handkerchief, damn it!
i can't sleep quietly in the tower.
i'm willing to give up my crown, but my sadness is still mine. you can take my glory and my royal status, but i still rule over my grief.
keep working, poison! this is the way to trick gullible fools. many good and innocent women are punished for reasons like this., my lord? my lord, othello!
why, what are you afraid of?
you'll lose some of those worries when you give the crown to me.
hey, cassio!
my uncle clarence's angry ghost. my grandmother told me he was murdered there.
just because you gain those worries doesn't mean i lose them. i'm worried by their loss and by what has happened. your concern is the new responsibilities you are taking on. i'll keep my worries even if i give away their cause, the crown.
what's the matter?
i'm not afraid of dead uncles.
are you willing to give up the crown?
othello's having some kind of epileptic fit. this is his second fit like this. he had one yesterday.
nor living ones, i hope.
yes and no. no and yes, since i must not be anything. so, no, no, because i give it up to you. now look, i'll make myself nothing. i'll give you this heavy crown from my head, and this scepter from my hand. i'll take the pride of being king out of my heart. my own tears will wash away the oil that made me king. my own hands will give away the crown. my own tongue will deny my sacred right to be king. my own breath will give up all oaths of allegiance made to me. i give up all the ritual and ceremony, all my homes, my income, and reject all the laws i enacted. may god pardon everyone who breaks his oath to me! may god keep them from breaking their oath to you! let me grieve for nothing since i have nothing, and let you be pleased with everything since you have everything! may you live long in my place, and let me be buried soon! god save king harry, former king richard says, and let him have many happy days! what else is left?
rub his temples.
well, i hope not. (to york) but come, my lord. with a heavy heart, thinking about my dead uncles, i will go to the tower.
nothing but for you to read aloud all the accusations and crimes that you and your followers committed against the wellbeing and prosperity of this country. once you've confessed, everyone can agree that you've been justly dethroned.
no, don't. this fit has to run its course. if you interrupt it, he'll foam at the mouth and go crazy. look, he's moving. why don't you go away for a bit? he'll get
richard, don't you think this chattering little york was encouraged to taunt you by his sneaky mother in that outrageous way?
do i have to? do i have to list out these charges? dear northumberland, if all your crimes were listed out, wouldn't you be ashamed to read them in front of such a distinguished group? if you did, you'd find on the list the terrible crime of deposing a king and breaking an oath, crimes condemned by heaven. all of you who are watching me act out my miserable fate here pretend like pilate the roman governor of judea who ordered the crucifixion of jesus. he washed his hands to signify that the execution took place at the request of the jews and he took no responsibility. pilate that you've done nothing wrong and look at me with pity. but you've all played a part in bringing me to this state, and you can't deny your sin.
better right away. when he leaves, it's very important that i talk to you.
no doubt, no doubt. oh, he's a dangerously clever boy, bold, quick-witted, capable. he's his mother's child from head to toe.
my lord, get on with it. read the charges.
what happened, general? did you hit your head?
well, enough about them., come here, catesby. you've sworn to participate in our plot and to keep it a secret. what do you think: wouldn't it be easy to convince lord hastings to join us in installing richard as king of england?
my eyes are full of tears and i can't see. but even so, i can see a group of traitors in front of me. and if i look at myself, i see just as great a traitor. i've agreed to give up my royal garments, made nobility common, and made a master a slave. i've made a king a subject and made the richest the poorest.
are you making fun of me?
hastings loved the prince's father so much that we won't be able to persuade him to do anything against the prince.
my lord, 
making fun of you? no, i swear! i wish you could face your bad news like a man!
what about stanley? won't he join us?
i'm not your lord, you haughty, insulting man. i'm no man's lord. i don't have a name or a title. the name i was baptized with is no longer mine. how sad it is that i am so old and i don't know what to call myself! if only i were a snowman, i could stand in front of the sun of bolingbroke and let myself be melted! good king, great king, but not a very good man. if my commands still have value in england, let me command someone to bring me a mirror, so i may see what i look like without any of my noble majesty.
a man who's been cheated on isn't a real man. he's subhuman, like an animal.
he'll do whatever hastings does.
someone go and get a mirror.
in that case there are a lot of animals on the loose in this city.
okay, just do this, noble catesby: sound out lord hastings, but make it seem as if you're just mulling over the idea, that it hasn't been firmed up yet. invite him to come to the tower tomorrow for the coronation ceremony. if he seems game to our plan, encourage him to join us and explain all our reasons. but if he's resistant and chilly, then be like that too and break off the conversation. let us know how he responds. tomorrow we're going to hold two separate meetings, one for those who are with us and one for those who aren't. you'll have a lot to do in these meetings.
read this paper until the mirror arrives.
did he confess?
give my regards to hastings, catesby. tell him the nest of dangerous enemies that plagued him for years will die tomorrow at pomfret. and tell him to give mistress after king edward died, mistress shore became hastings's mistress. mistress shore one extra kiss to celebrate this good news.
fiend, you are torturing me before i even get to hell!
sir, be a man. every married man has been cheated on. millions of men sleep with wives who cheat on them, wrongly believing they belong to them alone. your case is better than that. at least you're not ignorant. the worst thing of all is to kiss your wife thinking she's innocent, when in fact she's a whore. no, i'd rather know the truth. then i'll know exactly what she is, just as i know what i am.
good catesby, do your work well.
lord northumberland, stop asking him to read it.
you're wise! that's for sure.
my good lords, i plan to.
the house of commons won't be satisfied.
go somewhere else for a while. calm down. while you were dazed by grief, which isn't appropriate for a man like you, cassio showed up here. i got him to leave, and made up an excuse for your trance. i told him to come back and talk to me in a bit, and he promised he would. so hide here and watch how he sneers
will we hear from you before bedtime, catesby?
they'll get what they want. i'll read it when i can look at my face and see the sins that appear there.
at you. i'll make him tell me the whole story again, where, how often, how long ago, and when he plans to sleep with your wife in the future. i'm telling you, just watch his face. but stay calm, and don't get carried away by rage, or i'll think you're not a man.
you will, my lord.
give me the mirror, and i'll read what's on my face. no deeper wrinkles yet? could i endure so many sorrows without them appearing on my face? oh flattering mirror, you are lying to me just like my followers did during happier times. was this the same man who once kept ten thousand men in his employ? was this the face that made men lower their gaze, as if they were looking into the sun? was this the same face that endured so many challenges until it was defeated by bolingbroke? there's a fragile glory in this face, and it's a face as fragile as glory.
do you hear what i'm saying, iago? i'll be very patient, but, do you hear me?, i'm not done with him yet
you'll find us both at crosby place.
look, there it is in a hundred pieces. pay attention, king, to what this means. sorrow has so quickly destroyed my face.
that's fine, but for now keep your cool. will you go hide?
now, my lord, what are we going to do if we find that lord hastings won't go along with our plans?
it's only the outward gloom of your sorrow that has destroyed the appearance of your face.
now i'll ask cassio about bianca, a prostitute who sells her body for food and clothes. she's crazy about cassio. that's the whore's curse, to seduce many men, but to be seduced by one. whenever he talks about her he can't stop laughing.
chop off his head. whatever we decide to do. and when i'm king, remember to ask me for the earldom of hereford and all the possessions that go with it, which my brother the king used to own.
say that again. the outward gloom of my sorrow! ha! let's see. it's true that my grief is inside me and that anything i say or do to indicate my grief is just the outward reflection of what's inside. thank you, king, for being so kind as to not only give me reason to grieve but also to teach me how to show my grief. i'll beg one favor, and then i'll go away and no longer bother you. will you give it to me?
and when he laughs, othello will go crazy. in his ignorant jealousy, he'll totally misunderstand cassio's smiles, gestures, and jokes., how are you, lieutenant?
i look forward to that present.
whatever you want, fair cousin.
it doesn't make me feel any better when you call me lieutenant. i'm dying to have that title back again.
you'll find i'll give it to you very willingly. come, let's have an early dinner so that we have time to work out our plans.
"fair cousin"? i must be mightier than a king, since when i was a king subjects flattered me, but now that i'm a subject the king flatters me. since i'm so mighty, i don't need to beg.
just keep asking desdemona, and it'll be yours. if it was up to bianca to get you your job back, you'd have had it already!
(knocking) my lord, my lord.
ask anyway.
the poor thing!
(offstage) who's knocking?
and will i have it?
he's laughing already!
a messenger from lord stanley.
you will.
i never knew a woman who loved a man so much.
(offstage)what time is it?
then give me permission to go.
the poor thing, i really think she loves me.
four o'clock in the morning.
where?
now he denies it a bit, and tries to laugh it off.
can't lord stanley sleep?
wherever you want, as long as it is away from you.
have you heard this, cassio?
i guess not, for good reason, as you'll soon hear. first, he sends his regards.
go, some of you take him to the tower.
he's asking him to tell the story again. go on, tell it.
and then?
oh good! take me? you're all takers who've risen so mightily by my downfall.
she says you're going to marry her. are you?
and then he said to tell you that tonight he dreamed the duke of gloucester cut off his helmet, that is, his head. besides that, he says that two meetings are going to be held tomorrow, and something may be decided at one of them that may make you and him, who are at the other, sorry. he wants to know if instead of going to the meeting, you'll get on your horse and ride north with him to get out of harm's way.
next wednesday, i'll be crowned. lords, prepare for it.
ha, ha, ha!
go, man, return to your lord and tell him not to worry about the separate meetings. while he and i are at one, my loyal servant catesby will be at the other, so nothing will happen that we won't find out about. tell your master there is no sound basis for his worries. and as for his dreams, i'm surprised he's so foolish as to trust the fantasies of a restless night. if we flee from the boar before the boar even pursues us, we'll only make the boar angry and suspicious, causing him to chase us when he never intended to. tell your master to get up and come here, and we'll go together to the tower to meet the boar "the boar" refers to richard, whose heraldic emblem, worn on his armor to indicate his noble lineage, was the boar. boar , who will treat us well, as he'll see.
this is a sad scene we've witnessed.
are you laughing because you've won? do you think you've won?
i'll go, my lord, and tell him what you say.
the sadness is yet to come. children who aren't even born yet will feel the effects of this day like a thorn in their side.
me, marry her? that whore? please give me a little credit! i'm not that stupid. ha, ha, ha!
good morning, my noble lord.
you holy men, isn't there a way we can get rid of this terrible ruler?
so, so, so, so! the winner's always got the last laugh, hasn't he?
good day, catesby. you're up early. what news can you tell me in this fast-moving, unsteady state of ours?
my lord, before i speak freely, you must swear to keep this a secret and also to promise that whatever plan i come up with is carried out. i see how unhappy you are. come home with me for supper. i'll put forward a plot that will make us all happy.
i swear, there's a rumor going around that you'll marry her.
our world sure is spinning fast, my lord. i believe it won't stop moving and stand upright till richard wears the wreath of the realm.
the king will come this way as he is taken to the tower, where proud bolingbroke condemned him to be held a prisoner. let's rest here, if there is anywhere on this rebellious earth where i can rest.
you're kidding!
what do you mean, "wears the wreath"? are you talking about the crown?
but wait, but look, or rather don't look or you will wither. no, but look up, and let pity wash over you and your tears of love bathe him. ah, you, fallen in greatness like troy the city besieged and destroyed by the greeks in the trojan war. troy , the epitome of honor. you look like a shell of king richard and not king richard himself. oh, why should grief live in you, who are so honorable and royal, while triumph lives within bolingbroke, a commoner?
if it's not true, you can call me a villain.
yes, my good lord.
fair lady, don't grieve as if i were already dead. think of our past as a happy dream and that we have simply awoken to reality. i've had to bow to necessity, and i'll stay that way until i die. go quickly to france and join a convent. our only hope is to become holy and be crowned in heaven, since our lives here have ended in such ruin.
have you given me bastard children to raise? all right, then.
i'll have my head cut from my shoulders before i'll see the crown so misplaced. but do you think that's what he's aiming for?
what, has my richard been changed and weakened in both body and mind? has bolingbroke overthrown your mind? has he turned your heart? the dying lion claws at the earth, if nothing else, in his rage at being defeated. will you act like a rebuked student and take your punishment meekly, kiss the cane that beats you, and return rage with humility, when you are a lion and king of beasts?
the little monkey must have started that rumor herself. she thinks i'll marry her because she loves me. she's just flattering herself. i never promised her anything.
yes, i swear, and he hopes you'll join his party to help. for that reason he sends you this good news, that this very day your enemies, the queen's relatives, will die at pomfret.
a king of beasts, indeed. if only they weren't beasts, i would still be a happy king of men. good former queen, get ready to go to france. think of me as dead, and say goodbye to me now as if i were on my deathbed. through long winter nights sit by the fire with good people and let them tell you stories of sad times long ago. and before you say good night, tell them my sadder story and send them weeping to their beds. even the firewood will sympathize and cry out their fires. and some will be so unhappy at the story of the overthrow of a rightful king that they will cover themselves in ashes.
iago is gesturing for me to come closer. now he's telling the story.
well, i'm not sorry to hear that, because they have always been my enemies. but the idea that i'd give my support to richard and keep my master king edward iv's true heirs from the crown, never. god knows i'd die before i'd do that.
my lord, bolingbroke has changed his mind. you must go to pomfret a castle in yorkshire. pomfret instead of the tower. and madam, he's made arrangements for you to go to france as quickly as possible.
she was here just now. she hangs around me all the time. i was talking to some venetians down by the shore, and the fool showed up. i swear to you, she put her arms around me like this, 
well, let's hope you stay in that noble frame of mind.
northumberland, bolingbroke is mounting my throne on your ladder, but it won't take very long until you turn against each other. you'll think that even though he gives you half the kingdom, it's not enough, since you helped him get it all. and he'll think that you, who knows how to put undeserving kings in the throne, will know how to remove him from the stolen throne. wicked men's love soon turns to fear, then to hate, and from there one or both of them will become dangerous and die a violent death.
saying, "oh, cassio," it seems, judging by his gestures.
in a year, when things have calmed down, i'll laugh about how those who got king edward iv to hate me are now brought low. but as for now, before two weeks have gone by, i'm going to send some people packing. they have no idea what's coming.
my guilt is on my own head an allusion to the jews who said at jesus' trial, "his death be upon our heads, and the heads of our children." guilt is on my own head , and that's an end to it. say goodbye and separate, for you must depart shortly.
she hangs around me and dangles from my neck and cries, shaking me and pulling at me. ha, ha, ha!
it's a horrible thing to die when you're not prepared for it, my gracious lord.
twice divorced! you force me to divorce my crown and now my wife. i can't undo with a kiss the vows that bound us together, because they were sealed with a kiss. separate us, northumberland. i'll go to the north, where cold and sickness afflict the region. and my wife goes to france, from where she came with celebration like the spring, and now is sent back like the dead of winter.
now he's saying how she took him into our bedroom. oh, i can see your nose now. but i can't see the dog i'm going to throw it to.
yes, monstrous, monstrous! that's how it will be for rivers, vaughan, and grey. that's how it will be for some other men, too, who think they're as safe as you and i, who are well-loved by noble richard and buckingham.
and do we have to be separated?
i have to get rid of her.
richard and buckingham have a high opinion of you. (to himself) so high they'll stick your head on the bridge london bridge, where heads of traitors were displayed on poles to serve as warnings to the general populace. bridge .
yes, my love, our hands and our hearts must be divided.
look out, here she comes.
i know they do, and i certainly deserve it.
banish us both, and send the king with me.
it's a whore like all the others, stinking of cheap perfume., why are you always hanging around me?
come on, come on, where is your spear for the boar, man? you're afraid of the boar but you go around without your spear?
that might be an act of love, but it's not a smart policy.
damn you! what did you mean by giving me this handkerchief? i was an idiot to take it! you want me to copy the embroidery pattern? that was a likely story, that you found it in your room and didn't know who it belonged to. this is a love token from some other slut, and you want me to copy its pattern for you? give it back to her, i won't do anything with it.
my lord, good morning. good morning, catesby. go ahead and laugh at me, but by jesus, i don't like these separate meetings, i really don't.
then wherever he goes, let me follow him.
what is it, my dear bianca? what's wrong?
my lord, my life is as important to me as yours is to you, and it was never as precious to me as it is now. do you think i would be feeling as triumphant as i am if i didn't know that our situation was secure?
so the two of us together will make one big sorrow. weep for me in france, and i'll weep for you here. it's better for us to be far away than near, and never near each other again. go measure the distance in sighs, and i'll do the same with groans.
my god, that's my handkerchief!
when the lords who are imprisoned at pomfret left london, they also were in a good mood and supposed their situation was secure. and they also had no reason to worry. but you see how soon the day got cloudy for them. richard's sudden, hateful attack on them makes me worry. i hope to god i'm proven wrong! well, should we head to the tower? the day is well on its way.
so the farther i go, the longer i will moan.
if you want to come have dinner with me, you can. if you don't want to, then good riddance.
come on, let's get going. you know what, my lord? those men you just mentioned will be beheaded today.
since my way is shorter, i'll groan twice for every step i take and make the way longer with a sad heart. come, let's cut short this talk of grief, because we'll have long enough to live with it. let's kiss once and quiet our mouths and part without any more words. i give you my heart and take yours with me.
go after her, go.
they deserved to keep their heads more than some people who have managed to keep their positions. but come, my lord, let's go.
give me my heart back. it will only kill your heart if i take it. so now that i have my own heart back, go, so i can try to kill my own with mourning.
actually, i should. she'll scream in the streets if i don't.
go on ahead. i'll talk with this good man.
we're only encouraging sorrow with this delay. once more, goodbye. my grief will say the rest.
will you be having dinner with her tonight?
what's up, man? how's it going?
my lord, you told me you would tell the rest of the story about our two relatives coming to london, until weeping made you stop.
yes, i will.
better, since your lordship was nice enough to ask.
where did i stop the story?
well, maybe i'll see you there. i'd really like to speak with you.
i tell you, man, it's better for me, too, than the last time we met here. then i was on my way to the tower, where i was going to be locked up thanks to the false charges of the queen's allies. but now, i tell you, keep it to yourself, though, those enemies of mine are being put to death today, and i'm better than i've ever been.
at the sad place, my lord, when rude hands were throwing dust and rubbish on king richard's head from the upper windows.
please come. will you?
well, let's hope your good fortune continues!
then, as i said, the duke, great bolingbroke, got on a magnificent horse that seemed to know it was him and kept going in a slow and stately way. all around, people were calling, "god save you, bolingbroke!" you would have thought the windows themselves were talking. both old and young people were looking out on him with happy desire, and on the painted walls all around was written, "jesus protect you! welcome, bolingbroke!" meanwhile, he was turning his head, bare of any helmet and not even as tall as his horse's neck, and said, "i thank you, countrymen." and he continued along saying this as he went.
don't talk anymore, go after her.
thanks a lot, mister. here, drink to me.
alas, poor richard? where was he riding then?
(coming forward) how should i murder him, iago?
god be good to you!
people looked at him with the dissatisfaction they might have for a supporting actor who comes on stage after the star has left. they stared at him with contempt, and no one cried out, "god save him!" no one welcomed him back. instead, they threw dust on his sacred head. he shook it off with gentle sorrow, while he both cried and smiled as he wrestled with grief and patience. for some reason god must have hardened everyone's hearts, otherwise they would have melted so that even a barbarian would have pitied him. but heaven has ordered all this, and we must follow its will. we are bolingbroke's subjects now, and i must forever acknowledge his rule and honor.
did you see how he laughed about sleeping with her?
a nice coincidence, my lord. i'm glad to see you.
here comes my son aumerle.
oh iago!
i thank you, sir john, with all my heart. i am indebted to you for your last sermon. by next week, i'll be able to pay you.
he was duke of aumerle, but because he was richard's friend, he has lost his title. you must call him rutland he retains the title of earl of rutland. rutland now. i've sworn in parliament that he will honor and obey our new king.
and did you see the handkerchief?
i'll come to you, your lordship.
welcome, my son. who are the new favorites of the king?
was it mine?
what, talking with a priest, hastings? your friends at pomfret, they're the ones who need a priest. you, on the other hand, don't have any confessions you have to make.
madam, i don't know and i don't care. god knows i prefer just as much not to be one.
it was yours, i swear. and do you see how much your foolish wife means to him? she gave it to him, and he gave it to his whore.
when i ran into this holy man, those men you mentioned did come to mind, in fact. are you headed to the tower?
well, hold yourself upright in this new regime, or you'll die before your time. what's the news from oxford? are the jousts and festivities happening?
i wish i could keep killing him for nine years straight. oh, she's a fine woman! a fair woman! a sweet woman!
i am, my lord. but i won't be there for long. i'll be off before you are.
for all i know they are.
no, you have to forget all that now.
yes, probably, because i'm staying for lunch.
you will be there, i know.
yes, let her die and rot and go to hell tonight. she won't stay alive for long. no, my heart's turned to stone, when i hit it, it hurts my hand. oh, the world never saw a sweeter creature. she could be married to an emperor, and he'd be like her slave!
(to himself) and for dinner, too, though you don't know it. (to hastings) come, are you going?
i mean to, unless god prevents it.
but that's not how you're going to be.
i'll follow you, my lord.
what is the note that i see in your shirt? you've just gone white. let me see what it says.
damn her, i'm just describing her truthfully! she's so good at sewing, and a wonderful musician. oh, she could sing a wild bear to sleep! oh, she's so witty and creative!
sir richard ratcliffe, let me tell you this. today you will witness a person die for truth, duty, and loyality.
my lord, it's nothing.
all the worse that she stooped this low, then.
(to ratcliffe) god protect the prince from all of you. you're a group of damned bloodsuckers!
then it doesn't matter who sees it. i want to see it, and i will.
oh, a thousand times worse, a thousand times, and what a sweet personality she has!
(to ratcliffe) you'll live to regret this.
i beg you to forgive me. it's a small matter, but one that i don't want to share for certain reasons.
yes, a little too sweet.
hurry up. your lives are over.
i want to see it because of those reasons. i fear, 
yes, that's for sure. oh, it's dreadful, dreadful, iago!
oh, pomfret, pomfret! oh, you bloody prison, fatal and threatening to noble lords! within these guilty walls, richard ii was hacked to death. and now, to add more blood to its name, we're losing our innocent lives here.
what should you fear? it's just a bill for some festive clothing for the celebration.
if you still feel so affectionate toward her, then why not give her permission to cheat on you? if it doesn't bother you, it won't bother anyone else.
now margaret's curse has fallen on our heads, for standing by and doing nothing when richard stabbed her son.
a bill that he's wearing so close to himself! wife, you are a fool. boy, let me see what it says.
i'll chop her into pieces. how could she cheat on me?
she cursed richard then. she cursed buckingham then. she cursed hastings then. oh god, remember to hear her prayer for them, just as for us! but don't kill my sister and her royal sons, be satisfied, dear god, with our blood, which is being spilled unjustly, as you know.
i beg you, forgive me. i can't show you.
oh, it's horrible of her.
hurry up. the hour of death is approaching.
i will see it.
and with my own officer!
come, grey. come, vaughan. let's embrace (they embrace) and say goodbye until we meet again in heaven.
treason! foul treason! villain! traitor! slave!
that's worse.
now, noble lords, the reason we're meeting is to determine the day the prince will be crowned. in god's name, speak. when should the royal day be?
what is the matter, my lord?
get me some poison tonight, iago. i won't argue with her, so her beautiful body won't disarm me., tonight, iago.
is everything ready for that event?
hey, who is inside?
don't do it with poison. strangle her in her bed, the same bed she's contaminated.
it is. all we have to do is name the day.
saddle my horse. god have mercy, what treachery is this!
good, good, i like that, it's only fair! very good!
tomorrow's a good day.
why, what is it, my lord?
and let me kill cassio. you'll hear more from me by midnight.
who knows what the lord protector thinks? who's closest to him?
give me my boots and saddle my horse. now, by my honor, my life, and my vow, i will accuse the villain.
excellent, good.
you, i think, would best know what he's thinking.
what's the matter?
what's that trumpet for?
we know each other's faces, but as for our thoughts, he doesn't know any more about my thinking than i do about yours or his, or you do about mine. lord hastings, you and he are close.
be quiet, foolish woman.
i think someone's coming from venice. it's lodovico. he must be coming from the duke. look, your wife is with him.
thank you. i know he holds me dear, but i haven't asked him about the coronation, and he hasn't told me. but you, my noble lords, may name a time, and i'll second it on the duke's behalf, which i don't think he'll mind.
i won't be quiet. what is the matter, aumerle?
greetings, good general!
right on cue, here's the duke himself.
good mother, don't worry. it is something that i have to answer with my own life.
greetings, sir.
my noble lords and relatives, good morning. i slept in. but i hope i didn't delay any important decisions.
answer with your life!
the duke and senators of venice greet you.
if you hadn't shown up on cue, my lord, lord hastings was going to take your part, i mean, he was going to speak for you, in the crowning of the king.
bring me my boots. i must go to the king.
i'll do whatever they order me to do in this letter.
no one may be bolder than my lord hastings. he knows me well and loves me well., ely, when i was last at your palace, i saw some great strawberries in your garden. i beg you, send someone to bring some of them.
hit him she's instructing her son to hit the servant. him , aumerle! poor boy, you are distraught. go away, villain! don't come back.
what's new, cousin lodovico?
yes, my lord. with pleasure.
give me my boots, i say.
very nice to see you, sir. welcome to cyprus.
buckingham, i need to have a word with you. (drawing him aside) catesby has sounded hastings out and found the prickly gentleman so opposed to our plan that he actually said he would die before he'd agree to have his "master's son," as he put it so devotedly, lose the crown.
why, york, what are you going to do? won't you hide the crime of your own child? do we have any other sons? are we likely to have more? aren't i too old to have children? and are you going to take away my son in my old age, so i can no longer call myself a mother? doesn't he look like you? isn't he your son?
thank you. how is lieutenant cassio?
move to the other room, my lord. i'll come soon.
foolish madwoman, will you try to cover up this terrible conspiracy? a dozen have sworn and signed here that they'll kill the king at oxford.
well, he's alive.
we have not yet set the coronation day. tomorrow, in my opinion, is too soon. i myself am not as well-equipped as i would be if the day were put off a bit.
he won't be one of them. we'll keep him here, and then what will this affair have to do with him?
cousin, there's been a falling out between him and othello. an unfortunate rift, but you can fix it.
where is my lord, the duke of gloucester? i have sent for the strawberries.
get away, foolish woman! even if he were my son twenty times over, i would accuse him.
are you sure of that?
richard is looking cheerful today. you always know he's got some plan that pleases him when he says good morning with such gusto. i don't think there's a man under the sun who's worse at hiding his love or hate than richard. you know his feelings immediately just by looking at his face.
if you had gone through labor with him as i had, you would be more sorrowful. but now i know what you think. you think that i've cheated on you, and that he's a bastard and not your son. sweet york, my sweet husband, don't think that way. he looks as much like you as anyone could. he doesn't look anything like me, or like anyone in my family, but i still love him.
excuse me?
and what feelings did you see in his face today?
make way, you wild woman!
(reading) "don't fail to do this, since you'll, "
that he's not angry with anyone here. if he were, he would have shown it.
go after him, aumerle! take his horse, get to the king before him, and beg forgiveness before he can even accuse you. i'll be right behind. though i am old, i can ride as fast as york. i'll prostrate myself before the king until he has forgiven you. go on!
he didn't say anything, he's reading. so there's a rift between othello and cassio?
i pray to god he isn't.
can't anyone tell me about my irresponsible son? it's been three months since i last saw him. he's the only trouble in my life. i want him found. ask in london, around the bars there. they say he goes to them every day with immoral friends, the kind of people who ambush passersby in the street and beat and rob the guards. my pleasure-seeking son thinks it's a badge of honor to support such an awful crowd.
yes, unfortunately. i'd do anything to bring them back together, since i really care for cassio.
tell me, all of you, what punishment does a person deserve who conspires to kill me with witchcraft and who has already plagued my body with black magic?
my lord, two days ago i saw the prince and told him about the celebration at oxford.
damn it all!
because i love your grace, i say that whoever the offenders are deserve to die.
and what did he say?
excuse me, my lord?
then see the evidence of their evil with your own eyes. (he shows his arm) look how i've been bewitched! see how my arm has become like a withered tree-branch? this is the work of edward's wife, that monstrous witch, who is in league with that tramp shore. they have used witchcraft to harm me.
he said that he would go to the whorehouse and get a glove from the most promiscuous whore there to wear as a favor. and then he would win in the jousts.
are you in your right mind?
if they have done this thing, my noble lord, 
even if he is immoral and reckless, i still see some hope that his better qualities will emerge as he gets older. but who is approaching?
is he angry?
if? you lover of that damned whore, you're talking to me of "ifs"? you're a traitor., off with his head. by saint paul, i swear i won't eat lunch until i see him beheaded. lovell and ratcliffe, make sure it gets done. the rest of you who love me, come with me.
where is the king?
maybe the letter upset him. i think they want him to go home and appoint cassio governor in his place.
i pity england, but not myself. i was too foolish. i might have prevented this. stanley dreamed the boar beheaded him, and i laughed and refused to flee with him. three times today my horse stumbled and started when he looked in the direction of the tower, as if he hated to carry me to this slaughterhouse. oh, now i really need that priest who spoke to me today!
why does my cousin stare and look about him so wildly?
i'm happy about that.
and i regret having bragged to the messenger about how my enemies were being butchered at pomfret while i, as i said, was in good standing with richard. oh margaret, margaret, your heavy curse has now landed on poor hastings's miserable head!
god save your grace! i beg to speak to you alone.
oh, are you really!
hurry up, the duke wants to eat his dinner. make your confession short. he's eager to see your head.
go away, and leave us here alone.
my lord?
we spend more time seeking out the fleeting glories of this temporary world than looking to the permanent grace of god! anyone who builds his hopes on air lives like a drunken sailor hanging on a mast, ready with every dizzy nod of his head to tumble to the bottom of the sea. the things we worry about, like good looks and possessions, aren't lasting, and they don't matter.
what is the matter with you now?
i'm glad you're insane enough to admit it in front of me.
come, come, hurry up. it's pointless to talk now.
may my knees remain on the ground and my tongue stay silent until you give me your forgiveness.
why, sweet othello, 
oh bloody richard! miserable england, i foresee for you the most frightening time you have ever experienced., come, lead me to the block. bring him my head. those who smile at it will soon be dead themselves.
is it an offense that you have committed or that you planned to commit? if it was planned only, no matter how terrible it is, i'll forgive you in order to win your love.
(striking her) you devil!
tell me, cousin, i need to know if you can shake like you've got a fever, turn pale all of a sudden, and stop speaking in the middle of a word, as if you were driven crazy with fear.
then let me lock the door so no one else can come in until i'm finished telling you.
i haven't done anything to deserve this!
oh please, i can imitate the best tragic actor around. i can speak and then look all around, and tremble, and start at a mere piece of straw as if i were paranoid. frightening looks are also at my service, as are fake smiles. anytime i need them, they're waiting to do my bidding. but has catesby gone?
go ahead.
my lord, no one will believe this in venice, even though i'd swear i saw it with my own eyes. that was too much. you should apologize. she's crying.
he has. but here he is, back with the mayor.
(speaking from off-stage) my lord, beware. watch yourself. you have a traitor with you.
oh, you devil, you devil! you can cry all day and all night, and i still won't believe you're sad. get out of my sight!
lord mayor, 
villain, i'll render you harmless.
i wouldn't want to stay here and make you angry.
watch out for the drawbridge richard and buckingham are pretending they are under attack. drawbridge over there!
hold off from your revenge. you don't have any reason to be afraid.
she's obedient, a fine lady. please, my lord, call her back.
listen! a drum!
(speaking from off-stage) open the door, my foolish king. should i harshly criticize you out of love for you? open the door, or i'll break it down.
madam!
catesby, look over the top of these walls to see if anyone's there.
what is the matter, uncle? tell me. catch your breath. tell me how close the danger is so that i can prepare for it.
my lord?
lord mayor, the reason we have sent, 
read this, and you'll know what treason made me hurry so fast that i can hardly speak.
what do you want with her, sir?
look behind you! defend yourself! there are enemies here.
remember, as you read, what you just promised. i already regret it. don't read my name there. my heart doesn't match what my hand wrote.
who, me?
god defend and guard us innocents against them!
villain, your heart believed it before your hand wrote it. i took the paper from the traitor, king. he regrets it out of fear, not out of love for you. don't pity him, because that pity will come back to harm you.
yes, you asked me to call her back. see how well she can turn? she can turn and turn, and then turn on you again. and she can cry, sir, oh, how she can cry! and she's obedient, as you say, obedient. very obedient, keep crying., concerning this, oh, what fake emotion!, i am being ordered home, get away from me, i'll send for you later., sir, i'll obey the order and return to venice. get away from me, you witch!
stay calm. they're friends, ratcliffe and lovell.
oh, what a terrible and bold conspiracy! oh, loyal father of a treacherous son! your pure goodness overwhelms the wrongdoing of your foul son. because you have proven yourself so loyal, i'll forgive your son's damnable crime.
cassio can have my job. and tonight, sir, i invite you have dinner with me. welcome to cyprus. horny animals!
here's the head of that notorious traitor, the dangerous and unsuspected hastings.
so my virtue will pay for his vice, and as some bad sons spend all their fathers' money, he'll spend all my honor with his shame. my honor can only live if his dishonor dies, otherwise i will live in shame. by forgiving him you are killing me. if he lives, so does a traitor, and the loyal man is put to death.
is this the same moor whom the senate considers so capable? is this the guy who's supposed to never get emotional, and who never gets rattled, no matter what disaster happens?
i loved this man so much it makes me weep. i took him to be the plainest, most harmless christian on earth. he was the book in which i recorded all of my most secret thoughts. he was so slick in covering over his plans that if it hadn't been for his love affair with shore's wife, i would never have suspected him.
(speaking from off-stage) hello, my lord! for god's sake, let me in.
he's changed a great deal.
well, well, he was the most covert traitor who ever lived. would you believe, if we hadn't caught him, this subtle traitor would have murdered the lord of gloucester and me in the council room today?
what screeching beggar is there?
is he sane? is he losing his mind?
he would have?
a woman and your aunt, great king. it's me. please pity me. open the door and talk to me. i, who have never begged before, am now a beggar.
he is what he is. i won't say anything negative about what he might be. if he isn't what he might be, then i wish to god he were!
what, do you think we're turks or savages, instead of christians? you think we would have disobeyed the law and proceeded to kill this villain if england's peace and our own lives hadn't been at stake?
suddenly the scene has changed from something serious to "the beggar and the king." an old english ballad that was popular in shakespeare's time. "the beggar and the king." my dangerous cousin, let your mother in. i know that she's come to beg forgiveness for your terrible crime.
hitting his wife?
i hope nothing else like this ever happens to you! this man deserved his death. and you, my good lords, were right to warn other traitors from trying the same.
no matter who prays, if you forgive this crime, only more will follow. by cutting off this infected limb you'll keep the rest of the body healthy. it's the only way to keep this sickness from spreading.
it's true, that wasn't such a nice thing to do. but i wish i could say that's the last time he'll do it!
i didn't expect any better from him once he got involved with mistress shore. but we had decided that he shouldn't die until you were able to come witness his execution. (which was prevented by the haste of our friends, lovell and ratcliffe here, who went against what we intended somewhat in their hurry to protect us). if you could have heard the traitor speak for himself and confess the exact way he planned to murder us, you could have told the citizens what terrible intentions he had, though now they're likely to misconstrue what we did and wail over his death.
oh, king, don't believe this hardhearted man! if he can't love his son, he is incapable of loving anyone.
is it a habit of his? or did the letter make him emotional somehow, and this is the first time he's done it?
but, my good lord, the words of you and lord buckingham are as trustworthy to me as if i had seen and heard him speak myself. and do not doubt, you honest, noble princes, that i'll let our citizens know how fairly you proceeded in this case.
you crazy woman, what are you doing here? are you going to nurse another traitor with your old breasts?
oh, it's too bad! it wouldn't be right for me to tell you everything i've seen and heard. you'll see what he's like. his own actions will show you what kind of person he is, so i won't have to bother telling you. just go after him and watch what he does next.
that is exactly why we wanted you here, your lordship, to avoid the public carping and complaints.
sweet york, be patient. gentle king, listen to me.
i'm sorry i was so wrong about him.
but since you've come too late to see the execution as we intended, at least let people know what you hear we intended. and so, good lord mayor, we bid you goodbye.
get up, good aunt.
you haven't seen anything, then?
follow him, buckingham. he's traveling at a gallop to the london meeting hall. there, as soon as you have a chance, drop the hint that edward's children are bastards. tell the citizens how edward put to death a citizen just because the citizen said he was going to make his own son "heir to the crown", when all the citizen meant was that he owned a tavern called "the crown" and was going to leave it to his son. and then point out what a lech edward was and what a bestial appetite he had for women, which touched even the citizens' own servants, daughters, and wives. there was no limit to what his lustful eye and savage heart would prey on. and, if you need to, approach the subject of me: tell them that when my mother became pregnant with the insatiable edward, my noble father was fighting in france. with a little calculating, it's obvious that edward is not in fact my father's child, not a surprising revelation if you consider how my father the noble duke looked nothing like this man. but only hint at this vaguely, because, as you know, my mother's still alive.
not yet, i beg you. i'll stay on my knees and never look up again until you give me joy by forgiving rutland, my wayward son.
no, and i didn't hear anything either, or suspect anything at all.
don't worry, my lord, i'll be as eloquent as if the golden crown i'm pleading for were for myself. goodbye, my lord.
i'll kneel, too, in support of my mother's prayers.
but you've seen her and cassio together.
if things go well, bring the crowd to baynard's baynard's castle was another of richard's london estates. baynard's castle, where i'll be surrounded by priests and learned bishops.
i'll kneel to oppose them. if you forgive him, you'll only nurture more bad deeds.
yes, but i didn't see anything wrong, and i heard every syllable they said.
i'm off. around three or four o'clock, look for news from the meeting hall.
is he serious? look at his face. he's not crying. his prayers are a joke. his words come from his mouth, but ours come from our hearts. he prays softly, hoping to be denied. we pray with heart and soul and all our bodies. i know his old and tired knees would like to straighten up. we'll stay kneeling till our knees grow roots in the ground. his prayers are hypocritical, while ours are full of true desire and integrity. our prayers are more prayer-like than his, so let our prayers be rewarded as they ought to be, with mercy.
didn't they ever whisper?
lovell, go as fast as you can to doctor shaw. (to ratcliffe) go to friar penker. both of you, tell these men to meet me in less than an hour at baynard's castle.
good aunt, stand up.
never, my lord.
now i'll go inside and write out a secret order to keep clarence's brats out of sight and to forbid anyone whatsoever from seeing king edward's sons.
no, don't say, "stand up." first say, "i forgive," and then you can tell me to stand up. if i were your nanny, the first word i would teach you would be "pardon." i've never wanted to hear a word so badly. say "pardon," king. let pity teach you how. the word is short and sweeter than it is short. it's the most fitting word for a king to say.
or ask you to leave the room?
here's the indictment of the good lord hastings, which has been written out in a clear hand, like any legal document, so it can be read aloud in public outside st. paul's cathedral. and look how well this sequence of events holds together: after catesby brought the indictment to me last night, i spent eleven hours copying it. the original took just as long to write out. so that's twenty-two hours. and yet five hours ago, lord hastings was alive, untouched, free, at liberty. what a backward world we live in! why, who's so stupid that he can't see through this fraud? but who's so blind to the consequences of speaking out that he'll admit what he knows? the world is a bad place, where you can't speak what you know.
say it in french, king. say, "pardonne moi." excuse me." "pardonne moi."
never.
so what did the citizens say?
do you try to destroy forgiveness by teaching that pardon? oh, my sour husband, my hardhearted lord, you'd make that word the opposite of what it means. say "pardon" in english. we don't understand french. i can see it in your eyes, so let your tongue say it. listen to the pity in your heart with your ears, which our laments and prayers pierce, so that pity may move you to say "pardon."
not even to get her fan, or her gloves, or her mask, or anything?
it's incredible, they didn't say a word.
good aunt, stand up.
no, my lord.
did you mention that edward's children are bastards?
i'm not begging to stand. all i want is a pardon.
that's strange.
i did. i talked about how he was engaged to lady lucy edward iv was engaged to elizabeth lucy and had a child with her before he married elizabeth grey. lady lucy , and how he was engaged to lady bona edward sent warwick to secure this french marriage and then backed out of it. lady bona through the help of the earl of warwick. i spoke of the unquenchable greediness of edward's desires and the way he forced himself on the wives of londoners. i mentioned the way he punished people harshly for minor offenses. i said he was not the son of the noble duke of york, because your father was in france when he was conceived, which explains why he doesn't have anything in common with his father. and then i suggested that you were the spitting image of your father, both in the way you look and in the nobleness of your character. i went into all your victories in scotland, your skill as a warrior, your wisdom in peacetime, your generosity, your goodness, and your exceptional modesty. indeed, i left nothing out. and when my oration came to a close, i asked those who loved their country to cry, "god save richard, england's royal king!"
i pardon him, as god will one day pardon me.
i'd swear to you on my soul that she's a good, honest person, sir. if you suspect otherwise, stop thinking that right now because you're wrong. if any jerk has tried to convince you she's bad, i hope god curses him. if she's not honest, faithful, and true, then there's no such thing as a faithful wife or a happy husband.
and did they?
oh, the happy view from a bended knee! but i'm still fearful. say it again. saying it twice doesn't divide your pardon and weaken it but makes the one pardon stronger.
tell her to come here. go.
no, god help me, they didn't say a word. like silent statues or stones that breathed, they just gazed at each other and turned as pale as the dead. when i saw this, i scolded them and asked the mayor what this stubborn silence meant. he said that the people weren't used to being spoken to except by the recorder recorder=a legal official recorder . so i urged the recorder to repeat my tale, you know, "the duke of buckingham said this, buckingham meant that," but nothing on his own authority. when he was done, a few followers of my own at the far end of the hall hurled their caps in the air. some ten voices cried, "god save king richard!" i jumped on this slender opportunity and said, "thank you, noble citizens and friends. this widespread applause and enthusiastic shouts make clear you stand behind richard." and then i broke off and quickly came away.
with all my heart, i pardon him.
she says all the right things, but the dumbest brothel-keeper would tell the same story. desdemona's a tricky whore with a closet full of awful secrets, but still she'll kneel and pray like an honest woman. i've seen her do it.
what blocks of wood! they wouldn't say anything? aren't the mayor and his fellow citizens coming?
you are a god on earth.
my lord, what do you want?
the mayor is here at hand. pretend you're afraid, my lord, and don't speak until you're pleaded with. and make sure to carry a prayer book in your hand and to stand between two priests, okay? then i'll have the grounds to build a holy sermon about why you should be king. but don't be easily won over. act like a virgin, always answering "no," but taking it in the end.
but my trusted brother-in-law, the abbot, and all the rest of that group of conspirators must be destroyed. good uncle, send several men to oxford or wherever these traitors are hiding. i swear that as long as they are alive, i will find them and capture them. uncle, goodbye, and goodbye cousin, too. your mother has prayed well and proved your loyalty.
please, dear, come here.
i'm going now. if you're as good at pleading to them as i am at saying no to you, this will definitely come to a happy end.
come, my son. i'll pray that god forces you to reform.
what can i do for you?
hurry, go up to the roof. the lord mayor is knocking.
didn't you notice the king and hear what he said? "don't i have any friends who will rid me of this constant fear?" didn't he say that?
let me see your eyes. look at my face.
welcome, my lord. i'm twiddling my thumbs waiting for the duke to show up. i don't think he wants to be disturbed.
those were his exact words.
what horrible thing are you imagining?
here comes his servant. now, catesby, what does your lord say to my request?
twice he said, "don't i have any friends?" didn't he?
(to emilia) go do what you do best, madam. leave us alone for our hanky-panky, and shut the door behind you. if somebody comes, give a shout. that's your job othello implies that emilia\'s job is to help men and women have illicit sex. job , your job. go on, hurry!
my lord, he asks that you please visit him tomorrow or the next day. he's inside in prayer, with two reverend fathers. he doesn't want to be disturbed in his holy work by any worldly requests.
he did.
i'm begging you on my knees to tell me what your words mean. i can tell you're furious, but i don't understand what you're saying.
return to the gracious duke, good catesby. tell him that the mayor, some citizens, and i have come to confer with his grace in matters of great importance concerning the general good.
and when he said it, he looked at me intently, as if he were saying, "i wish you were the man who would take this fear away from me." he means the king at pomfret. come, let's go. i am the king's friend, and i'll get rid him of his enemy.
why? who are you?
i'll tell him right away, my lord.
i have been thinking about how i might compare this prison i live in to the world. but because the world is full of people and i'm the only one here, i cannot do it. yet i'll work it out. my brain and my soul will produce enough thoughts to fill this little world, like people in the outside world and just as discontented. the better kind of thought, like the thought of divine things, is mixed with doubts and compares passages from scripture, like "come, little ones" and "it is as hard for a rich man to enter heaven as for a camel to pass through a needle's eye." both passages involve the ease, or difficulty, of reaching heaven. "come, little ones" and "it is as hard for a rich man to enter heaven as for a camel to pass through a needle's eye." ambitious thoughts plot unlikely miracles, such as digging through the walls of my cell by hand, and these thoughts die in their prime because they are futile. contented thoughts tell themselves that they aren't the first to be a slave to fortune, and they won't be the last. they're like beggars in the stocks who take comfort in the fact that others have already sat there and more will sit there. so i host many people inside my own head, and none are content. sometimes i'm king, and then some treason makes me wish i was a beggar, and so then i am a beggar. then terrible poverty persuades me that i was better off as king, so then i am king again. and then i think that i have been dethroned by bolingbroke, and suddenly i'm nothing. but whatever i am, just like all men, i'll never be happy until i am dead and nothing at all. do i hear music?
i'm your wife, your true and loyal wife.
ah, my lord, this prince is nothing like edward! he is not lolling in bed but on his knees in prayer. he's not enjoying himself with a couple of prostitutes but studying with two learned priests. he's not sleeping to fatten up his lazy body, but praying, to nourish his attentive soul. england would be lucky to have this virtuous prince as king. but i'm afraid we'll never get him to agree to be king.
ha! keep time. how awful music is when they don't keep time and the notes' proportions are ruined. it's the same thing in men's lives. and here i can chastise the poor time kept on an out-of-tune instrument, when in the harmony of my government and life i couldn't hear my own time breaking. i wasted time then, and now time wastes me. time has made me his clock: my thoughts have become minutes that turn the clock hands in my eyes, and my finger is the dial that wipes away my tears. now, sir, my groans are like the sounds that toll the hours, and they're made by striking my heart, which is the bell. thus my sighs, tears, and groans signify minutes and hours. meanwhile, my time speeds on as bolingbroke has his joy, and i'm left here playing the clock for him. this music makes me crazy. let it stop. it might make madmen sane, but for me, it makes a wise man mad. yet bless the heart that plays it for me! it's a sign of love, and i am seldom given love in this hateful world.
go ahead, swear to that, so you'll be damned to hell for lying. otherwise the devils will mistake you for an angel and be too scared to grab you. go ahead, make sure you damn yourself by swearing you've been faithful to me.
but god forbid he says no to us!
hello, royal prince!
heaven knows i am.
i'm afraid he will. here comes catesby again.
thanks, my noble peer. you overvalue me, for we are equals and worth the same. who are you, and how have you come here? my only visitor is that man who keeps my misfortune alive by bringing me food.
heaven knows you're as unfaithful as hell.
what's up, catesby, what does your master say?
i was a poor groom in your stable, king, when you were king. i was traveling toward york, and after a great deal of trouble i got permission to see my former master's face. oh, how it saddened me when i saw bolingbroke ride into london that coronation day on barbary, the horse you've ridden so often and which i'd so often made ready for you!
unfaithful, my lord? with whom? how am i unfaithful?
my lord, he wonders why you have assembled such troops of citizens to speak with him, since he had no idea they were coming. my lord, he's afraid you mean him harm.
did he ride on barbary? tell me, dear friend, how did the horse do?
leave me alone, desdemona, go away!
i'm sorry my noble brother is suspicious of me. by god, i'm here because i love him. return and tell him so.
he pranced as proudly as if he scorned the earth.
oh, what a horrible day! why are you crying? because of me? if you've been ordered back to venice because of my father, don't blame me. you may have lost his respect, but so have i.
when devoutly religious men are praying, it's hard to draw them out of it, because they get lost in the wonder of their contemplation.
so proud to have bolingbroke on his back! he had eaten bread from my hand, and i made him proud by patting his neck. shouldn't he stumble? shouldn't he fall down and break the neck of the man that stole my throne? i forgive you, horse! why should i curse you, since you were created to fear man and carry him. i was not made like a horse, but i carry a burden like a donkey, and i'm kicked and exhausted from carrying rough-riding bolingbroke.
if god had decided to treat me like job, making me sick and covered with sores, reducing me to abject poverty, selling me into slavery and destroying all my hopes, i would have found some way to accept it with patience. but instead he's made me a laughingstock for everyone in our time to point at and scorn! even that i could put up with. but instead, my wife, who's supposed to
see how he stands between two clergymen!
fellow, go away. you can't stay any longer.
be like the fountain that my children and all my descendants flow from, has rejected me! worse than that, she's polluted herself, so that the fountain is a place where disgusting toads copulate and reproduce! even the goddess of patience couldn't look at this and be patient, it's too horrifying!
two props of virtue for a christian prince, to prevent him from ever becoming vain. and, see, he has a prayer book in each hand, the signs of a holy man. most gracious prince of the famous house of plantagenet, pardon us for interrupting your righteous, christian prayer. please listen favorably to our request.
if you love me, you should go.
i hope you think i'm faithful to you.
my lord, you don't need to apologize. i beg you to pardon me. i've been so intent on serving god that i've kept my friends waiting. in any case, what would you like?
i don't dare say what my heart feels.
as faithful as flies in rotting meat, which give birth to maggots every time the wind blows. you're like a weed pretending to be a flower, so beautiful and sweet-smelling that i ache when i look at you. oh, i wish you'd never been born!
only what, i hope, will please god above and all good men on this island, which currently has no king.
my lord, will you eat?
have i done something to offend you without knowing it?
i suspect that i have committed some offence to the city and you have come to reprimand me for not knowing better.
taste it first, as you usually do.
was someone as beautiful as you meant to be a whore? what have you done? what have you done? oh, you streetwalker! if i said out loud what you've done, you'd burn up with shame. what have you done? heaven has to hold its nose when it sees you! the pure moon in the sky has to shut its eyes when you go by! even the wind that blows over everything on earth is ashamed to visit you. you brazen whore!
you have, my lord. i hope you'll make up for it!
my lord, i don't dare. sir pierce of exton, who just arrived from the king, ordered me not to.
i swear to god you're accusing me wrongly!
why else would i live in a christian country, if i can't ask forgiveness for my faults?
may the devil take henry of lancaster and you! i am tired of being patient.
so you're saying you're not a whore?
then you should know that we take fault with your resigning the supreme seat, the majestic throne, the sceptered office, of your ancestors, the power and greatness that destiny and your noble birth have handed you, to the wrong person. you aren't respecting the lineage of your royal family. you're lost in sleepy thoughts, and we have come to wake you to our country's needs. this noble island has been compromised. she is scarred by the infamous deeds of king edward iv. her royal stock has been corrupted and nearly lost. we want that royalty remembered again. we heartily beg you, in all your goodness, to take upon yourself the responsibility and rule of this land, not merely as a servant, substitute, or other lowly agent of the king, but as the king himself. it is your birthright to be king. it's for this reason that we are here, the citizens of england and your devoted friends. we strongly urge you on.
help, help, help!
no, i'm as honest as i am christian. if only letting my husband touch my body means i'm not a whore, i'm not a whore.
i can't tell which is the better course of action, to leave in silence or to scold you. if i don't answer, perhaps you'll think i'm accepting the heavy responsibility you foolishly want to impose on me. but if i do speak and refuse your request, then i'm guilty of reprimanding my friends, who have been faithful and loving toward me. so, i'll speak to make clear i don't want the crown but also that i am grateful to you. here is my definitive answer: thank you for your love, but i'm going to have to turn down your weighty request because i don't deserve to be king. first of all, even if all the obstacles were eliminated and my path led straight to the crown, if it were truly my birthright, i would rather hide from my greatness than hide inside the greatness of the position itself and be smothered by it. my spirit is poor, and i have so many terrible defects that as king i would be like a little boat tossed about on a mighty sea. so, thank god, there is no real need for me, as i wouldn't be able to help you much. the royal tree has left us other fruit, which, with time, will do just fine on the throne and make us all happy as king, i'm sure. someone other than i has the right and the good fortune to be made king. god forbid that i snatch the crown from him.
do you mean to kill me in this despicable assault? villain, i'll kill you with your own weapon.
what, you're not a whore?
my lord, what you've said makes clear you have a conscience, but your objections are trivial, given the circumstances. you say that prince edward is your brother's son. we agree, but not by your brother's wife. king edward was going to marry lady lucy, your mother can vouch for that, and then he was betrothed to bona, the king of france's sister-in-law. but both of these were put off by elizabeth grey, a careworn mother of many children who had once been a beauty but was now a stressed-out widow long past her prime. nevertheless, under pretence of asking a favor of him, she attracted his lustful eye and seduced him so thoroughly that he completely debased himself, committing adultery with her. it resulted in this edward, whom we're polite enough to call "prince." out of respect for the living, i'll restrain myself from telling you everything. but, my good lord, if you don't care about this country, at least use your own pure lineage to rescue us from the current corruption of the royal line.
go to hell.
no, i swear it.
yes, my good lord, your citizens beg you.
you'll burn in hell forever for killing me. exton, you've stained the king's land with the king's own blood. arise my soul! your place is in heaven, while my body sinks down and dies.
is that possible?
don't refuse the love we offer you.
he is as full of courage as of royal blood, which i've spilled here. i wish the deed were good! the devil, who told me that i did well, tells me now that i'll go to hell. i'll take this dead king to the living king and bury the others here.
oh, heaven help us!
oh, make them joyful! grant their law-abiding request!
kind uncle york, the last news i heard is that the rebels have burned down the town of cirencester in gloucestershire. but i haven't heard if they've been captured or killed.
i beg your pardon then. i must have the wrong woman. i mistook you for that sly venetian woman who married othello., you whorehouse-keeper.
alas, why would you heap all these responsibilities on me? i am unfit to rule and to be king. please, don't take it badly, but i cannot and will not give in to you.
welcome, my lord. what's the news?
you're in charge of this hell! you! we've finished our business. here's some money for you. please lock the door and keep quiet.
perhaps you refuse our request out of love for your brother's son. you don't want to depose the child. we know how tender your heart is and what gentle, kind, womanly feelings you have for your relatives, as well as for people from all walks of life. but listen, if you won't become king, we'll just get someone else, to the disgrace and ruin of your family. we will not have your brother's son as king. on this note, we're leaving. come, citizens. damn it, i'm not going to beg anymore!
first, i wish you happiness. next, i've sent the heads of oxford, salisbury, blunt, and kent to london. this paper tells how they were taken.
what's he talking about? how are you, madam?
oh, please don't swear, my lord of buckingham.
i thank you, gentle percy, for your effort. i'll reward you well, as you deserve.
i'm stunned, to tell you the truth.
call them back, my lord, and accept their request. if you refuse it, the whole country will regret it.
my lord, i've sent the heads of brocas and sir bennet seely from oxford to london. they were two of the traitors who wanted to overthrow you at oxford.
my lady, what's wrong with your husband?
would you tie me to a whole world of worries? well, call them back again. i am not made of stone; i am affected by all these kind pleas, though it goes against my conscience and my soul.
i won't forget your efforts, fitzwater. i know that you deserve your noble title.
with who?
buckingham, my brother, and you wise, serious men, since you intend to force me to take responsibility for these changing times, whether i want to or not, i'm going to have to be brave and endure the load. but if this imposition you've put on me happens to result in dark scandal or ugly reproach, the fact that you forced me to accept this should clear me from blame. god knows, and you may have noticed, i'm not to eager to take on this job.
the abbot of westminster, who conspired against you, has died. but here is carlisle, alive, to hear your judgment on him.
why, with your husband, madam. my lord.
god bless your grace! we understand you're just doing it for us, and we'll be sure to say so.
carlisle, here is your sentence: pick some secret place where you can live out your life in peace and die without violence. even though you've always been my enemy, i've seen that you are a man of great honor.
who's your lord?
if you say that, you'll only be telling the truth.
great king, here is your greatest fear now buried inside this coffin. in it lies without breathing your greatest enemy, richard of bordeaux, brought here by me.
my lord is your lord.
then i salute you with this royal title: long live richard, england's worthy king!
exton, i don't thank you. by killing him, you've done a disgrace to my name and to our country.
i don't have a lord. don't talk to me, emilia. i can't even cry, though tears are the only answers i could give to all your questions. tonight put my wedding sheets on my bed, and tell your husband to come to me now.
amen.
i did this on your own command.
things have certainly changed!
will you be crowned tomorrow?
those who need to poison someone still don't love poison. even though i wanted him dead, i hate the man who murdered him, and now i love the man who has been murdered. you can take your guilty conscience as payment. i won't give you any praise or royal favors. go wander the night like cain in the book of genesis, cain kills his brother, abel, and, as punishment, god orders him to wander the earth for the rest of his life. cain is considered the world's first murderer. cain , and don't show your face here again.
it's fair for him to treat me like this, very fair. what have i ever done that he has anything to complain about?
whenever you want, since you're the one who wants it.
lords, i protest. my soul is full of sorrow that blood has been shed to make me more secure. come, mourn with me and dress yourselves in black immediately. i'll travel to the holy land to wash away this blood from my guilty hands. march sadly behind me, and weep for this untimely death.
what can i do for you, madam? how are you?
tomorrow, then, we will wait on your grace. now we'll take our leave, joyfully.
i don't know. when grown-ups teach little children, they do it gently and easily. he might have treated me like that, because i'm as unused to abuse as a little child.
(to the bishops) come, let us get back to praying., farewell, my cousin; farewell, noble friends.
camillo, if you ever happen to accompany your king to bohemia, as i am accompanying mine to sicilia, you'll see there's a great difference between our countries, and our masters.
what's the matter, lady?
who's this? my granddaughter, with her kind aunt, the duchess of gloucester, leading her by the hand? now, on my life, the young child must be headed to the tower to greet the young princes, whom she adores. daughter, how nice to see you.
i think the king of sicilia plans to visit the king of bohemia this coming summer.
he called her a whore so many times, and heaped up so much abuse on her that good people can't stand to hear it.
good afternoon!
if our hospitality is inadequate, we'll make up for it with our love for you; in fact, 
am i that name, iago?
the same to you, good sister. where are you going?
please, 
what name, madam?
just to the tower, i'm guessing, for the same reason you are: to salute the noble princes who are staying there.
truly, i say it from experience. we can't match the magnificence, the excellence, i don't even know how to describe it. we'll give you drinks to dull your senses, so that you won't be aware of our inadequacies, and even if you will be too sleepy to praise us, you won't be able to accuse us of negligence, either.
what my lord said i was.
yes, kind sister. we can all go together.
you are putting too great a value on something that is given for free.
he called her a whore. a beggar couldn't have called his slut worse names.
and here comes the warden, just in time. officer, please tell us, if you will, how are the prince and my little son, york?
believe me, i say what my knowledge tells me, and i say it honestly.
why did he do that?
they're just fine, my dear madam. but i'm sorry, i'm not allowed to let you visit them. the king has strictly forbidden it.
the king of sicily could never be anything but kind to the king of bohemia. they were brought up together as children, and so they have a deep-rooted affection for one another that can only grow. because of their adult responsibilities and their duties as kings, they have not been able to meet personally. instead their meetings have taken place via royal deputies and through the exchange of presents, letters, and fond words. through these means they've stayed in touch despite the great distance between them. may the heavens keep their friendship strong!
i don't know. i just know i'm not one.
the king? who's that?
i don't think there is anything in the world that can shake their friendship. and you have an indescribable comfort in the young prince mamillius. he has the greatest potential of any young gentleman i've ever seen.
don't cry, don't cry. what a day this is!
i meant to say the lord protector.
i agree with you regarding his potential. he is a noble child, and he is like a medicine for his subjects. the old feel young, and those who were crippled even before he was born now hope to live long enough to see him grow into a man.
did she give up all those chances to marry noblemen, give up her father and country and friends, just to be called a whore? doesn't that make you want to cry?
the lord keep him from the title of king! richard has set boundaries between my love and theirs? i am their mother. who's going to keep me from them?
would they otherwise want to die?
it's just my bad luck.
i am their father's mother. i will see them.
yes, if they didn't have any other reason for them to want to live.
damn him! how did he get such an idea?
i am their aunt, and i love them like a mother. so take me to see them. officer, i'll take the responsibility from you, and the blame too.
if the king didn't have a son, they would want to live as cripples until he had one.
heaven knows.
no, madam, no. i can't do this. i am bound by oath, so please forgive me.
it has been nine months since i left my throne. i could happily spend another nine months away, but i must leave now, forever in your debt. so, like a zero, which means "nothing" but adds value when placed beside a number for instance, placing a zero next to makes it . adds value when placed beside a number , my one "thank you" will multiply the thousand more i've already said.
i bet my life some evil busybody, some meddling, lying jerk made up this rumor to get some position. i bet my life on it.
in just an hour from now, duchess of york, i'll be saluting you as the mother of two beautiful queens. (to anne) come, madam, you must go straight to westminster abbey, where you will be crowned richard's queen.
don't thank me yet. wait until you leave.
nobody's that bad. it's impossible.
oh, cut my bodice-staps so that my pent-up heart can have some room to breathe, or i'll faint from this deadly news!
sir, i leave tomorrow. i'm fearful of what might happen by chance, or what plot may develop, because of my absence, and i worry my fears will be confirmed. besides, i've worn you out with my company.
if there is, then heaven help him!
cruel, cruel news!
you couldn't wear me out if you tried.
a hangman's noose will help him! let hell chew him up! why should he call her a whore? who's been with her? when has she had the time, the place, or the means to sleep with anyone? how is this at all likely? the moor is being tricked by some crook, some terrible villain, some rotten bastard. oh, i wish we could unmask scoundrels like that, and give a whip to every good man to beat them senseless with!
(to queen elizabeth) cheer up, mother. how are you feeling?
i can't stay any longer.
keep your voice down.
oh, dorset, don't waste your time talking to me. leave. death and destruction are following at your heels. your mother's name has become a threat to her own children. if you want to outrun death, go cross the sea to france and stay with richmond henry tudor, the earl of richmond, later to succeed richard as king henry vii. richmond , out of the reach of hell. go, get out of here, get out of this slaughterhouse. otherwise you'll just increase the number of the dead, and make me die the slave of margaret's curse, no longer a mother, a wife, or england's queen.
just one more week.
oh, to hell with those people! it's the same kind of guy who got you upset and made you suspect i'd cheated on you with the moor.
madam, your advice is wise and caring., dorset, take advantage of the time you have. i'll write to my stepson richmond on your behalf, so that he'll meet you on the way. but don't delay.
really, tomorrow.
you're a fool. shut up.
o, this evil wind that spreads nothing but misery. o, my cursed womb, it's a deathbed, really, since richard came out of it. it has hatched a cockatrice the cockatrice was a mythical being that could kill with its gaze. cockatrice , whose gaze kills whatever it lands on.
we'll split the difference, and i won't hear any objections.
oh god, iago, what can i do to win my husband back again? please go to him, my friend. i swear i have no idea why he stopped loving me. here i'm kneeling to swear that if i ever did anything to destroy his love for me, either by thoughts or actions, or if i ever took pleasure in anyone else, or if i never did love him, or don't love him now, even though he tries to shake me off, 
(to anne) come, madam, come. i was sent in a hurry.
please, don't plead with me. there is no one who can persuade me like you can, and you could persuade me to stay now if you really needed me to, even if it were necessary that i deny your request. my business does drag me home, so your attempts to keep me here, though done out of love, are painful to me. my staying only costs you and causes you trouble, so for both our sakes, i must go.
then i hope i have a life of misery! unkindness is powerful, and his unkindness may kill me, but it'll never destroy my love. i can't say "whore." it makes me sick to say the word even now. i wouldn't do the thing that would make me a whore for all the money in the world.
i go unwillingly. i wish to god that the golden crown that i'll have to wear were red-hot steel and burned me straight through to the brain! i wish i could be anointed queen with deadly venom, not oil, and that i would die before anyone even had a chance to say, "god save the queen!"
my queen, are you mute? speak.
please calm down. he's just in a bad mood. political business is bothering him, and he's just taking it out on you.
go, go, poor soul. i don't envy your position. if you want to make me happy, don't wish yourself harm.
i intended to keep quiet until you'd made him promise to stay. you argue too mildly. tell him you are sure that things in bohemia are fine, in fact, just the other day it was proclaimed so. tell him this, and his best argument for leaving is gone.
if only that were all it is, 
no? why? the man i'm married to now came to me when he'd barely washed the blood off his hands from killing my first husband, that angel, as well as my husband's sainted father, whose corpse i was following to burial. i'm telling you, when i looked at richard's face, this is what i wished: "i want you to be cursed for making me a widow so young. and when you get married, let sorrow haunt your bed. and i hope your wife, if any woman is crazy enough to marry you, is more miserable about the fact that you're alive as you have made me by killing my husband!" and then what? before i even had time to repeat the curse, my woman's heart was taken captive by his sweet, slick words. i became the victim of my own curse. since i married him, i have not had one hour's sleep in his bed. every night i'm awakened by his terrified anne's father, the earl of warwick, fought on the opposite side from richard and the other yorkists in the wars between the lancasters and yorks. terrified dreams. it doesn't matter if i sleep, though. he hates me because of who my father is. he will, no doubt, get rid of me soon.
well said, hermione.
it is, i promise.
poor dear, goodbye. i pity your situation.
if he says that he wants to see his son, that's a strong argument. but let him say it first, then let him go. if he swears to that, he won't stay. we'll chase him off by whacking him with wooden staffs. but i'm guessing he will remain in your presence another week. (to polixenes) when you receive my lord in bohemia, i'll give him permission to stay a month past his fixed departure day. (to leontes) yet, leontes, i don't love you a jot less than any other woman loves her lord. polixenes, you'll stay?
those trumpets are calling us in to dinner. the venetians are waiting for their food. go in, and don't cry. everything will be all right.
no more than i do yours.
no, madam.
how are you, roderigo?
goodbye. i know you're unhappy with the glory of becoming queen.
no, but you will?
i don't think you're treating me fairly.
(to elizabeth) and goodbye to you, the poor soul who has to leave that glory behind.
i can't, honestly.
what makes you say that?
(to dorset) go to richmond, and good luck. (to anne) you go to richard. i hope good angels will protect you. (to queen elizabeth) you take sanctuary in the abbey and think good thoughts for us. i will go to my grave, where i can look forward to peace and rest. i have witnessed eighty-odd years of sorrow; for each hour of joy i've experienced, i've suffered a full week of misery.
honestly! you counter me with weak vows, but even if you would try to take the stars out of the sky with your oaths, i'll still say you are not going. truly, you won't go, my "truly" is as powerful as yours. will you still go? you'll force me to keep you like a prisoner, not like a guest, and you'll have to pay a fine at the end, rather than give us thanks. what do you think? my prisoner, or my guest? "truly," as you say, you'll be one of the two.
every day you put me off with some trick. instead of finding opportunities for me, you seem to be preventing me from making any progress.
wait. look back at the tower with me. please, you ancient building, take pity on those tender babes locked inside your walls by envious rivals! you are such a rough cradle for such little pretty ones. you are a rude, ragged nurse and an old, sullen playmate for such tender princes. please treat my babies well. i know i must look foolish saying goodbye to a building, but i'm aching with sorrow.
your guest then, madam. being your prisoner would suggest i've offended you, which would be more difficult and painful for me than your punishment.
well, i won't take it any longer. and i'm not going to sit back and accept what you've done.
everyone stand aside., cousin buckingham.
i won't be your jailer, then, but your kind hostess. come, i'll ask you about the tricks you and my husband played when you were boys. you were handsome princes then?
will you listen to me, roderigo?
my gracious king.
we were, fair queen, two young boys who thought that tomorrow would be just like today, and that we would be boys forever.
i've listened to you too much already. your words and actions don't match up.
give me your hand.
was my husband the bigger prankster of you two?
that's not fair.
because of your advice and your help, i have a high position now. but will i wear these honors for only a day or will i enjoy them for a long time?
we were like two lambs that played in the sun and bleated at one another. we were wholly innocent. we didn't know what it was to do harm, or even that anyone did. had we continued this way, and had our weak spirits never given way to stronger passions, we could have said upon reaching heaven that we were "not guilty," and we would have been cleared even of original sin the doctrine that all people are born tainted by sin because the first humans, adam and eve, disobeyed god. original sin .
it's the truth. i've got no money left. the jewels you took from me to deliver to desdemona would've made even a nun want to sleep with me. you told me she got them, and that she promised to give me a little something in return soon, but nothing like that ever happens.
let them last forever.
i take it that you have not been so innocent since?
well, all right then. fine.
oh buckingham, now i'm going to test to see if you're truly made of gold. young prince edward is still alive, what do you think i'm going to say next?
most sacred lady! we've had our temptations since then. in those youthful days my wife was just a girl, and my playfellow had not yet seen you.
"fine!" he says. "all right!" it's not fine, and i'm not all right! it's wrong, and i'm starting to realize i'm being cheated!
go on, my loving lord.
heaven help me! don't pursue that train of thought, or you'll go on to say that your wife and i are devils. still, keep going. we'll take responsibility for whatever sins we've made you commit, as long as those sins were committed first with us, only with us, and you've never sinned with any other.
okay.
why, buckingham, i say i want to be king.
is he won over yet?
it's not okay! i'm going to tell desdemona my feelings. if she returns my jewels, i'll stop pursuing her and apologize to her. if not, i'll challenge you to a duel.
why, you are king, your highness.
he'll stay, my lord.
you've said what you have to say now.
ha! am i king? i guess i am. but edward is still alive.
when i requested it he would not. hermione, my dearest, you've never spoken so well.
yes, and i'll do everything i just said.
true, noble prince.
never?
well, all right then. now i see that you have some guts. from this moment on i have a higher opinion of you than before. give me your hand, roderigo. your complaint against me is perfectly understandable, but i still insist i've done everything i could to help you.
oh, how bitter it is that edward, the real "true, noble prince", should still be alive! cousin, you didn't used to be so thickheaded. shall i put it plainly? i want the bastards dead. and i want it done right away. what do you say? speak now and to the point.
only once before.
it doesn't look that way to me.
your grace can do whatever he wants.
what! i've only spoken well twice? when was the last time? please, tell me. fill me up with praise and make me as fat as a pet. if one good deed goes unrecognized, the thousand more that might have been inspired by it will never occur. praise is our motivation and reward. one soft kiss will take you two hundred yards; a sharp kick only gets you an acre. but back to the point: my last good deed was to plead for polixenes to stay. what was my first good deed? unless i'm misunderstanding what you said, there was an earlier one. oh, if only my name were grace! so once before i've spoken well. when? tell me, please, i long to know.
i admit it doesn't look that way to me, and the fact that you suspect me shows that you're smart. but roderigo, if you're as courageous and determined as i think you are, then wait just a bit longer. if you're not having sex with desdemona tomorrow night, then i suggest you find some way to stab me in the back and kill me.
tut, tut, you've become rather icy. your friendliness toward me seems to be freezing over. tell me, do i have your consent to kill them?
why, it was when three bitter months had passed before i could get you to pledge your love to me with your white hands. and then you said, "i am yours forever."
well, what's your plan? is it feasible?
give me a little breathing space, my lord, a little pause to think. i'll let you know my answer shortly.
it is grace, indeed. according to you, i have spoken well twice: once to earn a royal husband and again to keep a friend the word "friend" could also mean lover, a meaning leontes refers to in the speech that follows. friend a while longer.
venice has made cassio governor here on cyprus.
(so only the attendant nearest him can hear) the king is angry. see, he bites his lip.
(aside) that is too much! to take friendship too far is to make it a love affair. my heart is trembling and dancing, but not for joy. this hospitality may have an innocent face, and my wife's generosity may in fact come from warmth, affection, and the fact that it makes her more attractive. maybe. but to hold hands, as they are doing right now, and flirtatiously smile at each other as though into a mirror, all the while sighing as loud as a horn blast shakespeare's original language referred to the horn sounded in hunting to signal the death of a hunted deer. horn blast , that is not entertainment that pleases my heart, or my head. mamillius, are you my son?
is that true? then desdemona and othello will go back to venice.
(to himself) i only want to deal with stupid fools and careless boys. i have no use for people who look at me insightfully. ambitious buckingham grows much too circumspect. boy!
yes, my good lord.
oh, no. he'll go to mauritania and take the beautiful desdemona with him, unless he gets stuck here for some reason. the best way to extend his stay here is to get rid of cassio.
my lord?
in faith! that's my fine fellow. what, have you smudged your nose? they say it looks just like mine. come on, captain, you must be neat the term refers to cattle with horns, leading to leontes's comment in the next sentence. neat , that is, clean. yet the steer, the heifer, and the calf are all called neat. still playing her fingers up and down his palm! what are you up to, you silly calf? are you my calf?
what do you mean, get rid of him?
do you know anyone who would kill someone for money?
yes, if you'd like me to be, my lord.
i mean knock his brains out, so he can't take othello's place.
my lord, i know one unhappy gentleman who has more pride than money. money talks, and would very likely get him to do anything.
you need a shaggy head and horns men whose wives have been unfaithful, or cuckolds, were often depicted with horns. horns to be just like me. still, they say we are as alike as a pair of eggs. women say that, and they will say anything. but even if they were as false as africans or black fabric a common belief at the time was that africans were sexually promiscuous and thus "false" in that they weren't faithful. black fabric, meanwhile, became weak, or "false," as a result of the chemicals used to make the black dye. as false as africans or black fabric , or as fickle as the wind and the water, or fixed as a cheating gambler wants the dice to be, it would still be true that this boy looks like me. come, sir page, look at me with your sky blue eye. sweet villain! dearest! my flesh! can your mother have? could it be? jealousy's intensity strikes me through to my heart and makes things that are impossible seem possible. that jealousy speaks in dreams. how can this be? it collaborates with what's unreal and corresponds to nothing in real life. then it's very believable that my jealousy may be real, and she's gone beyond what's permitted, and i would find out and grow insane, and my brow would harden into horns.
and that's what you want me to do!
what's his name?
what is leontes saying?
yes, if you want to help yourself. he's having dinner tonight with a prostitute, and i'll go visit him. he doesn't know he's been appointed governor yet. when you see him walking by here (as i'll make sure he does between twelve and one) you can nab him. i'll be nearby to help you, and between the two of us we can handle him. come on, don't stand there in a daze. come along with me. i'll give you such reasons for killing him that you'll feel obliged to snuff him out. it's nearly dinner time, and the night's going to be wasted. let's go!
his name is tyrrel, my lord.
he seems upset.
i want to hear more about this.
i know the man a bit. go, bring him here, boy.
how are you, my lord?
you will. you'll hear all you want to hear.
(to himself) the thoughtful, witty buckingham will no longer be privy to my innermost thoughts. has he held out for me for so long and without a moment's doubt only to suddenly need some "breathing room"? well, so be it.
what news? how are you, my best brother?
please, sir, don't trouble yourself.
look who's here! what's the news with you?
you look distracted. are you upset, my lord?
i beg your pardon; walking will make me feel better.
you should know, my loving lord, i've heard that the marquess dorset has fled to brittany, to the earl of richmond.
no, truly. sometimes nature shows its weakness, its tenderness, and makes itself a source of amusement for harder hearts. looking at my boy's face, i thought i had gone back twenty-three years and saw myself without trousers leontes means he saw himself as a young boy who was not yet wearing men's clothing. in england at the time, boys younger than six were dressed in gowns. putting a boy in trousers, or breeches, signified the boy's transition out of childhood. without trousers , in my green velvet coat, with my dagger carefully sheathed so i would not hurt myself on it and so it wouldn't prove too dangerous, as toys often do. i thought how alike i was at that age to this child, this young boy, this gentleman. my honest friend, will you accept something relatively worthless in exchange for something valuable?
good night, madam. thank you.
come here, catesby. spread the rumor abroad that anne, my wife, is very sick. i will make sure she's kept out of view. and find a poverty stricken gentleman who i can marry straightaway to clarence's daughter. clarence's son is dull-witted, so i'm not worried about him. look at you, standing there in a stupor! i repeat, spread the rumor that anne, my wife, is sick and likely to die. hurry up because it's absolutely crucial that i destroy anything that may damage my position.
no, my lord, i'll fight.
you're most welcome.
(to himself) i must get married to my brother's daughter elizabeth of york, daughter of queen elizabeth and king edward. she later married henry tudor, earl of richmond. she was the grandmother of elizabeth i and considered by elizabethans to mark the start of the tudor reign. daughter . otherwise, my kingdom stands on glass. murdering her brothers and then marrying her isn't the most foolproof way to secure my position. but i'm steeped so deep in blood by now that one sin has to follow the next. i have no tears of pity for anyone.
you will! may happiness be his fortune! my brother, are you as fond of your young prince as i seem to be of mine?
would you walk out with me, sir?, oh, desdemona, 
are you tyrrel?
when i'm home, sir, he's my occupation, my laughter, all i worry about. first he's my sworn friend, then he's an enemy, a freeloader, a soldier, and a statesman, all together. he makes a long summer's day feel as short as a day in the middle of winter. and his childish ways keep me from gloomy thoughts.
yes, my lord?
james tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.
this young squire here does the same for me. he and i will walk along, my lord, and leave you to your slower steps. hermione, show how much you love us in how you entertain our brother. give him whatever he wants, no matter how expensive. after you and my young son, he's dearest to me.
go to bed right this minute. i'll be there shortly. send your maid emilia away. make sure you do what i say.
are you indeed?
if you are looking for us, we'll be in the garden. should we wait for you there?
i will, my lord.
test me, my blessed king.
do whatever pleases you. i'll find you, if you are anywhere under the sky. (aside) i'm fishing now, though no one sees how i set the line. go on! look how she holds up her nose and mouth to him, as if to be kissed. she acts with the boldness of a wife toward her husband!
how are things now? he looks calmer than he did before.
do you dare kill a friend of mine?
gone already! a little here, knee deep there, then grow horns over my head and behind my ears! go, boy, play. your mother plays around, and i play a role, though my part is one of a disgrace, with the result that i'll be hissed on my way to the grave, with contempt as my funeral bells. go play, boy, play. unless i'm mistaken, there have been cuckolds before. even now, as i speak, there is many a man who may hold his wife by the arm without suspecting that she has been unfaithful in his absence, and his neighbor, call him sir smile, has been with the woman that belongs to him. there's comfort in the fact that other men have had wives and those wives have been unfaithful, as mine has, against their will. if everyone whose wife strayed were to despair, a tenth of mankind would hang themselves. there's no remedy for it, since it is a world full of lust, from east to west and north and south. there's no barricade you can build around the womb, and one's enemy will go in and out as he pleases. thousands of us have the disease and don't know it. what now, boy?
he says he'll come back right away. he asked me to go to bed and to send you away.
yes, my lord, but i'd rather kill two enemies.
i look like you, they say.
send me away?
well, that's what you get to do. two great enemies, in fact, enemies to my peace of mind. tyrrel, i mean those bastards in the tower.
that's some comfort. camillo, are you there?
that's what he said. so give me my nightgown, emilia, and i'll say goodnight. we shouldn't displease him.
give me access to them, and soon you won't have to worry about them anymore.
yes, my good lord.
yes. i wish you'd never met him.
that's music to my ears. come here, tyrrel.
go play, mamillius, that's a good boy.
that's not what i wish. i love him even when he's harsh and mean, help me unpin this, would you?, i love even his stubbornness, his frowns, his bad moods.
by this token, you'll be admitted to their cell. get up and listen to me.
camillo, my friend polixenes will stay longer.
i put those wedding sheets on your bed, as you asked.
that's all there is to it. as soon as the deed is done, you will be in my favor and i will promote you.
you had to go to great lengths to make him stay. no matter what you said, he insisted he would leave.
it doesn't matter. oh, how silly we are! if i die before you do make sure i'm wrapped in those sheets in my coffin.
i'll do it right away.
did you see it?
listen to you! don't be silly!
my lord, i have thought over the request you just made of me.
he wouldn't heed your pleas, but said his business was too important.
my mother had a maid named barbary. she was in love, and her lover turned out to be wild and left her. she knew an old song called "willow" that reminded her of her own story, and she died singing it. i can't get that song out of my head tonight. it's all i can do to keep myself from hanging my head down in despair and singing it like poor barbary. please, hurry up.
well, it doesn't matter anymore. dorset has fled to the earl of richmond.
you saw it? (aside) people know my secret already, and they are whispering and murmuring, "sicilia is a such-and-such." it is already so well known while i am just figuring it out. camillo, how did it happen that he stayed?
should i get your nightgown?
i heard the news, my lord.
because the good queen asked him.
no, just help me unpin this. that lodovico is a good-looking man.
stanley, richmond is your wife's son. get information from her.
true, because of the queen. "good" should be an appropriate description, but under the circumstances it isn't. did anyone else see that it happened this way? since you notice more than the common idiots, perhaps it is only seen by those intelligent enough, the ones with extraordinary intellects? perhaps the commoners are blind to what just happened? tell me.
he's very handsome.
my lord, i'd want to have the gift you promised me on your honor: the earldom of hereford and all the possessions that go with it.
what happened, my lord? i think almost everyone understands that polixenes will stay here longer.
he speaks well.
stanley, pay attention to your wife's doings. if she sends any letters to richmond, you will be accountable to me for it.
what?
i know a lady in venice who'd walk all the way to palestine for a kiss from him.
what do you say, your highness, about my just request?
he will stay here longer.
(singing) the poor soul sat singing by the sycamore tree, everyone sing the green willow, she had her hand on her breast and her head on her knee, sing willow, willow, willow. the fresh streams ran by her and murmured her moans, sing willow, willow, willow. her salt tears fell from her and softened the stones, sing willow, willow, willow., put these things over there., please, hurry, he'll come right away., everyone sing, a green willow must be my garland. nobody blame him, he's right to hate me, no, that's not how it goes., who's knocking?
as i remember, henry the sixth prophesied that richmond would be king when richmond was only a foolish little boy. a king, perhaps, 
but why?
it's the wind.
my lord, 
to satisfy your highness and the request of our most gracious mistress.
(singing) i told my lover he didn't love me, but what did he say? sing willow, willow, willow. if i chase more women, you'll sleep with more men, okay, go away now. good night. my eyes itch, is that an omen i'll be crying soon?
how is it that the prophet didn't tell me at the time that i would kill him?
satisfy! the request of your mistress! satisfy her! that's enough. i have trusted you, camillo, with everything dearest to my heart, as well as confessed to you in my chamber. i parted from you there feeling repentant and reformed, as though departing from a visit to a priest. but now i feel that i have been deceived by what appears to be your integrity.
no, it doesn't mean anything.
my lord, your promise of the earldom, 
forbid the thought, my lord!
i heard someone say that's what it means. oh, these men, these men! do you honestly think, tell me, emilia, there are women who'd cheat on their husbands in such a disgusting manner?
richmond! the last time i was in exeter, the mayor kindly showed me the castle there and called it " rougemont the words "rougemont" and "richmond" were pronounced similarly, and both mean "red hill." rougemont ." the name startled me because an irish poet once told me that i would die soon after seeing "richmond."
now that i think of it, you are either dishonest or, if you are honest, you are a coward, hiding your honesty for fear of having to follow the correct course of action. perhaps you neglect your duties as a most trusted servant, or perhaps you are a fool who sees the high stakes of a game but thinks it's all a joke.
there are women like that out there, no question.
my lord!
my gracious lord, i may be negligent, foolish, and cowardly. no man is free from all those vices, and they will occasionally turn up. in your affairs, my lord, if i was ever deliberately negligent, it was because of my foolishness. if i ever pretended to be a fool, it was because of my neglectfulness and my inability to judge the consequences. if ever i was afraid to do something when i was uncertain of the outcome, and the deed was so necessary it had to be done, it was a fear that even wise men feel. my lord, these are acceptable weaknesses that honesty is always plagued by. but i beg your grace to be blunt: tell me exactly what i did wrong. then if i deny that i did it, it truly is not my fault.
would you ever do such a thing for all the world?
yes, what time is it?
haven't you seen? you have, that's not in doubt, unless you are willfully blind. or perhaps you have heard, since rumors can't be mute in the face of something so obvious. or maybe you have thought, since every man who thinks must have thought it. isn't my wife deceiving me? you must confess, unless you want to shamelessly deny that you have either eyes or ears or thought, that my wife is a whore, and deserves a name as awful as any base woman deserves who sleeps with a man before she is married. say it and affirm it.
why, wouldn't you?
i'm reminding your grace what you promised me.
i wouldn't stand by and listen to my mistress be slandered like that without taking revenge immediately. curse my heart, i've never heard you speak in a way that suited you less. to say it again would be as sinful as the crime you are describing, even if it was true.
by the light of heaven, no, i would not!
well, but what time is it?
is it nothing that they whisper together? lean their cheeks together? or touch noses? or kisses? or interrupt their laughter with sighs, a certain sign that they're in love? or playing footsie? or lurking in corners? or wishing that time would run faster, that hours were minutes and noon midnight, and that all eyes were blind with cataracts but theirs, so that they can be wicked without being seen? is this nothing? why, then the world and everything in it is nothing. the sky is nothing, polixenes is nothing, my wife is nothing, and they have nothing, if this is nothing.
i wouldn't either, by daylight. it would be easier to do it in the dark.
it's almost ten o'clock.
my lord, let go of this terrible opinion, and quickly, because it is dangerous.
could you really do such a thing, for all the world?
well, let it strike ten then.
say it is, but it is true.
the world's huge. it's a big prize for such a small sin.
why "let it strike"?
no, no, my lord.
i don't think you would.
because you're like the lowborn fellow who strikes the bell, you keep interrupting my thoughts. i am not in the giving mood today.
it is true, and you lie. i say you lie, camillo, and i hate you. i call you a horrible oaf, a mindless slave, or else nervous and wishy-washy, who's able to see good and evil in the same thing and is inclined to both. if my wife were as diseased physically as she is morally, she wouldn't survive an hour.
actually i think i would, and then i'd undo it after i did it. i wouldn't do it for a nice ring, or fine linen, or pretty gowns or petticoats or hats. but for the whole world? who wouldn't cheat on her husband to make him king? i'd risk my soul for that.
well, then, let me know whether you will give me the earldom some other time.
who corrupts her?
i'd never do such a bad thing, not for the whole world!
you're bothering me. i'm not in the mood.
the one who wears her like a medal around his neck: polixenes. if i had loyal servants, who saw my honor as their business and personal gain, they would act to prevent any more of this affair. and you, his cupbearer the man who served wine to the master in a noble household. cupbearer , i brought you up from a low rank, have given you some authority, and brought you up to respectability. you should be able to see plainly how upset i am. you could poison his drink to kill him, which would make me feel better.
why, a bad action is just a wrong in this world, but when you've won the whole world, it's a wrong in your own world, so you can make it right then.
is this really happening? does he reward my dedicated service with such deep contempt? did i work to make him king for this? oh, let me remember what happened to hastings and hurry to brecknock brecknock was buckingham's family estate in southeast wales. brecknock while i still have my head on my shoulders!
my lord, i could do it with a tiny amount of a slow-working potion that isn't as violent as poison. but i can't believe that my noble mistress would be so flawed, having shown herself always so honorable. i have loved you, 
i don't think any woman like that exists.
the tyrant's bloody request has been met. it was the most ruthless massacre this country has ever been guilty of. dighton and forrest, whom i hired to perform the butchery, are used to killing people, the bloody dogs. but they melted with tenderness and human compassion, weeping like children, when they described what they'd done. "the tender babes lay like this," said dighton. "like this," said forrest, "with their innocent white arms around each other. their lips, like four red roses on a stalk, touched. a prayer book lay on their pillow, which" said forrest, "almost made me change my mind. but, oh, the devil", there he stopped talking and dighton took up where he left off: "we smothered the perfect, most sweet work of nature." the two men were both destroyed by remorse. they couldn't speak. so i left them to bring the news to the murderous king. and here he comes.
make that your problem, and go to hell! do you think i am so dull-witted, so unsettled, that i would give myself all this trouble and dirty up the pure, clean whiteness of my bed? to preserve that purity gives one peace of mind, but if it's tainted it hurts like thorns, nettles, and wasp stings. do you think i would raise doubt about the legitimacy of my son, who i believe is mine and who i love, without compelling reasons? would i do this? could i turn aside from this?
yes, a dozen of them, as many as there are women in the world, in fact. but i do think it's the husband's fault if we wives cheat on them. for instance, our husbands
here he comes., health to you, my king.
i must believe you sir, and i do. i'll take care of polixenes for you, as long as once he's gone you will again treat your wife as your own, at least for your son's sake. that way you will silence all the harmful rumors that might spread to other kingdoms and courts that are allied with you.
may stop sleeping with us, and give it out to other women instead. or they may get insanely jealous, and keep us from going anywhere. or let's say they hit us, or cut back on the money they give us out of spite. we have feelings. we may be able to forgive them, but we want to get back at them too. husbands need to know that their wives are human beings too. they see, smell, and taste sweet and sour just like their husbands. why do they replace us with other women? do they do it for fun? i think they do. is it out of lust? i think so. is it a weakness? it is. and don't we have passions, and a taste for fun, and weaknesses, just like men? then tell them to treat us well. or let them figure out that the bad things we do are just what we learned from them.
kind tyrrel, will your news make me happy?
you advise me to do what i already determined i would do. i won't tarnish her reputation in any way.
good night, good night. i pray that god will let me learn from women like that, not to follow their bad example, but to avoid it!
if my doing what you told me to makes you happy, then be happy, because i did it.
my lord, then go, and with a face as open and friendly as if you were at a party, keep company with polixenes and your queen. i am his cupbearer, and i will give him the potion, or no longer think of me as your servant.
here, stand behind this wall; he'll come right away. keep your sword out, and then stick it in as far as it'll go. quick, quick. don't be afraid. i'll be right next to you. this will either make us or break us. keep that in mind, and be steady.
but did you see them dead?
do this and you will have one half of my heart. don't do it and your own will be split.
stay right near me. i may mess it up.
i did, my lord.
i'll do it, my lord.
i'm right behind you. be bold, and get ready.
and buried, noble tyrrel?
i'll act friendly, as you've advised me.
i don't really want to do this, but he's given me good reasons. i guess it's only one man, no big deal. my sword comes out, and he dies.
the tower's chaplain has buried them, but to tell you the truth, i don't know where.
oh, unfortunate lady! what have i gotten into? i have to poison good polixenes, only because i would obey a master who is mad and wants all his servants to be mad, too. if i do this, i'll be promoted. but even if i could find one example of someone who had struck down a chosen king and prospered, i wouldn't do it. since there isn't such an example recorded anywhere in history, even a villain wouldn't do it. i have to leave the court, since whether i do it or not i'm certain to be hanged. oh, good! here comes polixenes.
(to himself) i've rubbed this young pimple until he's ready to pop, and now he's angry. whether he kills cassio, or cassio kills him, or they kill each other, it all works in my favor. if roderigo survives, though, he'll ask me for all the gold and jewelry that i stole from him and said i gave to desdemona. i can't let that happen. if cassio survives,he's so handsome and well-spoken that he makes me look ugly. and besides, the moor might tell him about my lies about him., that would be very dangerous for me. no, he's got to die. let it be so. i hear him coming.
tyrrel, come back shortly after dinner and tell me the details of their deaths. in the meantime, think about how i can do you good and give you what you want. see you soon.
this is odd. i think i'm losing favor here. he wouldn't speak? good day camillo.
i know the sound of his walk., die, villain!
i humbly say goodbye.
hello, most royal sir!
that thrust might really have hurt me if i didn't have this armor on under my cloak. now let's see what you've got on.
i've locked up clarence's son and matched his daughter with a poor fellow. edward's sons have been carried off by the angels and anne, my wife, has bid good night to the world. now i go, a jolly, thriving wooer, to marry my brother edward's young daughter, elizabeth, because i know richmond has his eye on her. he wants to win the crown by way of marrying her.
what is the news of the court?
oh, i'm dead!
my lord!
nothing unusual, my lord.
i'll be crippled forever! help! murder! murder!
is the news good or bad that you enter without knocking?
the king looked as though he had lost a part of his kingdom as dear to him as himself. just now i met him with the usual cordial greetings, but turning his eyes away and sneering in contempt, he walked away from me, leaving me to wonder what happened to make him act this way.
that's cassio's voice. iago has kept his word.
bad news, my lord. the bishop of ely has fled to richmond, and buckingham, backed by a hardy welsh army, is on the march. his army is growing.
i don't dare know, my lord.
oh, what a villain i am!
ely joining richmond troubles me more than buckingham and his quickly assembled army. come, i've heard that frightened analysis only serves to delay action, and delay can lead to ruin. so my method is going to be to move as quickly as fire. come, let's gather an army. the best strategy is to head right to the battlefield. when traitors challenge us to fight, it's best to act fast.
what? you don't dare, or you don't know? do you know, but don't dare? it must be something of the sort, because if you know something for certain, you can't deny it. good camillo, your face is like a mirror to me, in which your changed expression shows my own. i must be responsible in some way for leontes's altered behavior, since i'm changed, too.
that's the truth.
so now the good times have ripened and grown rotten. i've lurked in the shadows here to watch the downfall of my enemies. i've been watching the terrible prologue to a scene that i hope will prove dark and tragic. i'll head to france soon. it's time to hide, wretched margaret. who's coming?
there is an illness that makes some of us mad, but i can't say exactly what it is. but even though you are still well, you have caught it, too.
help me! get some light! get me a surgeon!
ah, my poor princes! ah, my tender babes, my flowers who didn't even get a chance to bloom. if your gentle souls are still flying in the air and have not yet landed where they will remain forever, hover around me with your airy wings and hear your mother's lament.
what do you mean, i've caught it, too? don't tell me i have the deadly stare of the basilisk a mythical reptile that was able to kill with its stare. basilisk . i've looked at thousands of people who have been better off by having been seen by me, but i've never killed anyone that way. camillo, i know you are a gentleman because you are educated, and that makes one a gentleman as much as having parents who are nobles. i beg you, if you know something i should know, please don't pretend not to know and keep it from me.
it's him! brave iago, how honest and trustworthy you are! you even went as far as murder to help your friend in his misfortune. you teach me how i should act.
hover about her and tell her she got what she deserved, with her children dead before their time.
i can't tell you.
whore, your lover's dead now, and you'll be going to hell soon. i'm coming, slut! i've shut the memory of your beautiful eyes out of my heart. you've already stained our sheets with your lust; now i'll stain them with your whore's blood.
i've been crazed with so many miseries that my tongue has tired of lamenting and gone mute. edward plantagenet, why are you dead?
i've caught an illness, even though i am well! you have to tell me. do you hear me, camillo? i appeal to you by all the traits in a man that respond to honor, including this request itself. tell me why you think i'm in danger, how close the danger is, and how i might prevent it. or if i can't, how i might best endure it.
help! isn't there a guard around? no one passing by? murder! murder!
(to herself) one plantagenet pays for the other. one edward dies to pay a debt for the other edward who died.
sir, i will tell you, since i am obligated by my honor and since you're an honorable man. therefore listen to my advice, which must be followed immediately, or both you and i will be doomed and will meet a bad end.
something's wrong, the man sounds panicked.
will you abandon such gentle lambs, god, and throw them to the wolves? have you ever slept before while such a terrible deed was done?
go ahead, good camillo.
oh, help!
(to herself) sure, when my husband, holy harry harry = henry vi harry , died and when my sweet son died.
i have been appointed by him to murder you.
listen!
(sitting down) sight has gone blind, life is as dead as a ghost. this is a mournful scene, it's a shame to the world, when someone like me, who should have died long ago, still lives. as a short summary and record of an unbearable life, i'll settle my restless bones on england's lawful ground (sitting down), which broke the law when it got drunk on the blood of the innocent!
by whom, camillo?
i've acted like such a villain!
(sitting down beside her) oh, if only the earth would offer me not just a seat for mourning but a grave. then i would bury myself, not just rest my bones. oh, who has any reason to mourn except us?
by the king.
two or three men are groaning. but it's dark out, and it could be a trap. it's not safe to go near them till we get more help.
if the oldest grief is the most revered, then mine should have the most weight here. let my sorrow have the upper hand. if you can allow for comparison (sitting down with them), consider your losses next to mine. i had an edward till a richard killed him, and i had a harry till a richard killed him. on your side, you had an edward till a richard killed him, and you had the young richard, york, till a richard killed him. so, i guess we're equal.
why?
nobody's coming? i'll bleed to death.
i had a richard too, namely, my husband, and you killed him. i had my son rutland, and you helped kill him.
he thinks, no, he swears with as much confidence as if he had seen it or even helped you do it, that you have touched his queen in a forbidden way.
look!
you had a clarence, too, and richard killed him. your womb let loose a hellhound that hunts us all to death. that dog, who was born with sharp teeth for lapping up the blood of lambs, who had teeth before he even had eyes, is the world's worst tyrant, making the eyes of a whole kingdom red with weeping. he destroys god's handiwork and will send us to our graves. oh righteous god, how can i thank you enough that this meat-eating mutt preys on his mother's children and forces her to join others in their grief!
if i did, may my blood turn to poison and my name be as despised as judas's! let my reputation rot and stink so badly that even the least sensitive nose will be overwhelmed, and when i approach they'll turn their backs! let me be hated more than the worst disease that has ever been heard of!
here's someone coming in his pajamas, with a candle and weapons.
o harry's wife, do not triumph in my sorrow! with god as my witness, i swear i have wept for yours.
no matter how vehemently you swear his suspicions aren't true, you are as likely to keep the sea from obeying the moon as you are to change his mind. neither will oaths or wise words disturb the foundation of his foolish notion, which is built on his faith and will last for the rest of his life.
who's there? who's shouting "murder"?
bear with me. i am hungry for revenge, and now i plan to gorge myself on it. your son edward, who stabbed my son edward, is dead. to even the balance, your grandson edward is also dead, with young york thrown in because both your grandsons aren't equal to my one son. your clarence, who stabbed my edward, is also dead. and the audience to this insane play, the adulterer hastings, as well as rivers, vaughan, and grey, have been sent early to their graves. richard, a fiendish spy for hell itself, still lives, but only long enough to buy souls to send below. soon, very soon, he will meet his ghastly and well deserved end. when he dies, the earth will gape open, hell will burn hotter, devils will roar, and saints will pray to get him out of here fast. i pray that god ends his life before i die, so i can say, "the dog is dead!"
how did this come about?
we don't know.
oh, you prophesied that the time would come when i would want your help in cursing that humpbacked spider, that hideous toad!
i don't know, but i'm sure it's safer to avoid his jealousy than to wonder why he feels that way. so if you trust my honesty, which you shall take as my pledge, then leave tonight! i'll quietly let your followers know and get them out of the back gates of the city two or three at a time. as for me, i've lost everything i have by revealing this to you, but i'll put what i have to your service. don't be uncertain. by the honor of my parents, i'm telling the truth. if you try to prove it, i'll deny i ever said it. you won't be any safer than a man whom the king himself has condemned to be executed.
didn't you hear someone shouting?
back then, i called you "a poor, imitation queen," a badly reproduced copy of what i was, a pretty prologue for the tragedy that was about to follow, a woman who was lifted high only to be hurled down to hell, a mother only teased with two beautiful children, who would soon die. i said you were a mere shadow of what a queen once was, a garish target to be aimed at again and again, an empty symbol of dignity without any substance, a mockery of a queen only there to fill in a role. and i was right, because where's your husband now? your brothers? your two sons? your source of joy? who kneels at your feet now and says, "god save the queen?" what noblemen are bowing and scraping to flatter you now? and where is your throng of followers? once you've laid out all of these losses, it's clear what's left. in place of a happy wife, there's a miserable widow. instead of a joyful mother, here's a woman who cries at the mention of her children. for one who bestows favors on others, here's one who has to beg for favors. instead of a queen, we have a poor woman with a crown of worries. she who mocked me now is mocked by me. she who once ordered everyone about is now obeyed by no one. your fortune has fallen. now you have only the memory of what you were, which tortures you when you consider what you've become. you once stole my position; now you get to have the grief that goes with it. now like an ox, you carry half my heavy burden of grief, here, i'll give you the rest. farewell, york's wife. goodbye, queen of tragic misfortune. your english sorrows will make me smile in france.
i do believe you. i saw what he felt in his face. give me your hand. guide me and our fortunes will remain together. my ships are ready, and my people expected me to depart two days ago. he's jealous over a very precious woman, and so his jealousy will be as great as she is rare, and as violent as he is powerful. and since he thinks that a man who always professed friendship has deceived him, his revenge will be even more bitter. i'm overwhelmed with fear. may my swift exit help me, and may it comfort the good queen, who has no responsibility for his unjustified suspicions. come, camillo. i will respect you like a father if you take me away safely. let us leave.
i'm here, here! for heaven's sake, help me!
you who are so skilled in cursing, stay awhile and teach me how to curse my enemies.
i have the authority to pass through all the back gates of the city. let's go soon. come, sir, let's leave.
what's the matter?
don't sleep at night, and don't eat during the day. compare what you've lost with what you suffer now. remember your children as being sweeter than they actually were, and think of the man who killed them as worse than he is. making your loss greater makes the person who caused it worse. think like this all day, and you'll learn how to curse.
take the boy. he is such a pest i can't take it anymore.
(to lodovico) that's othello's ensign, i think.
my words are dull. enliven them with yours!
come with me, my gracious lord. shall i play with you?
it is. he's a good man.
your misery will make them sharp and piercing like mine.
no, i don't want anything to do with you.
(to cassio) who's shouting so loudly?
what good does it do to respond to catastrophe with a lot of words?
why, my sweet lord?
is that you, iago? i'm here, i've been destroyed by villains! help me.
words are a lot of useless breath, like lawyers who won't stop arguing for their sad clients, like a worthless inheritance, or like poor speech-makers who won't stop speaking. but give words a chance. though they won't help in any other way, at least they make us feel better.
you'll kiss me too hard and talk baby talk to me. (to second lady) i love you better.
oh, lieutenant! what villains did this to you?
if that's true, then don't be tongue-tied. come with me, and let's smother my fiendish son, who smothered your two sweet sons, in bitter words.
why is that, my lord?
i think one of them is nearby and can't get away.
i hear his battle drums. don't stint on your words.
not because your eyebrows are blacker, though they say that black eyebrows suit some women best, as long as there isn't too much hair and they are shaped like a semicircle, or drawn like a half-moon.
the treacherous criminals!, (to lodovico and gratiano) who's there? come here and help!
who's blocking the way?
who taught you that?
somebody help me over here!
the woman who might have blocked you from all the murders you've committed by strangling you in her cursed womb.
i learned it from looking at women's faces. tell me, what color are your eyebrows?
that's one of them.
are you hiding your forehead with a golden crown, when, if there was any justice in this world, it should be branded with the murders you committed, your slaughter of the prince who held that crown, and of my sons and my brothers? tell me, you villainous lowlife, where are my children?
blue, my lord.
(to roderigo) murderer! villain!
you toad, where is your brother clarence and his son, little ned plantagenet?
no, you're joking. i've seen a lady's nose that was blue, but not her eyebrows.
damned iago! you inhuman dog!
where are the noble hastings, rivers, vaughan, grey?
listen: your mother the queen is getting rounder by the day. we'll be serving a fine new prince one day soon, and then you'll want to play with us, if we'll let you.
killing men in the dark? where are these murderers? this is such a quiet, sleepy town!, murder, murder!, who's that coming? are you good or evil?
where is kind hastings?
she has become quite big lately. may it come quickly for her!
judge for yourself.
play, trumpets! a call to arms, drums! don't let the heavens hear these chattery women abuse the lord's anointed king. play, i say!
what are you talking about now? come, sir, now i'm ready for you again. sit next to me, and tell me a story.
signor lodovico?
either be calm and polite or i'll drown you out with the music of war.
should it be happy or serious?
that's me.
are you my son?
as happy as you'd like.
i beg your pardon. cassio's been wounded.
yes, i thank god, my father, and yourself.
a sad story is best for the winter. i have one about fairies and goblins.
cassio!
then patiently listen to my impatience.
let's hear it, good sir. come on, sit down, and try to frighten me with your fairies. you're good at it.
how are you doing, brother?
madam, i'm a bit like you in that i can't tolerate a tone of disapproval.
there was a man, 
my leg's been cut in two.
oh, let me speak!
no, sit down, and then tell me.
god forbid! bring me some light, gentlemen, i'll bind the wound with my shirt.
go ahead, but i won't listen.
, who lived by a churchyard. i'll tell it quietly, so those other ladies won't hear it.
what's the matter? who's shouting?
i'll be gentle and mild.
come on then, and tell me in my ear.
who's shouting?
and brief, good mother, i'm in a hurry.
did his men meet him there? camillo was with him?
oh, my dear cassio! my sweet cassio! oh, cassio, cassio, cassio!
are you that impatient? god knows i waited for you in anguish, pain, and agony when i gave birth to you.
i ran across them behind the pine grove. i've never seen men move so quickly along. i saw them go all the way to their ships.
you notorious whore! cassio, do you know who might have stabbed you like this?
and didn't i finally arrive to comfort you?
i'm so blessed to have such accurate judgment, and such a correct opinion! alas, if only i knew less! i'm cursed to be so blessed! there may be a spider in your cup, and if you drink without realizing it, you aren't hurt. but if you see the spider and know you have drunk it, you will wretch and heave violently. i have drunk from the cup, and i know that the spider was in it. camillo helped him and acted as his pimp. there is a plot to kill me and take my place as king. everything that i suspected is true. that traitorous villain i employed actually worked for polixenes. he has discovered my plan, and i'm still tormented, a toy for them to play with. how were the gates so easily opened?
no.
no, by god, you know perfectly well you arrived on earth to make it my hell. your birth was incredibly painful; you were a fussy and difficult baby; as a schoolboy, you were frightening, wild, furious, and caused me despair; as a young man, you were daring, bold, and enterprising, and in your maturity, you have been haughty, bloody, and treacherous, both more mild and more harmful than before. so, what hour of comfort have i ever had in your company? name one.
by camillo's authority, which he's often wielded by your command.
i'm sorry to find you like this. i've been looking all over for you.
i guess none except humphrey humphrey hour is an obscure reference, though shakespeare is probably playing off the expression, "to dine with duke humphrey," which meant, "to go hungry." richard is saying, in effect, "the only comfort you ever had was an hour you had without me, at breakfast time when you were hungry." humphrey hour, who once invited you to have breakfast without me. if i be such a disgrace in your eyes, let me march on and not offend you. strike up the band!
i know it too well. give me the boy. i am glad you didn't breastfeed him. he may look a bit like me, but he looks too much like you.
lend me your sash, oh, if we only had a stretcher to carry him out of here!
please, listen to me.
what is this, a joke?
he's fainted! oh cassio, cassio, cassio!
you're too bitter.
take the boy away. he won't be near her anymore. take him away! let her play with the one she's pregnant with now, since it is polixenes's child.
sir, i believe this piece of trash, bianca, has something to do with all this trouble., hang in there, cassio., come here, bring the light. do you recognize this face? oh, no, it's my friend and countryman, roderigo., yes, it's roderigo!
just listen this once. i'll never speak to you again.
i'll say it is not and will swear that you should believe me, whatever you think to the contrary.
what, roderigo from venice?
so be it.
my lords, look at her closely. if you are tempted to say, "she is a fine lady," the wisdom of your hearts will add, "a shame that she isn't virtuous or honorable." praise her for anything but her outward form, which does deserve praise, and immediately you must shrug or mutter to yourself. those are the expressions that slander uses, no, i'm wrong, that mercy uses, because slander only attacks someone who is virtuous. these shrugs and mutterings after you say, "she's goodly" interrupt you before you can say, "she's virtuous." listen to the man who has the most reason to be upset about it: she's an adulteress.
that's the one, sir. do you know him?
either you will die as you should, before you've had a chance to win this battle, or i will die from grief and age and never look upon your face again. so, take with you my heaviest curse, which i hope wears you out in battle even more than your heavy suit of armor will. i pray that the little souls of edward's children will whisper to your enemies and promise them success and victory. you are violent, and your end will be violent. your life was shameful, and let your death be, too.
if a villain said so, the worst in the world, saying so would make him even more of a villain. my lord, you are mistaken.
know him? yes.
though i have far more reason, i don't have as much energy to curse you. but i say amen to everything she said.
my lady, you have mistaken polixenes for me. oh, you creature! i won't give you the title that goes with your high social status, or i'll set a precedent allowing rudeness to use the same names for everyone and not distinguish between a prince and a beggar. i have said she is an adulteress, and i have said with whom. even more than that, she is a traitor, and she is in league with camillo, who knows what she should be ashamed of: that she's an adulteress. she's as bad as the women that common people give the coarsest name to, and she knew that they were escaping.
signor gratiano, i beg your pardon. i didn't mean to ignore you, it's just because of this bloody uproar.
wait, madam. i need to speak a word with you.
no, i swear on my life i knew none of this. you'll regret publicly shaming me like this when you realize you are wrong! my gentle lord, you can make it all right again by saying you made a mistake.
i'm glad to see you.
i have no more royal sons for you to murder. as for my daughters, richard, they will become praying nuns, not weeping queens. so don't aim at them.
no. if i am wrong about this, then the earth isn't big enough to hold a schoolboy's top a top for spinning, such as schoolboys would play with top . take her to prison! anyone who would defend her is indirectly as guilty as she is, just by speaking.
how are you doing, cassio?, someone bring me a stretcher!
you have a daughter named elizabeth, who is virtuous and beautiful, aristocratic and full of grace.
the stars must be aligned in a way that is making everyone mad! i must be patient until their positions change. my good lords, i don't cry as much as other women do, which might make you think i'm not deserving of pity. but my honorable grief burns more fiercely than tears can extinguish. i beg you all, my lords, judge me in as measured a manner as your sense of charity will allow. and so carry out the king's will!
roderigo!
and does she have to die for this? oh, let her live, and i'll ruin her manners and her beauty. so that she may live, i'll say i cheated on edward and that she is not really his child.
will i be obeyed?
it's him, it's him.
don't wrong her birth. she has royal blood.
who will go with me? your highness, i beg that my women might go with me, since i need help in my condition. don't cry, my dear ones. there's no reason to. if you ever know that your mistress is guilty and deserves to be in prison, then you can cry when i come out. but since i'm innocent, this trial i'm enduring will make me more virtuous. goodbye, my lord. i never wanted to see you feeling sorry, but now i know i will. my women, come, you have permission.
good, here's the stretcher. get somebody strong to carry him out of here. i'll get the general's surgeon. (to bianca) as for you, ma'am, don't bother. the man lying here was my dear friend, roderigo., what was the problem between you?
to save her life, i'll say she doesn't.
go on, do as i say!
there wasn't any problem. i don't even know him.
her life is only safe if she's really of royal blood.
your highness, i beg you, call the queen back.
(to bianca) you're pale?, get cassio out of here., you look awfully pale, bianca.
yes, as safe as her brothers' lives were.
be sure of what you are doing, sir, or what you think is justice might prove to be injustice, and three great people might suffer, you, your queen, and your son.
do you see how afraid she is? watch her, we'll get the whole story. keep an eye on her. do you see? the guilty speak volumes even when they're silent.
they were born under unlucky stars.
my lord, i would lay down my life for the queen in belief that she is virtuous in both the eyes of heaven and to you. she is innocent of what you accuse her of.
what's the matter? what's the matter, husband?
the stars weren't the problem. bad friends were.
if it turns out she's unfaithful, i'll guard my wife as vigilantly as i guard my horses scholars have generally interpreted shakespeare's original passage in two different ways: the first is the version given here; the second is that antigonus means he will treat his wife's lodgings as he treats his stables, where mares and stallions are kept apart. i'll guard my wife as vigilantly as i guard my horses , and i'll go about leashed together with her. i will only trust her when i can touch her or see her, because if the queen is lying, then every woman in the world must be a liar.
cassio was attacked here in the dark by roderigo and men who escaped. he's near death, and roderigo's dead already.
you can't escape a bad destiny.
be quiet.
oh, no, good gentleman! oh no, good cassio!
true, when a king who defies god is choosing that destiny. my children would have enjoyed a better death if god had blessed you with a purer life.
my good lord, 
this is what happens when you visit whores. please, emilia, ask cassio where he was at dinner tonight., (to bianca) what, does that make you nervous?
you speak as if i had killed my nephews.
we're speaking for your sake, not our own. some liar has abused your confidence, and he'll be damned for it. if i knew who it was, i would thrash him without pity. if the queen isn't honorable, my three daughters will pay for it, by my honor. the oldest is eleven, the next is nine and the third is about five, and i'll make them all incapable of bearing children. they'll be unable to have illegitimate children by the time they're fourteen. they are all my heirs, and i'd rather castrate myself than have them bear anything other than legitimate children.
he ate at my house, but that doesn't make me nervous.
nephews, indeed, cheated by their uncle of comfort, kingdom, relatives, freedom, and life. whichever hand literally stabbed their tender hearts, you're the one who gave the order. no doubt the murderous knife was blunt till it was sharpened on your stony heart, you reveled in my lambs' bloody guts. but constant expression of wild grief will only make it tame, so i'm not going to say any more about my boys until i've gouged your eyes out with my bare hands. like a sailboat that has lost its sails, i will throw myself on your rocky bosom, and get torn to pieces.
stop. say no more. you're about as perceptive as a dead man, but i see it and feel it as you feel this leontes likely performs some action, such as touching an object, to demonstrate. as you feel this . and i also see the fingers that feel.
oh, did he? i order you to come with me.
madam, if i do as well as i think i'm going to do in these dangerous, violent wars, you and your relatives will have more good at my hands than you've ever had bad!
if it is true, we don't need a grave to bury honesty, because it means that there is not a shred of it on this earth.
go to hell, you whore!
what good does heaven have in store that can do me any good now?
what? you don't believe me?
i'm no whore. i'm as moral as you are.
the advancement of your children, noble lady.
my lord, i would rather you be wrong than me in this instance. and i'd rather it turn out that she is honorable than that you are right, regardless of how you're blamed for it.
as moral as me! damn you!
advancement to some scaffold, to lose their heads.
why do i have to debate this with you, instead of just following my own strong impulse? as king i'm not required to seek your advice, though i tell you this information out of natural goodness. but if you, who are either confused or pretend to be, can't understand the truth as i do, then i don't need any more of your advice. the entire affair is in my hands.
gentlemen, let's go make sure cassio's wounds are properly dressed., come on, ma'am, you can tell us another story. emilia, go to the castle and tell othello and desdemona what happened., will you please go now? (to himself) this is the night that'll either make me or break me.
no, advancement to the dignity and height of honor, to a high, imperial kind of glory.
my lord, i only wish you had spent more time considering your judgment, without making it public.
i have to do it, i have to do it. i have to keep my reason in mind. i won't say out loud what my reason is, but i have to do it. but i won't shed any of her blood or scar that beautiful skin, whiter than snow and smooth as the finest marble. but she's got to die, or she'll cheat on other men. put out the light of the candle, and then put out the light of her heart. if i extinguish the candle, i can light it again if i regret it. but once i kill you, you beautiful, fake woman, i do not know the magic that could bring you back. when i've plucked this rose, i can't make it grow again; it will have no choice but to wither and die. let me smell you while you're still on the tree. (he kisses her) oh, that sweet breath almost convinces me not to kill you and carry out justice. one more, one more kiss. if you're this beautiful when you're dead, i'll kill you and then love you afterward. (kissing her) one more, and this is the last. such a sweet kiss was never so deadly. i have to cry, but i have to be cruel too. i'm acting like god in the old testament, i have to punish the one i love. she's waking up.
flatter me in my mourning: tell me what dignity or honor you could possible bring to any child of mine?
how do you mean? either you have become a fool with age, or you were born that way. camillo's fleeing and their intimacy, which was as obvious as any suspicion that lacked only an eyewitness to confirm it, together push this matter forward. still, since this is a serious matter and shouldn't be handled rashly, i've sent cleomenes and dion to get further confirmation at apollo's temple in delphos. you know they are competent. they'll bring word from the oracle, and i'll heed whatever advice it gives, whether for or against my suspicion. is that good?
who's there? othello?
the dignity of everything i own. in fact, i will give a child of yours everything plus myself, provided you forget the wrongs you imagine i have done to you.
very good, my lord.
yes, desdemona.
well, explain, but do it fast so that your puny store of kindness isn't used up by talking about it.
even though i am sure that i am right, the oracle will convince everyone else, such as those who find themselves unable to accept the truth. so i have thought it a good idea to confine her and keep her away from me, so the treachery of camillo and polixenes is not left to her to perform. come, follow me. i'm going to speak to the public, since this matter will incite everyone to action.
will you come to bed, my lord?
then know that from my soul i love your daughter.
(aside) incite everyone to laughter, i believe, if the truth were known.
have you said your prayers tonight, desdemona?
i believe it.
call the prison overseer. tell him who i am.
yes, my lord.
what do you believe?
no court in europe is good enough for you, good lady, so why are you in prison?
if you can think of any crime you haven't confessed, then pray for forgiveness right away.
that you love my daughter to spite your soul. that's the way you loved my brothers. and that's the way i thank you for it.
good sir, you know me, don't you?
oh, my lord, what do you mean by that?
don't be so quick to twist my meaning. i mean that i love your daughter with all my soul. i intend to make her queen of england.
i know you as a worthy woman and one i have great respect for.
well, hurry up and confess. be quick about it. i'll wait over here. i don't want to kill you before you've readied your soul. no, i don't want to send your soul to hell when i kill you.
tell me, who will be the king?
please, then, take me to the queen.
you're talking about killing?
the one who makes her queen, of course. who else should it be?
i can't, madam. i have explicit orders not to.
yes, i am.
what, you?
such a fuss just to keep kind visitors from seeing such an honest and honorable lady! am i allowed to see her attendants? any of them? emilia?
then heaven have mercy on me.
yes, exactly. me. what do you think, madam?
if you would please send away your attendants, i'll bring out emilia.
amen to that, from the bottom of my heart.
how would you woo her?
please, call her. (to her attendants) leave me here. the gentleman and the attendants exit.
if you really feel that way, then i hope you won't kill me.
that's what i want to find out from you, who knows her best.
madam, i must be present while you speak with emilia.
hmmph!
and will you learn from me?
well, if you must.
you're scaring me. you terrify me when you have that look in your eyes. i don't know why i should be afraid, since i haven't done anything wrong. but i'm still afraid.
madam, with all my heart.
what a great effort to make the queen guilty beyond justification when she is actually innocent.
think of your sins.
okay, then. do this: send her a pair of bleeding hearts. make clear they come from the man who killed her brothers. write "edward" and "york" on them. that will get her to weep. then present her with a handkerchief, like the one margaret gave your father, which was steeped in his son rutland's blood. tell her this handkerchief sopped up the blood of her sweet brother's body and urge her to dry her weeping eyes with it. if this encouragement doesn't move her to love you, send her a description of your other noble deeds. tell her how you secretly dispensed with her uncle clarence, her uncle rivers, and, for her sake, her good aunt anne.
dear gentlewoman, how is our gracious lady?
my only sin was loving you too much.
come, come, you're making fun of me. this is not the way to win your daughter.
as well as can be expected for one so great and so sad. because of her overwhelming grief and fright, which are greater than a kind woman has ever suffered, she has delivered her baby prematurely.
yes, that's why you have to die.
there isn't any other way, unless you took on another form and became someone else.
a boy?
you're wrong to kill me for loving you. why are you chewing on your lower lip like that? you're shaking with emotion. these are bad omens, but i hope, i hope, they don't predict my future.
but suppose i did all the things you named out of love for her.
a strong and healthy daughter. the queen draws comfort from the child, saying, "my poor prisoner, i am as innocent as you are."
quiet. stay still.
then she has no choice but to hate you, as you purchased her love with murder.
i swear that the king must give up these dangerous fits of madness, curse them! he must be told, and i'll do it, it's a task best suited to a woman. if i am deceitful, let my tongue blister and never be capable of expressing my anger ever again. please, emilia, tell the queen that i am her devoted supporter, and if she'll trust me with the baby i'll show her to the king and be her loudest advocate. maybe he will soften up at the sight of the child. pure silent innocence can sometimes convince when speech fails to do so.
i will. what's this all about?
whatever has already been done can't be undone now. men act imprudently sometimes, then realize their mistakes when they have time to think about them. if i took the kingdom from your sons, i'll give it to your daughter to make up for it. if i have killed your children, i will have children with your daughter. a grandmother is loved hardly less than a mother is. your grandchildren will be just one step removed from your own children, they share your character, your blood, and require the same effort minus that one night of labor, like that which you suffered through for your own daughter. your children caused you trouble in your youth, but mine will bring you comfort in your old age. the only loss you've had is that your son was not king. because of that loss, your daughter will be queen. i can't make up for everything that i'd like to, so accept such kindness as i can offer. your son dorset, who fled in fear to join an army in france against me, could come home to high promotions and great dignity. the king who calls your beautiful daughter "wife" will call dorset "brother." and you will be the mother to a king again, with all the miseries of unhappy times not just repaired, but also improved. indeed, we have many good days to look forward to! the tears you have shed will be transformed into pearls. your happiness will be like a loan that has grown through interest to ten times its original size. go, then, mother, to your daughter.
worthy madam, you are so obviously honorable and good that your generous mission cannot fail to have a positive outcome. there is no lady living more suitable for this great errand. if you'll make your way to the next room, i'll tell the queen of your noble offer. just today she had come up with a similar plan, but was afraid to approach any noble person, fearing she'd be rejected.
you gave that handkerchief, the one i loved and gave to you, to cassio.
give her the benefit of your experience, and prepare her to hear me court her. make her aspire to be queen. tell the princess about the sweet, silent hours of joy there are in marriage. and when my army has chastised the petty rebel, that stupid buckingham, i will return wreathed in victory crowns and lead your daughter to a conqueror's bed. she will be the only victor over my triumphs. she will be the ruler of a caesar.
emilia, tell her that i'll speak as well as i can. if i have as much intelligence as i have courage, don't doubt that i'll do some good.
no, i swear by my life and soul! bring him here and ask him.
what should i say to her? that her father's brother wants to be her husband? or should i say it's her uncle? or should i describe you as the one who killed her brothers and her uncles? how can i describe you that will make you appeal to the young woman and will also agree with god, the law, my honor, and her feelings?
bless you for it! i'll go to the queen. please, come closer.
my sweet darling, don't lie. you're on your deathbed.
claim fair england's peace depends on this alliance.
madam, if the queen wants to send the baby, i don't know how i'll be punished for allowing it, since i don't have any official approval.
i am? but i'm not dying yet!
she will purchase that peace with an everlasting war.
don't worry, sir. the child was a prisoner of the womb, and now by natural law she is free from it. she's not part of the king's anger, or guilty of any trespass of the queen, if any even exists.
yes, right now. so confess your sin freely now. even if you swear you're innocent of every accusation, you won't change my mind or remove the thought that's tormenting me. you're going to die.
tell her that the king, who has the power to command people, asks her.
i believe it.
then heaven have mercy on me!
he asks her to do what god forbids the church forbid marriage between uncle and niece. forbids .
don't worry. on my honor, i will you defend you myself.
amen to that.
say she will be a high and mighty queen.
i can't rest night or day. it is a kind of weakness to be so affected by this issue. if only the cause of it were no longer alive, part of the cause, at least, the adulteress. the lecherous king is away from here, which puts him beyond my aim and anything i could do to him. but she, the adulteress, i can keep close. if she were burned at the stake a punishment for treason against the king. burned at the stake , perhaps i would have some small bit of rest. who's there?
and you have mercy on me too! i never did anything wrong to you in my life. i never loved cassio, except with the pure love that i feel for humankind. i never gave him any token of romantic love.
only to watch that title become worthless, as her mother has.
my lord?
i saw him holding the handkerchief! you liar, you're turning my heart to stone, and making me call what i'll do murder, when i had been thinking of it as a sacrifice! i saw the handkerchief.
say i will love her everlastingly.
how is the boy doing?
he found it somewhere, then. i never gave it to him. tell him to come here. he'll tell the truth.
but how long will "ever" last?
he slept well tonight, and we hope that he's gotten over his illness.
he's already done so.
until her beautiful life's end.
i'm amazed at his nobility! recognizing the dishonorable behavior of his mother, he immediately began to decline, to feel the shame himself. he became sad, stopped eating, stopped sleeping, and grew weak. leave me alone, and go see how he's doing.
what, my lord?
but how long will her beautiful life last?
no! i won't think about polixenes. i fear taking revenge on him. he himself is too powerful, and he has powerful allies. let him be until an opportunity comes. i'll have revenge now on her. camillo and polixenes laugh at me, and find amusement in my sorrow. they wouldn't laugh if i could reach them, and neither will the woman who is within my power to punish.
that he had sex with you.
as long as heaven and nature extend it.
you must not go in.
what? had sex with me?
as long as hell and richard want it.
no, my good lords, back me. do you fear his tyrannical anger more than the queen's life? she's a gracious, innocent soul, more innocent than he is jealous.
yes.
tell her that i, her king, am her lowly subject.
that's enough.
he wouldn't say that.
but she, your subject, hates such a king.
madam, he hasn't slept tonight and has ordered that he be left alone.
no. he won't say anything anymore. honest iago's arranged that.
be eloquent on my behalf.
not so hasty, good sir. i'm here to bring him sleep. it's people like you who creep softly around him like shadows and sigh at his unnecessary agitation that feed the cause of his wakefulness. i have something to say to him that's as soothing as it is true, and honest as well, that will rid him of the sickness keeping him from rest.
oh, i'm scared. what, is he dead?
an honest tale succeeds best when it is told simply.
what is that noise?
if he had as many lives as he's got hairs on his head, i would've killed them all in revenge.
then tell her my loving story in simple terms.
it's not noise, my lord, but necessary talk about godparents for your highness.
oh, he's been betrayed, and i've been ruined.
you can't tell a story simply when it's a lie.
what! take this bold woman away! antigonus, i told you to keep her away from me, because i knew she would come.
what, you whore, are you crying for him right in front of me?
your answers are too shallow and too hasty.
my lord, i told her that she shouldn't visit you, or she'd risk making us both angry.
send me away, my lord, but don't kill me!
oh no, my reasons are deep and as permanent as death. they're buried as deep as my poor infants in their grave.
what, you can't control her?
down othello probably wrestles her down. down , whore!
don't harp on that point, madam, it's past.
he can keep me from dishonesty. unless he does as you've done and locks me up for being honorable, he won't control me in this matter.
kill me tomorrow, but let me live tonight.
i will harp on it till my heartstrings break.
you see, when she wants to take control i give her room, but she'll do what's right.
no, if you struggle with me, 
now, by st. george, my knighthood, and my crown, 
my good lord, i beg you to listen to me. i'm your loyal servant, your doctor, your most obedient advisor, though perhaps i don't seem like it because i won't condone your evil actions, as do those servants who only seem most loyal. i come from your good queen.
just half an hour!
the first you profaned, the second you dishonored, and the third you stole.
good queen!
while i'm doing this, i can't pause for a moment.
i swear, 
she is a good queen, my lord. i say she is a good queen, a very good queen. if i were a man i would fight a duel to prove her innocence, even against the most lowly man.
just let me say one prayer!
by nothing, because this is no oath. st. george loses his holiness once you have sworn by him; you've ruined the emblem of the knighthood, and the crown lost its kingly glory once you stole it. if you want me to believe something you'll swear to, then swear by something you haven't wronged.
force her out of here.
it's too late. (he smothers her)
then, by myself, 
the first man who tries to manhandle me better not value his eyes. i'll go by my own accord, but first i'll carry out my errand. the good queen, for she is good, has given birth to a daughter. here she is. she commends her to you so that you may bless her.
(offstage) my lord, my lord! hello! my lord, my lord!
you've misused yourself.
get out! this furious witch! take her out of here! she's a spying pimp!
what's that noise? aren't you dead yet? i know i'm cruel, but i'm merciful too. i don't want you to linger in pain.
now, by the world, 
not at all. i know nothing about that, while you show your knowledge of it by calling me that name. i'm as honest as you are mad, which, i assure you, is as honest as you can expect in this world.
(offstage) hello! my lord, my lord!
it's full of your ugly wrongdoings.
traitors! won't you shove her out? hand her the bastard child! you dolt! you are hen-pecked and kicked out of your place of authority by your hen here. pick up that bastard. pick it up, i say, and give it to your hag.
who's there?
by my father's death, 
(to antigonus) your hands will forever be unworthy of respect if you take up the princess under that terrible name he called her!
(offstage) oh my lord, i need to speak to you!
your life has dishonored his death.
he fears his wife.
yes, it's emilia.(to emilia), just a minute!, she's dead now., emilia's probably come to tell me that cassio's been killed. the fight outside was loud. so! you're not moving anymore? no, you're as still as a grave. should i let her in? is that a good idea? i think she's moving again, no. what should i do? if she comes in, she'll try to speak to my wife. my wife, my wife! what wife? i don't have a wife. oh, this is unbearable! oh, the horror! there should be a huge eclipse of the sun and the moon, now that desdemona's no longer on this earth.
why then, by god, 
i wish you did, too, and then you would undoubtedly call your children your own.
(offstage) please, my lord. i need to speak with you. oh, my good lord!
you wrong god most of all. if you had been afraid to break an oath with him, you wouldn't have ruined the united front the king, my husband, created before he died, and you wouldn't have killed my brothers. if you had been afraid to break an oath with him, the crown you are currently wearing would have graced the head of my child, and both princes would still be alive, not preyed on by worms. what can you swear by now?
a nest of traitors!
i'd forgotten about you, emilia, wait a moment, let me draw the curtains. (closes the bed curtains) where are you? (unlocks the door)
by the future.
i'm not one.
what's the matter with you now?
you've already wronged that by what you did in the past. i myself have many tears to cry in the time to come, because of what you've done. there are children living whose fathers you have slaughtered. when they are grown, they will wail about a childhood in which no one watched out for them. there are parents living whose children you have butchered; they are now old withered plants who will moan over their losses as they grow old. don't swear by the future, because you've ruined it before it has even arrived.
nor am i, nor is anyone else here other than himself, since he has betrayed his own honor, the honor of his wife, of his son, and of his baby with slander, which is sharper than any sword. it's a curse that he can't be forced to revise his opinion, which is as rotten as oak or stone is solid.
oh, my lord, terrible murders have been committed over there!
may i only do well in these dangerous battles if my intention to repent and prosper is sincere! let me destroy myself, let heaven and destiny deprive me of happy hours, let day remain dark and night sleepless, and let me have nothing but terrible luck if i do not love with a pure heart, clean devotion, and holy thoughts your beautiful royal daughter. my happiness and yours lie in her. if i do not win her, death, desolation, and decay will descend on this land and on me, you, herself, and many a christian soul. ruin cannot be avoided unless i marry her. it will not be avoided unless i marry her. therefore, good mother, i must call you that, advocate for me. plead with your daughter about what i will be, not what i have been. don't talk about my just desserts but about what i will deserve. tell her how necessary this marriage is at this time, and don't be small-minded about such important plans.
a constantly chattering harlot, who has recently beat her husband and now provokes me. this brat isn't mine, it's polixenes's child. take it away, and send it and its mother to the fire!
what? just now?
shall i be tempted by the devil?
it is yours. it looks so much like you, and for the worse, as the proverb puts it. see, my lords, how the baby has all the features of her father in miniature: the eyes, nose, lips, her father's frown and forehead, the dimples on his chin and cheeks, his smile. they have the same hands, nails, fingers. and so good goddess nature has made the baby just like the man who conceived her. if nature has control over temperament, too, don't let her have any jealousy, or she'll suspect, as her father does, that her children are not her husband's!
yes, just now, my lord.
yes, if the devil tempts you to do good.
(to antigonus) a horrible woman. scoundrel, you ought to be hanged for not stopping her from speaking.
it's because of the full moon. it comes too close to the earth and drives men crazy.
shall i forget the wrongs you've done to me so that i can be the mother of a king again?
if you hang all the husbands who can't keep their wives from talking, you'll have hardly any subjects left.
cassio's killed a young venetian named roderigo.
yes, if your memories do you no good.
once again, get her out of here.
roderigo's been killed? and cassio's killed?
yet you killed my children.
a most unworthy and unnatural lord can do only that.
no, cassio wasn't killed.
but in your daughter's womb i will bury them. in that rich nest they shall grow again, to console you.
i'll have you burnt.
cassio's not dead? then the wrong man is dead, and sweet revenge has gone wrong.
should i go convince my daughter to marry you?
i don't care. it would be a heretic building the fire, not the woman burning in it. i won't call you a tyrant, but your cruel mistreatment of your queen seems something like tyranny, since you can't produce any evidence beyond your own weak imaginings. it will make you dishonorable, even scandalous, to all the world.
oh, i've been murdered unfairly!
and be a happy mother by doing so.
be loyal to me and take her out of the room! if i were a tyrant, would she still be alive? if she knew i was a tyrant, truly, she wouldn't dare call me one. take her away!
oh lord, who's that crying?
i'm going. write to me very soon and i'll let you know what she thinks.
please don't push me. i'll go. look at your baby, my lord. she's yours. may jove send her a better protector! (to attendants) why do you put your hands on me? all of you who are so accepting of his misbehavior won't do him any good, not one of you. so, goodbye, i'm going.
that? what?
give her a kiss from me, her true love. and so, goodbye.
(to antigonus) you traitor! you put your wife up to this. my child? get rid of it! you, who have such a tender heart for it, take it away and see that it's burned immediately. you, and no one but you. do it now. within the hour i want to hear that it is done, and with witnesses, or i'll have your life, and all else that you call your own. if you refuse and will face my anger, say so. i'll dash the bastard's brains out with my own hands. go, take it to the fire, since you put your wife up to this.
oh, no, that was my lady's voice.
weak-willed fool! shallow, fickle woman!
i didn't, sir. these lords, my noble fellows, will clear my name.
help! help! oh, lady, speak again. sweet desdemona! oh sweet mistress, speak!
hello! what's the news?
we can, my royal lord. he isn't responsible for her appearance here.
i'm dying an innocent woman.
my noble king, a powerful fleet of ships sails on the western coast. many former friends of ours have gathered to meet the fleet and aren't willing to beat it back. word is that richmond is the navy's admiral. the ships are drifting off the coast, sails unfurled, only waiting for buckingham to help them come ashore.
you are all liars.
oh, who did this thing?
someone who can ride fast, go to the duke of norfolk norfolk was a york loyalist, he stood behind edward iv and richard iii, and he died fighting for richard. norfolk . you go, ratcliffe, or catesby. where is catesby?
please, your highness, we are more honorable than that. we have always served you faithfully and beg you to think of us that way. we beg you on our knees, as repayment for all our services of the past and future, that you'll change your mind. this plan is so horrible and bloody that it can only lead to something terrible.
no one. i did it myself. give my love to my kind husband. oh, goodbye!
here, my good lord.
i am asked to follow every opinion i hear. should i allow this bastard to grow up and call me father? i'd rather burn it now than curse it then. but, fine, let it live. (to anitogonus) you, sir, come here. you have interfered so kindly along with your wench in order to save this bastard's life, and i'm as certain it's a bastard as i am that your beard is gray, so what will you risk to save the brat's life?
why, how could she have been murdered?
catesby, fly to the duke.
anything that my ability will allow and that nobility would demand. i'd give what little blood i might have left to save this innocent child. i'll do whatever is possible.
my god, who knows?
i will my lord, as fast as i can.
it will be possible. swear by this sword that you will do what i demand.
you heard her say it wasn't me.
ratcliffe, come here. ride to salisbury. when you get there, (to catesby) stupid, distracted rascal, why are you still standing there? why haven't you left for the duke's?
i will, my lord.
yes, she said that. i must go report what happened.
first, mighty king, tell me what you want me to tell him.
make note of what i tell you, and perform it, because if you fail to do any part of it not only will you die, but so will your crudely outspoken wife, whom i'll pardon for now. i command you, as my loyal servant, to take this female bastard away to some deserted place far from my kingdom, and to leave it there without mercy, left to its own abilities and the whims of the weather. since it came to me because of a foreigner, it is only just that i order you, on pain of death and torture, to take it to a foreign place where luck might nurture or kill it. pick it up.
she was lying even as she was going down to hell. i did kill her.
oh, right, good catesby. tell him to gather together the greatest army he can muster in a hurry and meet me right away at salisbury.
i swear to carry out your orders, though killing her right now would have been more merciful. come on, poor baby. may some powerful angel call on the vultures and ravens to take care of you. they say that wolves and bears have given up their savageness to perform similar acts of pity. sir, be prosperous in more ways than this act deserves! (to the baby) and may a prayer against this cruel act help you, poor thing, condemned to die!
then she was even more an angel, and you're an even blacker devil!
i'm off.
no, i won't raise another man's child.
she cheated on me, and she was a whore.
what would you like me to do at salisbury?
your highness, messages from the men you sent to the oracle arrived an hour ago. cleomenes and dion have both arrived safely from delphos and are hurrying here to the court.
you slander her, you devil.
why, what is there to do before i get there?
their speed is astonishing.
she was fickle and unfaithful, like water.
your highness just told me that i should ride there before you.
they've been gone twenty-three days. their speedy return predicts that great apollo wants the truth of this matter revealed. prepare yourselves, lords. convene an open trial for this disloyal lady. since she was publicly accused, she'll have an open and just trial. while she lives my heart is heavy. leave me, and consider my orders.
you've lost your mind to accuse her of cheating. she was utterly true to you!
i changed my mind.
delphos's climate is exquisite, the air very sweet, the island fertile, and the temple is even more beautiful than people say.
cassio had sex with her. ask your husband if you doubt me. if i didn't have a good reason to do this, damn me to the very bottom of hell. your husband knew about everything.
stanley, what news do you have?
what most charmed me were the divine clothes and the great respect held by the wise men who wore them. and the sacrifice! the offering was so ceremonious, solemn, and otherworldly!
my husband!
nothing that you want to hear, my lord, but nothing so bad that i can't mention it.
of everything, the sudden and deafening voice of the oracle, like a clap of thunder, shocked me most and made me feel like i was nothing.
your husband.
well, how nice, a riddle! neither good nor bad. why do you go around in circles when you could get to the point? once again, what's the news?
if only the outcome of the journey is as successful for the queen as it was wonderful, pleasant, and quick for us, it would be a worthwhile trip.
he said she was unfaithful?
richmond is sailing on the sea.
may great apollo make all turn out well! i don't like these claims accusing hermione of faults.
yes, with cassio. if she'd been faithful to me, i never would have given her up, not even if god himself offered me a jewel as big as a planet in exchange for her.
let him sink there so the sea will cover him! lily-livered coward, what's he doing there?
the rash way it has been conducted will either clear up this business or end it. this judgment, sealed by apollo's priest, will reveal some wonderful knowledge to us once it is open.
my husband.
i don't know, mighty king. i can only guess.
we call this session with great grief and heartache. the defendant is the daughter of a king, my wife, and one i have loved too much. let me be cleared of acting like a tyrant, since i have been so open about this course of justice, whether it end in guilt or acquittal. bring out the prisoner.
yes, he's the one who first told me about her. he's an honest man who detests evil actions.
well, what do you guess?
it is the king's request that the queen appear in person in the courtroom. silence!
my husband?
that, stirred up by dorset, buckingham, and morton, he's coming to england to claim the crown.
read the indictment.
why do you keep repeating that, woman? i'm telling you, your husband.
is the throne empty? is the army without a leader? is the king dead, the empire dispossessed? what heir of the york family is there alive other than myself? and who is england's king but an heir of the great york? therefore, tell me, what is he doing at sea?
(reads) hermione, queen of the worthy leontes, king of sicilia, you are accused and arraigned for high treason, for committing adultery with polixenes, king of bohemia, and conspiring with camillo to kill our sovereign king, your royal husband. then, when the plot was accidentally discovered, you, hermione, against the duty and faith of a loyal subject, advised them to flee by night for safety, and helped them to leave.
oh, my mistress, a villain has made a mockery of your love! my husband said she was unfaithful!
unless it's what i said, your majesty, i have no idea.
since what i'm going to say must contradict this accusation and the only testimony in my favor comes from me, it hardly helps to say "not guilty." i'm believed to be a liar, so whatever i say will be considered false. but if the gods watch what we humans do, i don't doubt that innocence will win out against false accusation and tyranny. you, my lord, know that my past life has been faithful, pure, and true, though you seem to know this least of anyone. those qualities are now matched by my unhappiness, which is greater than history has ever seen, even if it were created and performed to enthrall an audience. look at me, who has slept in the royal bed, who owns part of the throne as the daughter of a great king, the mother of the prince who will one day take the throne, forced to defend my life and my honor in front of anyone who cares to come and hear. i care as much for life as i do for grief, which i could do without. honor, though, is passed down from me to my children, so i will make a stand for that. i appeal to your conscience to remember how you held me in good graces before polixenes came to court, and how i deserved to be regarded so. since he came to court, think of what was so unacceptable about my behavior that i now appear on trial. if i have acted in any way dishonorably, or even seemed inclined to do so, may all that hear me harden their hearts, and may even my closest relatives curse my grave!
yes, him, woman. i said "your husband.", do you understand that word? my friend, your husband, the honest, honest iago.
unless he's coming to be your leader you can't guess why the welshman's richmond was a descendent of the welshman owen tudor. welshman's coming? you plan to revolt and join him, i'm afraid.
the same audacity that allows someone to perform a terrible deed also lets her deny it.
if he said that, then i hope his malicious soul rots in hell forever. he's lying through his teeth! she was too attached to her filthy marriage ever to do a thing like that!
no, mighty king, do not distrust me.
that's true enough, but that has nothing to do with me.
ha!
where is your army, then, to beat him back? where are your tenants and your followers? aren't they at this very moment on the western shore helping the rebels land safely from their ships?
you won't admit it.
go ahead, do your worst. killing me won't send you to heaven. you weren't good enough for her.
no, my good lord, my friends are in the north.
i take full ownership of my faults, but i won't acknowledge any faults that aren't mine. i confess that i loved polixenes in the manner his honor required, and with a love that was befitting a lady like me, with such a love, even, as you yourself commanded. if i hadn't love him in this way, i would have been disobeying you and showing ingratitude to both you and your friend, who has loved you since childhood. now, as for conspiracy, i don't even know what it is like, even if it is being aimed at me. all i know is that camillo was an honest man, and the gods know as little as i do about why he left your court.
you'd better shut up!
then they're cold friends to me. what are they doing in the north when they should be in the west serving their king?
you knew that he was leaving, and you know what you have tried to do in his absence.
i can endure far more pain than you could ever give me! oh, you idiot! you stupid fool! as dumb as dirt! you've committed a terrible evil, i'm not afraid of your sword. i'll tell everyone what you did, even if it
they haven't been commanded to go to the west, mighty king. if your majesty would like, i'll muster up my friends and meet you wherever and whenever you like.
sir, i don't understand what you are saying. i'll give up my life, which is the target of your delusions.
costs me my life twenty times over., help, help, help! the moor's killed my mistress! murder, murder!
yes, you want to go join richmond. but i'm not going to trust you.
my "delusions" are made of your actions. you had a bastard child with polixenes, maybe i just dreamed it! you are past any shame, as women like you are, or any truth. just as i've cast out your brat, whose lack of a father is more your fault than the child's, i'll devise a punishment for you, the least of which will be death.
what's the matter? what's going on here, general?
most mighty sovereign, you have no reason to doubt my friendship. i was never disloyal, and i never will be.
sir, save your threats. i'd seek out the terrible punishment you threaten me with. life has no value for me now. having your favor was my highest goal and my comfort, and i give it up as lost now, though i don't know how. my second joy in life, my first son, is kept from me as though i have a disease. my third comfort, that unlucky child with the innocent milk still in its innocent mouth, has been taken from my breast and dragged out to be murdered. i've been publicly declared a whore, with outrageous hatred denied the rest after childbirth that all women of my rank deserve, and hurried here into the open air before i've regained my strength. now, my lord, tell me what i have to live for, and why i should fear death. go ahead. but listen to what i say, which i say not for the sake of my life but for my honor: if i am condemned on mere guesses and your jealousy without any proof, it is merely severity and not justice. your honors, i commend myself to the oracle, and let apollo be my judge!
oh, are you here, iago? you've done a good job, that other men can attribute their murders to you!
then go gather your men, but leave behind your son, george stanley. make sure your faith is firm, or he has little chance of keeping his head.
your request is just. bring forth the oracle of apollo.
what's the matter?
treat him as my loyalty toward you calls for.
if only my father, the emperor of russia, were alive and could be here to see his daughter's trial! if only he could see my misery with eyes of pity, not revenge!
(to iago) tell this villain he's wrong, if you're man enough. he says you told him his wife cheated on him. i know you didn't. you're not that much of a villain. speak, because i'm too emotional to say any more.
my noble king, my friends have informed me that sir edward courtney and his brother, the haughty bishop of exeter, are now in devonshire devonshire: a county in southwest england devonshire , where they have assembled an army.
you will swear upon this sword of justice that you, cleomenes and dion, have both been at delphos and have brought back with you the sealed oracle, delivered by great apollo's priest, and that you have not broken the holy seal nor read the secrets in it.
i told him what i thought. i didn't tell him anything that didn't make sense or ring true to him.
my king, the guildfords in kent kent: a count ysoutheast of london kent have armed themselves, and every hour new associates flock to their aid, and their army increases.
we swear all this.
but did you tell him she cheated on him?
my lord, the duke of buckingham's army, 
break the seal and read.
i did.
enough, you owls the cry of the owl was thought to be a death omen. owls ! do you have nothing but songs of death? (he strikes the third messenger) take that until you bring me better news.
(reads) hermione is chaste, polixenes is innocent, camillo is a loyal subject, leontes is a jealous tyrant, and his innocent baby is legitimately born. the king will live without an heir if the baby that was lost is not found.
then you told a lie, a sick, wicked lie. i swear on my soul it was a lie. you said she slept with cassio. did you say cassio?
the news i have to tell your majesty is that buckingham's army has dispersed from sudden floods and heavy rainfall. buckingham himself has wandered away alone to who knows where.
blessed be the great apollo!
yes, with cassio. now be quiet.
i beg your pardon. here's some money to make up for that blow i gave you. (he gives money) has any intelligent friend of ours offered a reward to whoever catches the traitor?
praise him!
i will not be quiet! i have to speak. my mistress here lies murdered in her bed, 
yes, your highness.
have you read the truth?
no, heaven forbid!
it's been reported that sir thomas lovell and lord marquess dorset have assembled an army in yorkshire yorkshire: a town in northern england yorkshire , my lord. but i bring your grace this comfort: a storm has dispersed the navy from brittany. and richmond, who is in dorsetshir dorsetshire: a county on england's south coast dorsetshir e, sent a boat to shore to ask the men on the banks if they were on his side, yes or no. they said they were with buckingham. richmond didn't trust them. he hoisted sail again and sailed back to brittany.
yes, my lord, exactly as it is written here.
and your lies caused this murder.
let's keep marching since we're prepared to fight. even if we don't fight foreign enemies, we'll beat down these rebels at home.
there is no truth in what the oracle says. the trial will proceed. these are simply lies.
don't stand there gaping, everyone. it's true.
your majesty, the duke of buckingham has been captured, that's the best news. the fact that the earl of richmond has landed in milford milford haven is on the coast of wales. milford with a mighty army is less good news, but it must be told.
my lord the king!
it may be true, but it's unbelievable.
away toward salisbury! while we're talking here, a royal battle could be won and lost. someone deliver the order that buckingham be brought to salisbury. everyone else, march on with me.
what's going on?
oh, what a horrible deed!
sir christopher, relay this message to richmond: my son george stanley is penned up in the bloody boar's sty. if i revolt, off goes young george's head. my fear of that prevents me from helping richmond at this time. but, tell me, where is the noble richmond now?
sir, you'll hate me when i tell you! the prince, your son, imagining and fearing the queen's fate, is gone.
evil, evil, evil! i can smell it! i suspected it earlier. i'll kill myself out of grief! oh, evil, evil!
at pembroke, or at harfordwest in wales.
what, gone?
are you crazy? i'm ordering you, go home.
which noblemen have joined him?
he's dead.
good gentlemen, give me permission to speak. i know i ought to obey my husband, but not now. maybe i'll never go home again, iago!
sir walter herbert, a renowned soldier; sir gilbert talbot; sir william stanley; oxford; the highly feared pembroke; sir james blunt; rice ap thomas, with a valiant crew; and many other famous and powerful noblemen. they plan to head straight to london, assuming they don't encounter any resistance on the way.
apollo is angry, and the heavens themselves strike back at my injustice.
oh! oh! oh!
(giving him a paper) return to your lord. give him my best regards. tell him the queen has given her heartfelt consent to his marriage to her daughter, elizabeth. and these letters will let him know what my thinking is. goodbye, and take care.
what now?
yes, go ahead and moan, because you killed the sweetest, most innocent woman who ever lived!
won't king richard let me speak with him?
the news is deadly to the queen. look at her and see how she is dying.
she was filthy! i barely knew you, uncle gratiano gratiano is brabantio's brother and desdemona's uncle. gratiano . here's your niece lying here dead. i killed her with these hands. i know this looks horrible.
no, my good lord. so be calm.
take her out of here. she's just overwhelmed, she'll get better. i've believed too firmly in my own suspicions. please, give her something to help her recover.
poor desdemona! i'm glad your father isn't alive to see this. your marriage made him die of grief before his time. if he was alive now, this sight would hurt
hastings and edward's children, rivers and grey, holy king henry and your fine son edward, vaughan, and all who have died from underhanded, corrupt, fiendish injustice, if your angry souls are witnessing this moment through the clouds, enjoy the revenge, laugh at my ruin! this is all-souls' a catholic day of prayer for souls stuck in between heaven and hell all-souls' day, fellows, isn't it?
apollo, forgive how i have insulted your oracle! i'll make it up to polixenes, court my queen again, and call back good camillo, whom i declare an honest and merciful man. when i was made mad by my jealousies and plotted bloody revenge, i asked camillo to poison my friend polixenes. it would have been done if camillo hadn't delayed doing it, even though i threatened to kill him if he didn't and to reward him if he did. even so, he was so humane and honorable that he revealed my plot, left his great fortunes here, and giving himself over to uncertainty, departed with only his honor. how much finer he appears next to me! and how his good deeds make my actions seem even worse!
him terribly. it would make him curse the heavens and be damned to hell.
it is, my lord.
alas! cut my corset, so that my heart, in cracking through it, won't break as well.
it's sad, but iago knows she had sex with cassio a thousand times. cassio confessed it, and she pledged her love to him by giving him the handkerchief i'd given her. i saw it in his hand. it was an old memento that my father gave to my mother.
why, then, it's my body's doomsday. today i'm going to get what i said i wished would happen to me if i was ever false to king edward's children or his wife's allies. this is the day i'm going to get what i wished for when i wished that the person i most trusted would betray me. this, this all-souls' day, is my just desserts. i tried to play games with god, and he turned my fake prayer on my head, giving me for real what i'd asked for as a joke.
what is wrong, good lady?
oh, god! dear god in heaven!
this is how god forces wicked men to turn their swords against themselves. margaret's curse has come true. "when richard has split your heart in two with grief," she said, "you'll know that margaret was a prophetess." come, sirs, bring me to this block of shame. i have done wrong, so i will suffer wrong. i have been blamed because i deserved to be.
how have you decided to torment me, tyrant? with wheels, racks, fires, or flaying? with lead or oil? all are forms of torture. wheels, racks, fires, or flaying? with lead or oil? what old or new torture must i receive, since my every word deserves the worst you could give me? think of what your jealousy, which is too silly even for boys, and too immature and foolish for a nine-year-old girl, together with your tyranny has done, and then you'll go mad! all of your earlier insanities were just a foretaste of this. your betrayal of polixenes was nothing, it just showed you to be a fickle and ungrateful fool. neither was it much that you tried to tarnish camillo's honor by commissioning him to assassinate a king. these are just small misdeeds, with a more monstrous one waiting. i suppose the fact that you threw your baby daughter to the crows is little or nothing beside this, even though a devil would have shed tears from his fiery eyes before he did that. and the death of the young prince isn't directly your fault. his heart tore in two at the thought that his gracious mother had been so disgraced by his vulgar and foolish father. this is not the worst act you'll have to answer for. but this last deed, oh, lords, when i have told you to grieve, it is because the queen, that dearest, sweetest creature, is dead, and she has not yet been avenged.
damn it, shut your mouth.
fellow soldiers and my loyal friends suffering under that tyrant richard, we have marched all the way to the center of england without encountering any opposition. and now we receive encouraging news from my stepfather stanley: richard, that violent, greedy boar who roots through your summer fields and ripening vines, guzzles your warm blood, and makes his trough in your disemboweled bellies, is now near the town of leicester, only one day's march from us here in tamworth tamworth is in central england. tamworth . in god's name, let's continue on in high spirits, my courageous friends. our aim is to achieve everlasting peace from this one violent war.
the gods forbid!
no, the truth will come out, me, shut my mouth? let heaven and men and devils tell me to shut me up. i'll say what i have to say.
every man's conscience is a thousand swords against this murderer.
i swear that she is dead. if my word and oath don't convince you, go look. if you can bring any color or life to her lip or her eye, warm her body or cause her to breathe again, i'll serve you as i would serve the gods. but, oh, you tyrant! don't try to repent now, because all your sorrow won't change it. all you can do now is despair. if you had ten thousand years to spend naked, on your knees, fasting on a barren, wintry mountain in perpetual storms, the gods wouldn't take pity on you.
if you're smart, you'll go home.
i suspect his friends will join us.
go on, you can't say too much. i've deserved all the bitterest words people can say.
i won't.
he has no friends except those who are too afraid to defy him. in his greatest need, even they will desert him.
don't say any more. however it happened, you are wrong to speak so boldly.
shame on you! drawing your sword on a woman?
all to our advantage. so, in god's name, let's march. hope with good cause is swift; it flies as fast as a swallow. it turns kings into gods and men of lower rank into kings.
i'm sorry for it. i always repent for my faults once i am aware of them. alas! i have been too rash, and he feels it in his heart. what has happened and can't be fixed should be past grieving over. don't let my words make you feel bad. i beg you, instead, to punish me for reminding you of what you should forget. now, my good and royal sir, forgive a foolish woman. the love i had for your queen, ah, i'm behaving like a fool again!, i won't speak about her anymore, or of your children, and i won't remind you of my husband, who is gone, too. be patient, and i'll be quiet.
oh, you stupid moor! i found that handkerchief by accident and gave it to my husband. he'd begged me to steal it many times.
let's pitch our tents right here in bosworth field. my lord of surrey, why do you look so sad?
you spoke best when you told the truth, and i prefer it to being pitied. please, take me to the dead bodies of my queen and son. i'll bury them in one grave, and i'll inscribe their gravestone with the cause of their death, to memorialize my shame. i'll visit the chapel where they lie daily, and my pastime will be to shed tears. i'll do it daily, as long as i am able to. come, take me to this sorrowful sight.
you evil whore!
my heart is ten times lighter than my looks.
you are sure that our ship has landed at the desert of bohemia?
you think she gave it to cassio? no, i found it and gave it to my husband.
my lord of norfolk, 
yes, my lord, and i fear we've landed at a bad time. the sky is dark, and it looks as though a storm approaches. it seems to me that the heavens are angry at what we are about to do and are unhappy with us.
you piece of filth, you're lying!
here, most gracious king.
let their sacred will be done! go aboard, and see to your ship. i'll call for you shortly.
i swear i'm not lying. (to othello) oh, you murderous fool! how did you ever get such a good wife?
norfolk, we're going to have a few blows, right?
go as quickly as you can, and don't venture too far inland. it promises to be a dreadful storm, and this area is famous for its predators.
won't heaven strike this iago dead? you absolute villain!
we've got to give them and take them, my lord.
go away. i'll be right behind you.
the woman's falling down! he's killed his wife!
put my tent up! i'll lie here tonight. but where will i lie tomorrow? well, it doesn't matter. does anyone know the number of the enemy's troops?
i'm happy to be done with this business.
yes, yes! lay me next to my mistress.
six or seven thousand, at most.
come, poor child. i've heard but never believed that the spirits of the dead might walk the earth. but perhaps it is true, because last night your mother appeared to me, and no dream ever seemed so real. she comes to me with her head to one side or the other, and i've never seen anyone so filled with sorrow and so beautiful. dressed in pure white robes, she came to my room where i was resting. she bowed three times to me, and struggling to speak, she broke into tears. once her fury was spent, these words came out: "good antigonus, since fate, against your good nature, has chosen you to cast out my child according to your oath, leave her in the remote places of bohemia. there you weep, and leave the child crying. since she is lost forever, i ask you to call her perdita latin for "lost one." perdita . because of this terrible business forced upon you, you will never see your wife paulina again." and then she disappeared, shrieking. very frightened, i finally got myself together and decided it had truly happened and wasn't a dream. dreams are just trifles, but for this once, even if it's superstition, i'll be ruled by one. i believe that hermione has died, and that this child is truly the child of king polixenes, so apollo would want her to be left, whether to life or death, on the land of her real father. blossom, fare you well! (he lays down the child and a scroll) lie there, and i'll put an account of your parentage with you. (he puts down a box) these jewels and gold will help pay for your upbringing, and if fortune pleases, leave some left over for you. (thunder) the storm is beginning. poor child, because of your mother's transgressions you are left out to die! i can't weep, but my heart bleeds, and i'm cursed for having to do this deed. farewell! the day gets worse and worse. you are likely to be lulled to sleep with a rough lullaby. i've never seen the sky look so dark during the day. what a savage noise! i'll be lucky to get on board! this is the hunt! i'm gone forever.
he's gone, and his wife's dead.
why, our troops amount to three times that. besides, the king's name is a tower of strength; the opposition doesn't have that advantage. put up my tent! come, noble gentlemen, let us look at our battle plan and get some experienced officers to help us figure out the best strategy. let's be disciplined and not delay, because tomorrow is a busy day.
i wish that the ages between sixteen and twenty-three didn't exist, or that young men would spend them asleep. otherwise there is nothing between those ages but getting girls pregnant, acting dishonestly toward their elders, stealing, fighting, look at this! would anyone but an addlebrained nineteen or twenty-two-year-old hunt in this weather? they've scared away two of my best sheep, which i'm afraid the wolf will find before i do. if i find them anywhere it'll be by the shore, eating ivy. what is this here? mercy, it's a baby, a pretty baby! a boy or a girl, i wonder? a pretty one, a very pretty one. here is the product of some forbidden affair. i'm not a scholar, but i can read the signs of a lady-in-waiting behind this. it must have been some secret sexual relationship carried out in back stairs, in large chests, or behind closed doors. the man and woman who conceived this child were more hot-blooded than the poor baby is. out of pity i'll take it, but i'll wait here until my son comes. i heard him shout just a moment ago. hallo!
he's a wicked, horrible criminal. take the moor's sword and guard the door from the outside. kill him rather than let him leave this room. i'm going after iago. he's a horrid criminal.
the sunset was golden and left a bright track in the sky, which indicates that tomorrow will be a good day. sir william brandon, you will carry my flag. bring some ink and paper to my tent, and i'll draw a model of our battle, appoint each leader to his particular command, and carefully divide up our small army. my lord of oxford, you, sir william brandon, and you, sir walter herbert, are going to stay with me. the earl of pembroke will stick with his regiment. good captain blunt, tell the earl goodnight from me, and tell him that by two in the morning i would like him to visit my tent. one more thing before you go, blunt, where is lord stanley lodging, do you know?
hallo!
i'm not that strong, if a puny nobody can grab my sword. but why should my reputation for honor last longer than my honor did? let it all go.
unless i've mistaken his battle flags, which i'm sure i haven't, his regiment lies at least half a mile south of the king's mighty army.
what, are you near? if you want to see something to talk about when you are dead and rotten, come here. what is wrong with you?
what did your song mean, lady? can you hear me? i'll die like a swan. they sing when they die. (singing) willow, willow, willow., moor, she never cheated on you. she loved you, you cruel man. i swear on my soul i'm telling the truth, and as i say this, i die.
if it's possible to do this without putting yourself in danger, dear captain blunt, say goodnight to him from me and give him this important note.
i've seen two such sights, on sea and on land! but i won't say it is a sea, since the sky is just as wet from the storm. you couldn't squeeze a needle's point between the sky and the sea.
i've got another weapon in the room. it's a spanish sword, hardened in ice cold water and razor sharp. here it is. uncle, i'm coming out!
upon my life, my lord, i'll do it. have a restful night!
why, boy, what's happening there?
(offstage) if you try that, you'll pay for it. you've got no weapon, so you'll have to suffer.
good night, dear captain blunt.
i wish you could see how it rages and rushes up the shore! but that's not the point. oh, the pitiful cries of the men, coming in and out of sight. then the ship would rise up so its mast looked like it hit the moon, and the next moment it was swallowed by the frothing waves. and then on land, i saw how the bear tore out his shoulder, and he cried to me for help. he said his name was antigonus, and he was a nobleman. but to finish telling you about the ship, you should have seen how the sea swallowed it up. but first the poor men roared, and the sea mocked them, and then the poor gentleman roared, and the bear mocked him, and they both roared louder than either the sea or the storm.
look in on me, and talk with me, or i'll attack even without a weapon.
come, gentlemen, let's discuss tomorrow's action in my tent. the night air is too raw and cold for us to stay outdoors.
goodness me, when did this happen?
what's the matter?
what time is it?
just now, i haven't even blinked since i saw these sights. the men aren't yet cold under the water, and the bear has only partly dined on the gentleman, he's still eating now.
look, i have a weapon, the best sword a soldier could have. i've fought my way through obstacles twenty times more terrifying than you with this weapon. but
it's dinnertime, my lord. it's nine o'clock.
if only i'd been close by to help the gentleman!
who can control his fate? i'm not like that now. don't be afraid, even though you see me with a weapon. this is the end of my journey, the end of my life. are you backing away in fear? there's no reason to be afraid. you could tap me with a feather and i'd back away. where would othello go?, oh, look at you! such cruel luck! you're as pale as your nightgown! when we meet on judgment day, that look of yours will send me from heaven to hell, where devils will grab me. you're cold, cold, and you were never hot with lust. oh you damned villain! whip me, you devils, so i don't have to look at this heavenly sight! blow on me with hot winds, roast me in lava, drown me in liquid fire! oh, desdemona! dead desdemona! oh, oh!
i'm not going to eat dinner tonight. give me some ink and paper. is the visor of my helmet working better now? and has my armor been put in my tent?
i wish you had been near the ship so you could have helped it, on the water you wouldn't have had a place to stand.
where is that poor rash man?
yes, my lord. everything's ready.
sad affairs, sad affairs! but look here, boy. say a blessing. while you were watching things dying, i was meeting with things newly born. here's a sight for you. look, baby clothes for a squire's child a squire was a man of relatively high social standing. squire's child ! look here, pick it up, boy, and open it. let's see what's in it. i've been told that the fairies would make me rich. this is some changeling a child said to have been swapped for another child by fairies. changeling . open it. what's in it, boy?
you mean the man who used to be othello? here i am.
my good man norfolk, hurry to your post. be careful whom you choose as guards, make sure they're trustworthy.
you are set, old man! as long as the sins of your youth have been forgiven, you'll live well. it's gold, all gold!
where's that snake? bring the villain forward.
i'm off, my lord.
this is fairy gold, boy, and will prove to be. pick it up, and hold it close. let's go home. we are lucky, boy, and to keep it that way we have to keep this matter a secret. let the sheep go. come, good boy, let's go home.
i'm looking to see if you have cloven hooves like the devil. but that's just a fairy tale. if you are a devil, i won't be able to kill you.
get up early tomorrow, at the sound of the lark, noble norfolk.
go home yourself with what you've found. i'll go see if the bear has left the gentleman and how much of him he ate. they are only vicious when they are hungry. if there is anything left of the gentleman, i'll bury it.
take his sword away from him.
i will, my lord.
that's a good deed. if you can tell by what's left of him who he was, bring me to the body.
i'm bleeding, but you didn't kill me.
catesby.
i will, and then you can help me bury him.
i'm not sorry, either. i want you to live, since to me, death is happiness.
yes, my lord?
it's a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds to mark it.
oh othello, you were once so good, then you were tricked by this villain. what can i say to you?
send a junior officer to stanley's regiment to tell stanley to bring his men here before sunrise, if he wants to see his son george alive.
i am taking up my wings, in the name of time, which pleases some, tests all, brings both joy and terror, makes errors and corrects them. don't see it as a crime that i pass quickly over sixteen years and leave that wide gap unexamined, as i have the power to overthrow the laws of nature and, in one hour, to establish or topple custom. let me remain as i've been since before civilization began through what currently is. i saw the times that led to the present, and as i did to the past, i'll make the youngest things old and dim the shine of the present until it, too, is old. if your patience allows, i'll turn my hourglass and move the scene forward as if you had slept through it all. leontes mourns the terrible results of his foolish jealousy so much that he shuts himself away. then imagine, dear spectators, that i am now in fair bohemia, where a son of the king, named florizel, lives. and quickly i'll speak of perdita, grown into a young woman so graceful she inspires admiration. i won't prophecy what will happen to her, but let time reveal it. she is a shepherd's daughter, and what pertains to her is the provenance of time. allow this leap in time if ever before now you've spent time in a worse way. if you haven't, time himself hopes you never will.
say anything. call me an honorable murderer if you like. i did nothing out of hate, only out of honor.
(to soldiers) get me some wine. get a soldier to stand watch outside my tent. saddle my white horse surrey for battle tomorrow. make sure the shafts of my lances are solid, but not too heavy. ratcliffe!
i beg you, camillo, stop being so persistent. it's terrible to deny you anything, but it would be death to grant this.
this poor guy's partly confessed his plan. did you plan cassio's death with him?
yes, my lord?
it's been sixteen years since i've seen my country. although i've lived abroad so long, i want to be buried at home. besides, my master, the king, regrets his actions and has sent for me. perhaps i can ease his grief, if i'm not too presumptuous in thinking i might, and that makes my departure all the more urgent.
yes.
did you see the gloomy lord northumberland?
if you love me, camillo, don't renounce the rest of your service to me by leaving me now. it's your own excellence that makes me need you so much. it would have been better not to have known you at all than to miss you. since you've managed matters here in a way that no one can do without you, you must either stay and see them through or take them with you. if i haven't been thankful enough, and i can't be too thankful, i'll apply myself to it even more and find my profit in your great friendship. please don't speak of that deadly country, sicilia, anymore. its very name hurts by making me remember that remorseful, as you call him, and reconciled king, whose loss of his precious queen and children should be mourned anew even now. tell me, when did you last see my son, prince florizel? kings are just as unhappy when their children are not virtuous as when they lose them after they've proved their virtues.
dear general, i never gave you any reason to hate me.
thomas, the earl of surrey, and he were moving from troop to troop around twilight cheering up the soldiers.
sir, it has been three days since i saw the prince. i don't know what happiness he might have, but i have noticed that lately he's more often absent from the court and neglectful of his princely duties than in the past.
i believe you, and i ask you to forgive me. will you please make this half-devil say why he tricked me and damned my soul?
good, i'm satisfied. give me some wine, i don't feel as energetic as i used to. set it down. is my ink and paper ready?
i have thought about this, and with some concern, camillo, so much so that i've had some of my servants keep an eye on him while he's been absent. from them i've learned that he is often at the home of a simple shepherd, a man, they say, who has gone from nothing to amazing riches, greater than any of his neighbors could have imagined.
don't ask me anything. you know what you know. from this moment on, i'll never say another word.
it is, my lord.
i've heard of such a man, sir, who has a most exceptional daughter. what people say of her is beyond what one would expect to have come from such a cottage.
what, not even to pray?
make sure my guard is on duty and leave me alone. ratcliffe, around midnight come to my tent and help me put on my armor. now leave me alone, as i said.
i've heard the same thing, and i fear that she's what takes my son there. you shall go with me to that place, and in disguise we'll question the shepherd, whose simple nature i think will make it easy to find out why my son visits there. please, be my partner in this matter and forget about sicilia.
torture will make you talk.
let fortune and victory be yours!
i willingly obey your command.
well, do your best.
i wish you all the comfort that such a dark night as this can offer, noble father-in-law. tell me, how is my mother?
wonderful camillo! we must disguise ourselves.
sir, you'll understand everything that has happened. i don't think you know now. here is a letter we found in roderigo's pocket. and here's another. this one talks about how roderigo should kill cassio.
your mother sends her blessings. she prays continually on your behalf. enough about that, morning will be here soon. to be brief, as the occasion requires, prepare to fight early in the morning, when your future will be decided. i can't do everything i want to, but i'll help you as well as i can. but i can't be too obvious about being on your side without risking the life of your stepbrother, young george. if i'm seen helping you, george will be killed right in front of my eyes. farewell. the lack of time and the risk i'm under will have to keep us from bonding and catching up on each other's news the way we usually would after not seeing each other for so long. i hope we have the time some day! again, goodbye. be brave and do well!
when daffodils begin to sprout, with the poor wench over the hills, why then it's the sweetest part of the year as red blood reigns in flesh made pale by winter. the white sheet airing out on the hedge, and oh, the sweet birds singing, makes my thieving fingers itch, and a quart of beer is a drink for a king! the lark chants "tirra-lyra," and the thrush and the jay sing, while my mistress and i tumble about in the hay. i have served prince florizel and worn three-piled velvet a luxuriously thick type of velve. three-piled velvet , but now i'm unemployed. but should i mourn for that, my dear? the pale moon shines at night, and in wandering here and there, i take the right course through life. if menders of metal pots have the right to live and bear the burden of their tool bag, then i can tell my own story and in the stocks a form of punishment in which a person was locked into a wooden device, called the stocks, in public to be exposed to ridicule the stocks . i deal in sheets, and when the thieving bird builds his nest, he takes up poorer linen. my father named me autolycus in greek myth, autolycus was the grandfather of odysseus and a cunning thief autolycus . like me he was born under mercury the god of thieves. mercury , and like me he would steal those little things left unsecured. by gambling and pimping i bought this outfit, and my income is from little deceptions. being a highwayman might get me hanged or beat, which are terrors to me, and as for the afterlife, i try not to think about it. oh, look, a prize!
oh, you villain!
good lords, escort him to his regiment. i'm going to try to take a nap despite my racing thoughts so that exhaustion won't get the better of me tomorrow, when i'll need to ride as if my horse had wings. again, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
let's see. every eleven sheep gives about twenty-eight pounds of wool. every twenty-eight pounds of wool earns a pound and some shillings. if we've shorn fifteen hundred sheep, how much does that come to?
ungodly and monstrous!
oh god, whose side i think i'm fighting on, look kindly on my forces. fuel them with dangerous fury, so they can crush the enemy. make us your agents of revenge, so we can praise you when we're victorious! before i fall asleep, i entrust my soul to you. defend me, god, both when i'm asleep and when i'm awake. he sleeps.
(aside) if the trap holds, the bird is mine.
here's another letter from his pocket, addressed to iago and full of complaints. we think he was going to send it to iago, but then iago stepped in and answered his complaints by killing him.
(to richard) i will weigh heavily on your soul tomorrow. remember how you stabbed me at tewksbury, when i was just a young man. despair, and die! (to richmond) be cheerful, richmond, butchered princes fight for you. i, king henry's son, will provide you with comfort.
i can't do it without something to add it up. let's see, what do i need to buy for our sheep-shearing feast a traditional summer event in rural england at the time. sheep-shearing feast ? three pounds of sugar, five pounds of currants, rice. what does my sister need rice for? but my father has put her in charge of the feast, and she is doing a good job with it. she's made twenty-four small bouquets for the shearers, who can all sing three-part songs, and very well. but they are mostly tenors and basses, and one is so saintly he sings psalms for dances. i have to get saffron to color the pear pies. do i need mace a spice derived from the same fruit as nutmeg. mace and dates? no, that's not on my list. seven nutmegs, some ginger root, though i might be able to get that for free, and four pounds each of prunes and raisins.
oh, you wicked scoundrel! cassio, how did you get my wife's handkerchief?
(to richard) when i was still alive, you punctured my body, the body of god's blessed king, full of holes. remember the tower and me there. despair, and die! harry the sixth commands you to despair and die! (to richmond) because you are virtuous and holy, you must be the conqueror! harry, who prophesied that you would be king, comforts you in your sleep: live and prosper!
oh, that i was ever born!
i found it in my room, and iago just confessed that he put it there for his own purposes.
(to richard) i hope i weigh heavily on your soul tomorrow! it's me, drowned to death in a nauseating barrel of wine. it's me, poor clarence, whom you betrayed to death! tomorrow in battle, think of me and drop your useless sword. despair, and die! (to richmond) offspring of the house of lancaster, the wronged heirs of york pray for you. good angels protect your fight! live and prosper!
what in the world, 
oh, what a fool i am!
(to richard) i will weigh heavily on your soul tomorrow, i, rivers, who died at pomfret. despair, and die!
oh, help me! take off these rags, and then i can die!
also, in his letter to iago, roderigo criticizes iago for telling him to get me angry while i was on guard duty, and get me demoted. and just now he admitted it, even though he'd seemed to be dead for a long while, iago tricked him, iago urged him to do it.
(to richard) think about grey, and despair!
alas, poor soul! you need more rags to cover you, not to take your rags off.
(to othello) you'll have to leave this room and come with us. you're stripped of your power and your command, and cassio will govern cyprus. as for this slave, iago, if we can think of any torture that will hurt him a lot but keep him alive a long time, he'll have it. you'll remain a prisoner until we bring your crimes to the venetian government., okay, take him away.
(to richard) think about vaughan, and drop your lance from fear and guilt. despair, and die!
oh, sir, their awfulness offends me more than the blows i received, which were numerous and painful.
wait. a word or two before you go. i've given the state of venice a bit of help in the past, and they know it. but enough about that. when you record these sad events in your letters, please describe me exactly as i am. don't tone things down or exaggerate them out of hostility. if you're being fair, you'll have to describe me as someone who loved too much, but who wasn't wise about it. i was not easily made jealous, but once i was tricked and manipulated, i worked myself into a frenzy. describe me as a fool who threw away a precious pearl with his own hands, like a silly indian who didn't know what it was worth. as someone who was not emotional, but who then cried a lot. write all this
(to richmond) awaken, and have faith that the wrongs richard carries in his heart will defeat him! awaken, and win the day!
alas, poor man! to have suffered a million blows is a serious problem.
down, and then say also that in aleppo i once saw a turk beating a venetian, so i grabbed the turk by the throat and hit him like this.
(to richard) dream about your nephews, smothered in the tower. let us rest in your heart as heavily as lead, richard, and drag you down to ruin, shame, and death! your nephews' souls command that you despair and die! (to richmond) sleep, richmond, sleep in peace and wake in joy. good angels will protect you from the boar's attacks! live, and give birth to a whole, happy race of kings! edward's unlucky sons want you to flourish.
i've been robbed, sir, and beaten, my money and clothes taken from me, and these horrible rags put on me instead.
oh, what a bloody end to all this!
(to richard) you violent, guilty man, wake up full of guilt and end your days in a bloody battle! think about lord hastings. despair, and die! (to richmond) quiet untroubled soul, wake up! arm yourself, fight, and win for beautiful england's sake!
what, by a man on horse or on foot?
everything we've heard is bad.
(to richard) richard, your wife, your wretched wife, anne, who never enjoyed a quiet hour of sleep with you, now fills your sleep with disturbing thoughts. tomorrow in battle think of me and fall on your sword: despair, and die! (to richmond) you quiet soul, sleep a quiet sleep. dream of success and happy victory. your enemy's wife is praying for you.
a man on foot, sweet sir, on foot.
(to desdemona) i kissed you before i killed you. now, killing myself, i'm dying while i kiss you again.
(to richard) i was the first to help you to the crown and the last to feel the effects of your tyranny. think of buckingham when you're fighting tomorrow, and die terrified of the sins you've committed! tonight, dream of bloody deeds and death. tomorrow, when you lose heart, fall into despair and then death. (to richmond) i died before i could help you as i was hoping to. but be cheerful and don't worry. god and good angels fight on your side, and richard will fall at the height of his false pride.
indeed, he should be a man on foot, judging by those clothes. if it were the coat of a man on a horse, it has seen some terrible service. give me your hand, and i'll help you. here, give me your hand.
i was afraid this would happen, because he was a noble, brave man, but i didn't think he had a weapon.
give me another horse! bandage my wounds! have mercy, jesus!, wait, i was only dreaming. oh cowardly conscience, how you're torturing me! the candles burn blue, that means it's the dead of night. i'm sweating and trembling with fear. but what am i afraid of? myself? there's no one else here. richard loves richard, that is, there's just me and myself here. is there a murderer here? no. yes, i am. then run away. what, from myself? yes, to avoid taking revenge on myself. unfortunately, i love myself. why? did i do anything good to myself? oh, no. alas, i hate myself instead, because of the hateful deeds i've committed. i am a villain. but i'm lying; i'm not a villain. fool, speak well of yourself. fool, do not flatter yourself.
oh, good sir, be gentle!
(to iago) you bloodthirsty dog, you're crueler than sadness or hunger, crueler than the sea. look at these dead people on this bed. you did all this. he makes me sick. take him away. gratiano, take care of the house, and take the moor's property. you've inherited everything., (to cassio) governor, i leave it in your hands to punish this evil villain: just decide the time, the place and the means of torture. and then carry it out! i have to go back to venice, and tell them about these sad events.
give me another horse! bandage my wounds! have mercy, jesus!, wait, i was only dreaming. oh cowardly conscience, how you're torturing me! the candles burn blue, that means it's the dead of night. i'm sweating and trembling with fear. but what am i afraid of? myself? there's no one else here. richard loves richard, that is, there's just me and myself here. is there a murderer here? no. yes, i am. then run away. what, from myself? yes, to avoid taking revenge on myself. unfortunately, i love myself. why? did i do anything good to myself? oh, no. alas, i hate myself instead, because of the hateful deeds i've committed. i am a villain. but i'm lying; i'm not a villain. fool, speak well of yourself. fool, do not flatter yourself.
alas, poor soul!
my lord.
oh, good sir, carefully! i'm afraid my shoulder might be dislocated.
if only we had divine inspiration, our play might rise to the highest level of imagination. if we had a stage as big as a kingdom, real kings and queens to act the part of kings and queens, and royalty to also witness the glorious spectacle, then it would be as it really was. then valiant king harry would resemble the god of war, as he did in life, and famine, sword, and fire would sit like dogs at his feet, waiting to be unleashed. but, ladies and gentlemen, since that's not the case, you must forgive us plain, ordinary men who dare to act out so great a story on this humble stage. can this theater seem to contain the sweeping fields of france? could we even squeeze into this little theater the helmets that looked so frightening at agincourt? hardly! but, pardon us, because just as a few strokes of a pen, a few zeros, can signify a huge number, we, who are zeros in this great story, can work on your imagination. pretend that within the confines of this theater sit two great kingdoms divided by a narrow but perilous ocean. let your thoughts make up for our imperfections. divide each man into a thousand, and there you will have an imaginary army. imagine, when we talk of horses, that you see them planting their proud hooves in the soft earth. because now it is your thoughts that must dress up our kings and transport them from place to place. your thoughts must leap over huge spans of time, turning the events of many
damn it, who's there?
what else? can you stand?
years into the space of a few hours. to that end, consider me a sort of chorus, here to help tell the story. and, as the speaker of any prologue should, i ask you to hear our play courteously and to judge it kindly.
ratcliffe, my lord, it's me. the rooster has already crowed twice. your friends are up and buckling on their armor.
(picking the yokel's pocket) careful, dear sir, careful. you have done me a charitable deed.
my lord, this bill that's being proposed is the same one that was proposed in the eleventh year of old king henry's reign. everyone thought it would pass then, and it probably would have had it not been for the great civil unrest and uncertainty of the time, which required the matter to be put off.
oh ratcliffe, i had a terrifying dream! what do you think, will my friends prove loyal?
do you need money? i have a little i can give you.
but how will we keep it from being passed now, my lord?
no doubt, my lord.
no, good kind sir, i beg you. i have a relative less than a mile from here whom i was going to visit. he can give me money or whatever i need. please, don't offer me money. that kills me.
we have to think about that. if it does pass, the church will lose more than half of what it possesses, because the bill would strip us of enough real estate left to the church by wealthy, pious men in their wills to support fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights, six thousand two hundred squires, and a hundred well-supplied almshouses for the relief of lepers, old-age pensioners, the poor, and those too weak or sick to work. add to that a yearly sum of a thousand pounds to go directly into the king's coffers. that's what the bill says.
oh ratcliffe, i'm afraid, i'm afraid, 
what did the fellow who robbed you look like?
that would be quite a drain.
no, my good lord, don't be afraid of dreams.
a fellow, sir, that i have known to go about with prostitutes. i know he was once a servant of the prince. i'm not sure, good sir, for which of his virtues it was, but he certainly got whipped out of court.
it would drain us dry.
by st. paul, ghosts have struck more terror in my soul tonight than ten thousand of worthless richmond's soldiers could, dressed up in their most sword-proof armor. it's not yet daylight. come with me; i'll spy under the tents to see if any of my own people plan to desert me.
vices, you mean, since virtues aren't whipped out of court. they cherish virtues there, and yet they won't stay there long.
but what can be done to prevent it?
good morning, richmond.
i would say vices, sir. i know this man well. since he left he has been a performer with a monkey, then a summons server, a bailiff, and then he came up with a puppet show about the prodigal son, and then he married a pot-mender's wife within a mile of my property. having entered and abandoned all these disreputable professions, he finally settled on being a rogue. some call him autolycus.
the king is virtuous and kind.
pardon me, lords and gentlemen who stayed awake. you've caught me oversleeping.
a curse on him! a crook, upon my life, a crook. he lingers about funerals, fairs, and bear-baitings.
and a true lover of the holy church.
how did you sleep, my lord?
very true, sir, that's him, the rogue that put me in these clothes.
you wouldn't have expected it based on how he acted as a youth. but no sooner had his father stopped breathing than the prince's wildness died too. really, at that precise moment he gained a capacity for reflection, which appeared like an angel to chase away the sinful part of him, leaving his body like a paradise, fit to house only lofty thoughts and feelings. you never saw anyone become serious and studious so quickly. you never saw such a total transformation, as though a wild river, rushing through, had swept away his faults. such a collection of stubborn character flaws was never banished from one place so suddenly as in the case of this king.
since you left, i've been enjoying the sweetest sleep and most promising dreams i've ever had, my lords. i dreamed the souls of the people richard murdered came to my tent and promised me victory. i tell you, i feel very jolly remembering such a beautiful dream. how late is it, lords?
there's no more cowardly rogue in all of bohemia. if you had looked large and had spit at him, he would have run.
we are fortunate in the change.
it's almost four.
i have to confess to you, sir, i'm not a fighter. i'm too faint at heart, and i'm sure he knew it.
if you just listen to him discuss theological matters, you'll find yourself thinking privately what an excellent bishop he would make. hear him debate matters of domestic policy, and you'd swear he had made them his constant study. listen to him talk about war, and you'll hear elegant and thrilling accounts of the battles. bring up any political topic, and he'll untangle it as easily as if it were his own garter a garter was a band used to hold up stockings or shirt sleeves. garter . and the result is that when he speaks, the very air, which is free to go where it likes, stops dead, and men stand in silent wonder, hoping to catch the benefit of his gorgeous utterances. there must be skill and experience behind all this abstract thought, but it's anyone's guess how he obtained it, since in his youth he preferred shallow pursuits, with uneducated, crude and superficial companions. he spent his time drunken, overfed, and constantly seeking out entertainment, with no inclination for learning or quiet contemplation, nor any limit to his tolerance for public haunts and crowds.
why, then, it's time to put on my armor and instruct the troops. (to his soldiers) i can't tell you much right now, loyal countrymen, because we don't have time. but know this:
how are you now?
strawberries grow underneath nettle plants, and berries grow best when they're planted next to inferior fruit. in the same way, the prince hid his serious side under the guise of wild behavior. just like summer grass, which grows fastest during the night, this sober quality was able to grow and thrive all the better for being undetected.
we have god and a good cause on our side. the prayers of saints and those that richard wronged support us like high-walled fortresses. other than richard, even those whom we fight against would rather we won. because who is this man they follow? truly, gentlemen, a violent tyrant and a murderer, who rose to his high position by shedding blood and kept the position the same way. he rose to the top by means of others and then slaughtered them. he's like a worthless stone, who only seems like a valuable gem because he's on the throne, where he doesn't belong. he has always been god's enemy. and when you fight god's enemy, god will protect you. if you struggle to bring down a tyrant, you will sleep peacefully when the tyrant is killed. when you fight against your country's enemies, you will be paid for your efforts with your country's wealth. if you fight to protect your wives, your wives will welcome you home as conquerors. when you free your children from the sword, your grandchildren will repay you in your old age. so, in the name of god and all the good that will come of this battle in the middle ages, noblemen taken in battle often could go free afterward if they paid the enemy. richmond says if richard captures him, he will die rather than pay for his freedom. battle , march with your flags high and draw your swords. as for me, if i fail, the only ransom i will offer the enemy is my corpse. but if i succeed, every one of you will share in the profit. play boldly and cheerfully, drummers and trumpeters. here's to god and saint george! to richmond and victory!
kind sir, much better now than before. i can stand on my own and walk. i'll even say goodbye to you, and make my way carefully to my relative's home.
that must be it, because the age of miracles is passed, and we have to find reasonable explanations for why these things happen.
what did northumberland say about richmond?
shall i help you there?
but tell me, my lord: as to the softening of this bill proposed by the house of commons, does his majesty favor it or not?
that he was never trained as a soldier.
no, pretty sir. no, kind sir.
he seems neutral, perhaps leaning a little more toward our side than that of our opponents, since i've made his majesty an offer, following a meeting with our fellow bishops. the offer regards certain matters having to do with france that his grace and i have been discussing. my offer would involve us giving him a greater sum than the clergy ever gave at one time to any of his predecessors.
that's true. and what did surrey say to that?
then best of luck to you. i have to go buy spices for our sheep-shearing.
how did he take the offer, my lord?
he smiled and said, "the better for us."
may you prosper, sweet sir!
favorably, except that there wasn't enough time for his grace to hear, as i sensed he would have liked to, the details about how he is rightfully entitled to certain dukedoms in france, and to the throne of france in general, through clear lines of descent originating with his great-grandfather, edward iii.
he's right, and that's how it is.
your purse is not full enough to purchase your spices. i'll join you at your sheep-shearing, too. if i don't make this deception lead to another and prove the shearers as stupid as sheep, let me be removed from the list of thieves and my name become known for virtue!
what kept you from telling him this?
read the time there. give me an almanac. (looking in an almanac) did anyone see the sun today?
jog on, jog on, along the foot-path, and merrily grasp the gate. a merry heart can go all day, a sad heart tires after just a mile.
the french ambassador arrived at that moment and asked to see the king. and, in fact, i think they're meeting together right now. is it four o'clock?
i didn't, my lord.
your festival clothes give you a new look. no longer a shepherdess, but the goddess of flowers appearing at the beginning of april. your sheep-shearing is like a meeting of minor gods, and you are the queen of them.
it is.
then it refuses to shine. according to this almanac, it should have risen an hour ago. it'll be a black day for somebody today. ratcliffe!
my gracious lord, it doesn't suit me to rebuke you for exaggerations. oh, pardon me for naming them! you, the one whose charms make him admired by the public, have hidden yourself in rustic clothing, while i, just a poor lowly girl, am made up like a goddess. if there weren't foolishness at every table during our feasts, and if people weren't accustomed to such foolishness by now, i'd feel embarrassed to see you dressed like that and would faint to see myself in the mirror.
then let's go in and hear what he has to say, though i think i can guess before the frenchman has uttered a word.
my lord?
i bless the day when my hunting bird flew across your father's land.
i'll accompany you. i'm also eager to hear it.
the sun will not appear today. the sky frowns and scowls on our army. i wish there wasn't so much dew on the ground. so, the sun won't shine today! well, why should that be worse for me than it is for richmond? the same heaven that's frowning on me looks gloomily on him.
now may jove give you reason to be glad! for me the difference in rank between us fills me with dread, though you in your greatness aren't used to fear. even now i tremble to think that your father might by some accident pass this way, like you did. oh, the fates! how would he look when he discovered that his noble son was so humbly dressed! what would he say? how should i, in this borrowed finery, look upon his stern presence?
where is my gracious lord of canterbury?
get ready, my lord. the enemy is making its appearance on the battlefield.
imagine only happiness. the gods themselves have taken on the form of beasts when they're in love. jupiter became a bull and bellowed; neptune became a ram and bleated. and the god of the sun, golden apollo, became a humble shepherd just as i appear today. but their transformations were never for someone so beautiful, and neither were their loves as chaste as mine, because my desires are secondary to my honor, and my faith burns hotter than my lusts.
he's not here.
hurry, hurry, prepare my horse. tell lord stanley to bring his army. i will lead my soldiers to the field and the battle formation will be like this: the vanguard will extend in a line that is equal parts horsemen and foot soldiers. the archers will stay in the middle. john duke of norfolk and thomas earl of surrey will lead the horsemen and foot soldiers. i'll follow in the center of the troop formation, which i'll defend with my best horse, and with saint george on my side, as well! what do you think, norfolk?
but sir, your feelings toward me might falter when they are opposed, as they must be, by the power of the king. then one of the two must happen: either you will change your feelings or i will lose my life.
send for him, dear uncle.
a good plan, warrior king. i found this pinned to my tent this morning.
dearest perdita, don't let these farfetched thoughts dampen the high-spirits of the feast. i'll be yours, my fair love, and not my father's. i can't be myself, or anything to anyone, if i'm not yours. my feelings won't change, even if destiny says we are not to be together. be happy, dearest. get rid of these thoughts by busying yourself with something else. your guests are coming. look happy, as if it were the day we're getting married, as we've sworn we will.
shall we call in the ambassador, my liege?
i found this pinned to my tent this morning.
oh, fortune, remain favorable!
not yet, cousin. before i hear him, i want to decide some important issues that are on my mind concerning my throne and france.
(reads) "jackie of norfolk, don't be too bold, for dick your master has been betrayed." something the enemy devised. go, gentleman, every man to his command. don't let babbling dreams frighten us, conscience is just a word that cowards use to intimidate the strong. the strong fight we put on will be our conscience, our swords will be our law.
see, your guests are approaching. prepare yourself to entertain them in a lively manner, and let's be red-faced from all our laughter.
may god and his angels guard your sacred throne and grant that you dignify it for a long time.
march on, be brave in battle, and let's go pell-mell to heaven, if not hand in hand to hell. (to his army) what more can i say? remember who you're dealing with, a random bunch of bums, rascals, runaways, breton scum, and peasant hangers-on whom an overcrowded nation vomits out to populate every desperate, sure-to-fail enterprise. you have been sleeping soundly, and they bring unrest. you own land they want to steal. those of you who are blessed with beautiful wives, they want to defile them. and who's leading them but an inconsequential fellow who for the longest time lived in brittany at his mother's expense? a girly man, a man who never in his life felt more cold than seeps into one's boots in the snow? let's send these stragglers back over the sea. let's whip these arrogant relics of france, these starving beggars, tired of their lives, who would have hanged themselves, poor rats, if it weren't for this foolish enterprise they've been dreaming about, back to france. if we're going to be conquered, let men conquer us, and not these french bastards whom our forefathers already beat, thrashed, and pummeled on their own turf, and shamed them forever in the history books. should these people enjoy our lands? sleep with our wives? rape our daughters?
oh, daughter, when my old wife was still alive, on this day she was a pantry maid, butler, cook, mistress of the house, and servant. she welcomed all, served all, would sing her song and dance her share. she would sit first at the head of the table, then in the middle. she'd be on this man's shoulder, and then on that one's. her face would be red from work and what she drank to quench her thirst, and she would drink a toast to each person. you are withdrawn, as if you were a guest and not the hostess of this party. please, welcome these strangers so that we can become better acquainted. come, stop blushing and present yourself as that which you are: the mistress of the feast. come on and welcome us to your sheep-shearing, so that your flock will prosper.
thank you, i'm sure. my learned lord, kindly explain to us the legal and religious grounds for why this french salic law either should or shouldn't bar me in my claim. and god forbid, my dear and faithful lord, that you should invent, twist, or distort your interpretation, or burden your conscience by subtly arguing for false claims. for god knows how many healthy men will shed their blood in support of whatever you persuade me to do. so think carefully before you incite me
listen! i hear their drums. fight, gentlemen of england! fight, brave landlords! draw your bows all the way back, archers! spur your proud horses hard, horsemen, and ride in blood. startle even the sky with the sound of your lances cracking.
(to polixenes) sir, welcome. my father wishes me to be the hostess here today.
to wage war. i charge you, in the name of god, be careful what you say. for mighty kingdoms such as england and france have never gone to war with one another without much bloodshed, every innocent drop of which cries out against the wrongdoer who caused such loss of life without good reason. with this in mind, speak, my lord. and i will listen, consider, and earnestly believe that what you say is spoken with a conscience as pure as a newly baptized soul.
what does lord stanley say? will he bring his army?
you are welcome here, sir. give me those flowers there, dorcas. honored sirs, for you there are rosemary and rue rosemary is an herb that symbolizes remembrance, while rue is an herb that symbolizes repentance and grace. rosemary and rue , which keep their appearance and scent all through the winter. may you both have grace and remembrance, and welcome to our shearing!
then hear me, gracious sovereign, and all you peers who owe your lives and duty to this imperial throne. there is no legal obstacle to your highness's claim to france except the following rule, which the french cite from king pharamond: in terram salicam mulieres ne succedant (no woman shall inherit property in the salic land). the french wrongly interpret "the salic land" to mean france, and they cite pharamond as the founder of this law that bars female succession to the throne. but their own authors assert that the salic land is in germany, between the sala and the elbe rivers, where charles the great left behind certain french settlements after conquering the saxons. the french settlers despised the german women because they were unfaithful to their husbands, so the settlers passed this law that no woman should have right of inheritance in salic land. and the salic land, the region between the elbe and the sala, in germany, as i said, is now called meissen. it is clear, then, that the salic law was not
my lord, he refuses to come.
fair shepherdess, since we are old, you do well to pair us with winter flowers refers to the common metaphor comparing the stages of life to the seasons, with winter being old age. winter flowers .
intended for the realm of france. nor did the french possess the salic land until four hundred twenty-one years after the death of king pharamond, incorrectly thought to be the founder of the law. he died in the year , and charles the great conquered the saxons and settled frenchmen in the region beyond the river sala in the year . besides, according to the french historians, king pepin, who deposed childeric, based his own claim to the crown of france on his descent from blithild, the daughter of king clothair. another case: hugh capet, who usurped the crown from charles the duke of lorraine, sole male heir in a direct line from charles the great, passed himself off as heir to lady lingare, daughter of charlemagne, who was the son of lewis the emperor (who was the son of charles the great), in order to give his claim to the throne more validity (though, in fact, the claim was completely false and worthless). another case: king lewis the tenth, who was sole heir to the usurper capet, could not rest easy as king until he was assured that queen isabel, his grandmother, was a direct descendent of the lady ermengare, daughter of the aforementioned charles duke of lorraine, by which marriage the line of charles the great was reunited with the throne of france. thus, it should be clear as day that king pepin's title, hugh capet's claim, and the resolution of king lewis's doubts all plainly derive from the female.
off with his son george's head!
sir, the year is growing old, with the summer not yet over and the winter not yet starting. the fairest flowers of this season are carnations and two-toned gillyflowers, which some call nature's bastards. but we don't have any of those flowers in our garden, and i don't care to get any cuttings of them.
to this day, the kings of france follow this unspoken rule, even though they point to this salic law to bar your highness from inheriting it through the female line. they prefer to obscure matters rather than reveal how corrupt their own claims to the french crown are. they usurped that crown from you and your ancestors.
my lord, the enemy has already passed the marsh. let george stanley die after the battle.
kind maiden, why do you reject them?
can i justifiably and in good conscience make this claim?
a thousand hearts beat in my chest. let's advance our flags, set upon our enemies, and have our ancient saint of courage, good saint george, inspire us with the fury of fiery dragons! let's go! victory is with us.
because i've heard that their many colors are due as much to cross-breeding as to nature.
if not, mighty sovereign, let the blame be mine. for it is written in the book of numbers: "when the man dies, let the inheritance descend unto the daughter." gracious lord, claim what is yours. unfurl your banners of war. take your mighty ancestors as models. go to the tomb of your great-grandfather, from whom your own title to the crown derives. invoke his warlike spirit and that of edward the black prince, your great-uncle, who fought a tragic battle on french soil, routing the french army in full force while his mighty father stood by on a hilltop, smiling to see his son steeped in the blood of french noblemen. o noble english, who could take on the entire french army with only half their forces, leaving the other half to stand by, idle and laughing.
help, my lord of norfolk, help, help! the king performs more wonders than seem humanly possible, challenging every enemy he sees. his horse is killed, so he's fighting on foot, risking his life to search out richmond. help, dear lord, or the battle will be lost!
perhaps that's true. but any technique used to improve nature is itself made by nature, so any form of artifice that adds to nature is really a natural artifice. you see, sweet maid, we marry a more noble stem to a wild stem, so that a lesser plant produces one that is superior. this is an art that improves nature, or rather changes it, but the art itself is natural.
awaken the memory of those valiant ancestors and with your own powerful arm make their deeds live again. you are their heir and sit on their throne, and the blood and courage that glorified them run in your veins. you, my most powerful sovereign, are in the very prime of youth, ripe for glorious deeds and great enterprises.
a horse, a horse, i'd give my kingdom for a horse!
so it is.
the other kings throughout the world all expect you to take the offensive, just like your lion-hearted forebears.
get off the field, my lord. i'll find you another horse.
then fill your garden with gillyflowers, and don't call them bastards.
they know your grace has justification, as well as the money and military strength. and so you do. no king of england was ever backed by wealthier nobles or more loyal subjects. their bodies may remain here in england, but their hearts are encamped on the fields of france already.
peasant, i have gambled my life on this one throw of the dice, and i'm willing to take what comes. i think there are six richmonds on the field. i've killed five that looked like him, anyway. a horse, a horse! i'd give my kingdom for a horse!
i won't put a shovel in the dirt to plant a single one of them, just as i wouldn't want this youth here to think i'm attractive and want to sleep with me only because i'm wearing makeup. here are flowers for you: lavender, mint, savory, marjoram, and the marigold, which sets with the sun and rises with it filled with dew. these are flowers that bloom in the middle of summer, and i think they should be given to men of middle age. you're very welcome here. (she gives them flowers.)
oh, let their bodies follow, my dear king, to win back what's rightfully yours with blood and sword and fire. and to that end, we, the clergy, will raise your highness a sum greater than your ancestors were ever given at any one time.
god and your work be praised, victorious friends. the day is ours. the bloody dog is dead.
if i were part of your flock, i would stop grazing and instead gaze on you as my only nourishment.
we must not only arm ourselves to invade france, but must also apportion troops to defend against invasion by the scots, who will see this as a perfect opportunity to attack.
(offering him the crown) courageous richmond, you fought well. here, i've taken back the stolen crown from that violent lowlife so it can grace your brows. wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.
oh, not at all! you'd be so skinny that the icy winds of january would blow right through you. (to florizel) now, my fairest friend, i wish i had flowers of the spring that would match your age, (to mopsa and dorcas) and yours, and yours, who are still in your adolescence. oh, proserpina, if only we had the flowers that you, frightened, let fall from dis's chariot in greek myth, proserpina was abducted by dis, also known as pluto, while she was collecting flowers. proserpina, if only we had the flowers that you, frightened, let fall from dis's chariot ! daffodils that bloom before the swallows dare return from the south, and that charm the winds of march with their beauty. modest violets that are sweeter than juno's eyes juno was the roman name for hera, zeus's wife and queen of the gods. juno's eyes or cytherea's breath roman name for venus, goddess of love. cytherea's breath . pale primroses that die unmarried, before they can see the bright sun at full strength, a sickness that often affects young women. bold oxlips and the crown imperial lily, lilies of all kinds, the flower-de-luce or fleur-de-lis. flower-de-luce being one! oh, if only i had these flowers to make garlands and to throw over my sweet friend!
your subjects in the north, gracious sovereign, will provide a wall of defense against scottish thieves across the border.
great god of heaven, say amen to all this! but, tell me, is young george stanley alive?
what, like a corpse?
i don't mean merely bands of thieves. what we have to worry about is a full-scale invasion from scotland, always an unreliable neighbor. you'll find that my great-grandfather never went to war with france without scotland making an attack on his undefended kingdom, pouring in full force like the tide through a gap in a dyke, troubling the depleted country with violent attacks, and laying siege to towns and castles. the whole of england, being unprotected, trembled with fear.
he is, my lord, and safe in leicester, where, if you'd like, we can retreat to.
no, like a riverbank for love to lie and play on. not like a corpse, or, if so, not one to be buried, but one alive and in my arms. come, take your flowers. i think i am playing as i've seen them do during whitsun a religious feast celebrated seven sundays after easter. whitsun festivities. this outfit i'm wearing certainly changes my attitude.
but the country was more frightened than hurt, my liege. take this example: when all its knights have been in france and all its noblemen absent, england has not only defended itself well, but actually seized the scottish king and penned him up like a stray dog. then he was sent off to france. he enhanced king edward's fame, adding royalty to his captives and thus making england's own history as rich with glory as the muddy floor of the sea is rich with sunken ships and innumerable treasures.
which gentlemen on each side have been killed?
what you do is always better than what is normally done. when you speak, sweet, i'd have you do it forever. when you sing, i'd have you buy and sell with songs, and give alms, pray, and arrange your affairs with singing. when you dance, i wish you were a wave in the sea, so that you would only ever do that and have no other purpose in life. everything you do is so perfect that whatever you do is the best.
but here's an old, true saying: "if you want to win france, start with scotland." for when the eagle england leaves her nest to seek prey, the weasel scot always comes sneaking around to suck dry her princely eggs and, like the mouse when the cat's away, destroy more than she can actually eat.
john duke of norfolk, walter lord ferrers, sir robert brakenbury, and sir william brandon.
oh, doricles the fake name florizel is using. doricles , you praise me too much. if your youth and your noble character didn't shine through your disguise and reveal your purity, i might worry that you were trying to lead me astray.
it would follow from this that the cat should stay home. but that is a false conclusion, since we have locks to keep our valuables safe and clever traps to catch little thieves. while the armed hand fights in foreign lands, the wise head defends itself at home. for though the state is divided into different levels and functions, it all works in agreement for a unified purpose, a natural and perfect end such as we find in music.
bury them in a manner appropriate to their noble births. proclaim that i'll pardon the soldiers who fled if they will return and submit to my rule. as i vowed, i will unite the york and lancaster families.
i think you have as little cause to fear as i have intention to make you feel afraid. but come, dance with me please. give me your hand, my perdita, just as turtledoves pair for life and never part from one another.
that is why god divided humanity into various functions, so as to keep human endeavor moving ever forward, the one single fixed element, the aim, being obedience. honey bees operate in just such a communal way. in fact, you can learn a lot about how to run a well-ordered kingdom from these creatures. they have a king and officers of sorts. some, like magistrates, dole out punishment at home, while others venture forth for commerce, like merchants. still others, armed like soldiers with stingers, pillage the summer flowers, bringing the booty triumphantly home to the royal tent of their emperor, who is preoccupied with governing. the emperor supervises the masons as they build gold roofs, the ordinary citizens as they process the honey, the humble laborers as they crowd through the city's narrow gate with their heavy burdens, and the solemn-looking judge (with his grouchy hum) as he delivers lazy, unproductive drones to pale executioners. from this, i conclude that many different elements can work toward one common end, just as many arrows, shot from different points, converge on a single target; just as many roads meet in a single town; just as many fresh streams empty into only one salt sea; just as the many radiuses of a sundial a sundial is a device that tells time, with a straight edge casting a shadow on a flat metal plate. sundial unite at its center. just so, a thousand actions, once set in motion, will result in one desired object, and all will be well carried out and have a successful end. therefore, head to france, my liege! divide your lucky england into four. if you take even one quarter with you to france, you will nevertheless make the whole country shake.
heaven, for a long time you have frowned upon the hatred between them. smile, then, on this beautiful union. what traitor hears me and doesn't say amen? england has long been so crazy that she was willing to hurt herself, brothers blindly shed their brothers' blood, fathers rashly slaughtered their own sons, sons were forced to butcher their fathers. all this further divided the two families, which were already so badly divided. now let richmond and elizabeth, the true heirs of each royal house, be joined together! and let their heirs, if you are willing, god, enrich the future with peace and plenty! gracious lord, blunt the swords of those traitors who mean to tear poor england apart again! let those who would mar this fair land's peace with treason die before they can enjoy its wealth. civil wounds now can heal, and peace can live again. so that england may live a long life like this, let god say amen!
i'll swear to their philosophy.
if we cannot defend our country with three times such a power left at home, then we deserve to be harassed by an invader and lose our reputation as a powerful and politically savvy nation.
she is the prettiest common girl that's ever run across the lawn. everything she does has an air of something greater than herself, something too noble for this place.
call in the messengers sent from the dauphin.
i remember, adam, that's exactly the actual reason is never made clear; the audience has happened upon a conversation already in progress. exactly why my father only left me a thousand crowns in his will. and as you know, my father commanded my brother, oliver, to make sure that i was brought up well, and that's where my sadness begins. oliver keeps my brother jaques away at school, and everyone says he's doing extremely well there. but he keeps me at home in the country, to be precise, he keeps me stuck at home but doesn't support me. i ask you, is this any way to treat a gentleman as nobly born as i am, to pen me in like an ox? his horses get treated better than i do, at least he feeds them and trains them properly, and spends a lot of money on trainers for them. all i've gained from his care is weight, which makes me as indebted to him as his animals on the manure pile are. he gives me plenty of nothing, and takes away everything else, letting me eat with his servants, refusing me what's owed me as his brother, and ruining my good birth with a poor education. this is what angers me, adam. my father's temper and spirit, which i think i share, makes me want to mutiny against my brother's tyranny. i won't stand for it any longer, though i haven't yet figured out how to revolt.
he's saying something that makes her blush. goodness, her complexion is as creamy as milk.
now i've made up my mind, and with god's help, and yours, you nobles who are the mainstay of my power, i'll force france to fear me, or i'll break her into pieces, as she's rightfully mine. either i'll sit, ruling with absolute authority over france and all her dukedoms, or i'll lay these bones in a common grave, with no stone or inscription over them. either the story of my deeds will be declaimed loudly and without restraint, or else my grave will remain speechless, like a turkish mute, not honored with even an epitaph etched in wax.
here comes my master, your brother.
come on, play the music!
i'm ready now to hear what my good cousin the dauphin has to say, for i hear that the greeting you bear is from him, not the king.
go hide, adam, and you'll hear how he abuses me.
mopsa will be your dance partner. give her garlic to make her breath better!
will your majesty grant us permission to freely express the message we've been asked to convey? or should we be tactful and only hint at what the dauphin sent us to say?
hey, you! what are you making oliver means "what are you doing here," but orlando interprets "making" in its usual sense. making here?
now, that's enough!
i am no tyrant but a christian king, whose emotions are as tightly controlled as the wretches who languish in our prisons. therefore tell me the dauphin's mind frankly and without constraint.
nothing. i've never been taught how to make anything.
don't say a word. we'll act with manners. come, play the music!
here it is then, in as few words as possible. your highness recently sent word to france claiming certain dukedoms as your own, in the name of your great ancestor, king edward the third. by way of answer, the prince our master says that you're acting like the immature youth that you are. he warns you to take note: there's nothing in france that you can win by dancing. you can't party your way into dukedoms there. he therefore sends you this casket of treasure as a gift more suited to your character. and in return for this gift, he wishes you to drop your claim to the dukedoms. this is the dauphin's message.
well, then, what are you messing up?
good shepherd, can you tell me who is the handsome young man dancing with your daughter?
what's the treasure, uncle?
i'm helping you mess up one of god's creations, your poor, unworthy brother, by having him do nothing.
they call him doricles and say he has a valuable pasture. he's told me so himself, and i believe him. he looks honest. he says he loves my daughter, and i think he does. he gazes into my daughter's eyes as intently as the moon shines onto water. and, to be blunt, i don't think there's a way to tell from their kiss who loves the other more.
tennis balls, my liege.
indeed, sir, find something better to do and get lost for a while.
she dances well.
i'm happy the dauphin has such a good sense of humor. thank you for his present and your trouble. once i've put my rackets to these balls, i'll play a set in france, god willing, that will knock his father's crown right out of the court. tell him he's got himself such a willing opponent that we'll be chasing balls all over france. and i understand perfectly his sneering reference to my wilder days. he doesn't realize how useful they were to me. for a long time, i didn't value this humble throne of england, and therefore lived at some remove and gave myself over to riotous living. men tend to be at their most irresponsible when they're away from home. but tell the dauphin i will retain the dignity of kingship and appear all the more royal and glorious on the throne of france. precisely for this purpose i went about like a commoner and experienced the life of the ordinary man. now i'll rise there with
should i tend your pigs and eat husks with them? when did i waste orlando alludes to the prodigal son, a figure from the bible who leaves home, spends all his money, and returns to his father's house in poverty (luke ). waste so much money that i ended up this poor?
she does everything well. i'll tell you something i shouldn't: if young doricles does marry her, she'll bring him greater fortune than he guesses.
such glory that i'll dazzle all the eyes of france. i'll shine so brightly that even the dauphin will be struck blind. and tell the laughing prince that this joke of his has transformed his tennis balls into cannon balls, and the destructive vengeance they bring with them will be his responsibility. his mocking will mock many thousands of widows out of their husbands. it will mock mothers out of their sons, and mock castles down. there are people yet unborn and unconceived who will have reason to curse the dauphin's scorn. but all this lies with god, to whom i do appeal. in god's name, inform the dauphin i am coming, to avenge myself and to put forth my rightful hand in a sanctified cause. so go in peace. and tell the dauphin his joke will look pretty stupid when thousands more weep than ever laughed at it. (to attendants) give them safe conduct., farewell.
do you know where you are, sir?
oh, master, if you had heard the peddler at the door, you'd never again dance to a tambourine and a pipe, and a bagpipe wouldn't tempt you. he sings several songs faster than you can count money. he sings them as readily as if he had digested them completely, and all men can't help but listen.
that was a humorous message.
yes, sir, very well, i'm here in your orchard.
he couldn't have come at a better time. let him in. i love a ballad almost too much, especially a sad subject set to a happy tune, or a pleasant subject sung mournfully.
i hope to make the sender blush for it. now, lords, don't let slip any opportunity that might be advantageous for our expedition. my thoughts are now bent entirely on france, except my thoughts about god, who takes precedence over this undertaking. therefore, let's set about mustering the requisite number of troops and give consideration to anything that can be expected to speed our enterprise. for, with god on our side, we'll chastise this prince on his father's own doorstep. therefore, let every man give some thought to how this noble expedition may be undertaken.
do you know whom you're talking to?
he has songs for all men and women. he fits them to his customers closer than gloves. he has pretty love songs for the maid, without any lewdness, which is unusual, and with delicate refrains full of dildos and orgasms the servant apparently doesn't understand that the songs are, in fact, full of sexual puns. delicate refrains full of dildos and orgasms , like "jump her and thump her." and if an obscene rascal would try to make mischief and interrupt the song, the peddler makes the maid answer, "hey, do me no harm, good man," and puts him off that way.
now all the young men of england are inspired and have stored their party clothes in the closet. armorers are doing great business, and all men think about is honor. people are selling off their land to buy warhorses so they can follow the exemplary king into battle as if they had winged feet, like mercury in roman mythology, mercury is the messenger of the gods, often de picted with winged feet. mercury . there's a sense of anticipation in the air. in the minds of harry and his followers, visions of the kingdoms, spoils, and titles to be won eclipse thoughts of actual fighting. the french, meanwhile, have been forewarned of all this preparation by their spies and tremble in fear. they seek to derail the english with cowardly tricks. oh, england! you are physically small but inwardly great, like a mighty heart enclosed in a small body. there is nothing you couldn't accomplish if all your subjects were loyal and loving! but, see, the king of france has detected your weak spot: a nest of faithless traitors, whose treachery he has purchased with gold. three corrupt men, richard, earl of cambridge; henry, lord scroop of masham; and sir thomas grey, knight, of northumberland, have agreed to conspire with the french in exchange for money. the gracious king will die by their hands in southampton before he sets sail for france, if hell and treason have their way. stick with us, ladies and gentlemen, and we'll make a play, conquering space and time. imagine that the traitors have been paid and made their choice. the king has left london, and the scene now
yes, better than you know me. i know you're my oldest brother, and deserve more respect. but we're in the same family, so you should acknowledge that i am a gentleman too. according to custom, as the first-born you are my superior. but it's not customary to treat me like i'm not even a gentleman, even if there were twenty brothers between you and me. i have as much of our father in me as you do, though i admit you're closer to him and matter more because you're older.
this is an excellent fellow.
shifts, friends, to southampton. that's where you must pretend the theater is; that's where you must sit. from there we'll safely carry you to france and back, calming the waters of the channel to provide you with a smooth voyage. for if we can help it, we'd just as soon nobody was made sick by our play. but we won't shift the scene to southampton until henry reappears.
(hitting orlando) what nerve!
believe me, you are talking about a very witty fellow. does he have any new items to sell?
good to see you, corporal nym.
(grabbing hold of oliver) come on, big brother; you don't know anything about fighting.
he has ribbons in all the colors of the rainbow, and countless laces that he gets wholesale. he has linen tape and yarn tape, fine linens, too. why, he sings about them as if they were gods and goddesses. you would think a ladies' undergarment were an angel, the way he sings to the cuff and embroidery about the bodice.
good day, lieutenant bardolph.
what, you dare put your hands on me, villain?
please, let him in, and have him sing while he's approaching us.
tell me, are you and ensign pistol friends again yet?
i'm no villain. i'm the youngest son of sir rowland de boys, and anyone who claims my father's sons are villains is a villain himself. if you weren't my brother, i'd leave this hand of mine on your neck until i'd pulled out your tongue for talking like this. you've only insulted yourself.
warn him that he musn't use bad words in his songs.
for my part, i really don't care. i don't say much, but when the time comes, we'll smile at each other. but that's as it may be. i won't fight, but i can close my eyes and take a swipe with my sword, just a simple sword, but so what? it's good enough to toast cheese, and it will survive cold as well as another man's sword. and that's that.
gentlemen, calm down. for the sake of your father's memory, make peace.
there are some peddlers who have more bad words in them than you would think.
i'll buy you both breakfast if it will make you two friends. then we can all three be comrades on our way to france. how about it, corporal nym?
let me go, i say.
ay, good brother, or wish to think.
well, i will live until i die, that's for sure, and when i can't live anymore, i'll deal with it. that's it. that's really all i can say.
i won't until i'm ready. you will listen to me. my father instructed you in his will to give me a good education. but you've raised me as a peasant, hiding from me what i needed to become a gentleman. my father's spirit is growing in me, and i won't take this any longer. either give me the freedom to act like someone of my own rank or give me my share of the inheritance, so that i can seek my fortune elsewhere.
linen as white as wind-whipped snow; crepe a material used for mourning clothes. crepe as black as a crow; gloves as sweet-smelling as damask roses; masks to cover faces and noses; a glittering bracelet, a necklace made of amber; perfume made for a ladies room; golden caps and dress fronts for my young men to give to their sweethearts; pins and rods of steel; whatever young woman need from head to toe; come buy them from me, or your ladies will cry. come buy.
it's true, corporal, that he is married to nell quickly. and it's true that she did you wrong, since you were engaged to her.
and what are you going to do after you've spent your money? beg? well, sir, go inside. i'm not going to be bothered by you for long. you'll get some of what you want. now please leave me alone.
if i weren't in love with mopsa, i wouldn't give you a dime. but being infatuated as i am, i'll have to get a few ribbons and gloves.
it's not for me to say. things are what they are. men may sleep, and when they do they may have their throats with them, and some people say knives have blades. what must be must be, and though my patience is worn out, it will last a little longer. there must be some resolution. well, it's not for me to say.
i won't bother you any more than necessary.
you promised them to me in time for the feast, but i guess it's not too late.
here comes ensign pistol and his wife. be cool now, corporal., how are you, pistol, my good host?
(to adam) and you get lost too, you old dog.
he's promised more than that, or he is a liar.
you peasant dog, are you calling me a host? i swear, i scorn the word. my nell isn't going to be taking any lodgers.
is that my reward, to be called "old dog?" well, it's true, i've served this family so long i've gotten old and toothless, like a dog. god bless my old master. he would never have spoken to me like this.
he has given you all he promised, and maybe a baby on top of it. it will shame you to pay him back with that baby in nine months.
no, not for long, that's certain. for we couldn't even put up a dozen or so nice girls who make an honest living sewing without our neighbors thinking we were running a brothel.
is that how it's going to be? are you starting to challenge me? i'll cure you of your insolence, and i'm not going to give you a thousand crowns, either!, hey, dennis!
don't you maids have any manners? will you reveal your most intimate affairs in public? isn't there a time to tell these secrets while you are milking, or going to bed, or at the fireplace, rather than tattling in front of our guests? good thing they are whispering among themselves. bite your tongues, and don't say another word.
oh, dear. if he isn't cut down in his tracks right now, we'll see willful adultery and murder "willful adultery and murder" is an example of the humorous nonsense mistress quickly speaks. willful adultery and murder committed.
did you call for me, your worship?
i won't. come on, you promised me a cheap neckerchief and a pair of gloves.
good lieutenant, good corporal, don't fight each other here.
wasn't charles, the duke's wrestler, here to speak with me?
didn't i tell you i was tricked along my way and lost all my money?
pish!
yes, sir, he's here at the door right now and asks to see you.
it's true, sir. there are tricksters out there, so it's in a man's best interest to watch out.
pish to you, you mangy dog, you pointy-eared icelandic mutt.
call him in.
don't fear, man, you won't lose anything here.
corporal nym, be a man and put away your sword.
i have a good plan. and tomorrow is the wrestling match.
i hope not, sir, since i have so many parcels of value.
get lost, will you? (to pistol) i'd like to get you solus solus means "alone" in latin. solus .
good morning, sir.
what do you have here? ballads?
solus, you unspeakable dog? you loathsome snake, i throw your solus in that weird face of yours, in your teeth and your throat and in your hateful lungs, and even worse, in your nasty mouth! shove that solus into your bowels, because i can take you. my gun is cocked and ready to fire.
good mr. charles! tell me, what's the latest news at the new court?
please, buy some. i love having a ballad written out, because then we are sure it's true.
i am not some fiend of hell: you can't get rid of me with spells. i'm in a mood to beat you up pretty good. if you get nasty with me, pistol, i'll stab you with my sword, in fair play. if you'd like to step aside with me, i'll give you a little prick in the guts, all in fair play, if i can, and that's the way it is.
no news but the old news: the old duke senior has been banished by his younger brother, the new duke frederick. a few loyal lords have gone into exile with duke senior, and given up their lands and money to frederick, so he's happy enough to have them leave.
here's one that's sung to a very mournful tune: how a money lender's wife delivered twenty bags of money in one birth, and she wanted to eat snakes' heads and toads grilled.
you revolting braggart and hellish creature! your grave is gaping open, and your death is near. so take your last breath.
can you tell me whether rosalind, duke senior's daughter, has also been banished?
do you think it's true?
listen, listen to what i say: whoever strikes first, i'll run him through with my sword, as sure as i'm a soldier. (drawing his sword)
oh, no. duke frederick's daughter, celia, grew up with rosalind, and celia loves her cousin so much that she would have either followed her into exile or died of grief. rosalind has stayed at court, where duke frederick loves her like his own daughter. no two women ever loved each other like they do.
very true, and only a month old.
that's an oath of great power, and our fury must subside. ( pistol and nym sheath their swords) give me your hand, your forefoot. you have a brave spirit.
where will the old duke live?
may i never marry a loan shark!
i'll cut your throat, sooner or later, that's just how it is.
they say he's already in the forest of arden. he has many cheerful men with him, and they live like robin hood and his outlaws. people say that new batches of young men flock there every day, and that they all pass the time without a care, like people did in the golden age in greek mythology, the first humans lived in a golden age, free from work, conflict, or violence, and without the need of laws. golden age .
here's the name of the midwife who helped at the birth, one mistress taleporter, and the five or six who witnessed it. why should i spread lies around?
couple  gorge "couple  gorge" is corrupt french for "cut the throat." couple  gorge is the word for what you're trying to say. i defy you again. you dog, do you think you'll take my wife? no, go to the hospital, into the ward where they treat venereal disease, and get yourself a leprous, diseased prostitute like doll tearsheet and marry her.
so, are you going to wrestle before the new duke tomorrow?
please, buy it.
i won the former mistress quickly and i'll keep her as my only wife, and, damn it! that's enough. come on!
indeed i do, sir, and i've come to let you in on a certain problem. i've been informed by certain sources i can't disclose that your younger brother orlando plans to fight me in disguise. tomorrow, sir, i'm fighting for my reputation, and any man who gets away without a broken bone or two is an exceptional wrestler indeed. your brother is young and inexperienced, and because of my affection for you, i'd hate to crush him, though i'd have to, if he challenged me. i'm telling you all this out of affection for you, so you can either keep him from carrying out his plans or prepare to accept his disgrace, which will be his own fault, not mine.
come on, put it aside, and let's see more ballads before we buy anything.
my host pistol, you must come to my master. you too, my hostess: he is very sick and should be put to bed. bardolph, put your face between his sheets and act as a warming pan in shakespeare's henry iv plays, bardolph's face is described as flam ing red with acne. warming pan . really, he's very sick!
charles, i thank you for your loyalty to me, and you'll see that i'll reward you. i'd heard about my brother's plan and have been subtly trying to change his mind, but he's determined. i tell you, charles, he's the stubbornest young fellow in france: overly ambitious, jealous of other people's good qualities, and a traitor against me, his own blood brother. so use your discretion. i'd be just as happy if you broke his neck as his finger. and you'd better be careful, because if you embarrass him at all, in fact, if he doesn't beat you thoroughly, he'll come after you and won't leave you alone till he's poisoned you or trapped you, killed you, in other words, one way or another. it brings me to tears to say this, but there isn't another person alive who is so young and at the same time so wicked. because he's my brother, i have to take his side. but if i really laid him bare, i'd have to weep and hang my head, and you would not believe me, his behavior is so shocking.
here's another ballad about a fish that appeared on the shore on wednesday, the eightieth of april, two hundred and forty thousand feet above sea level, and sang this song to soften the hearts of young women. some thought it was a woman who had been changed into a cold fish because she wouldn't sleep with the man who loved her. the ballad is as sad as it is true.
get out of here, you punk!
i'm very glad i came to see you. if he shows up tomorrow, i'll give him what's coming to him. if he can manage to walk after our fight, i'll never wrestle for money again. farewell, my lord.
you think it's true, too?
i swear, he'll be food for the crows soon. the king has broken his heart. good husband, come home soon.
take care, charles.
five judges would swear to it, and there are more witnesses' statements than i could pack along with me.
come on, can i get you two to make up? we have to go to france together: why should we cut each other's throats?
now it's time to get this playboy brother of mine all worked up. i hope i'll see the end of him soon, i don't know why, but i hate nothing in the world as much as him, though he's an upstanding guy. he's never gone to school but he's smart, with good values, and everyone is delighted by him and loves him, especially my subjects, who know him the best. they love him, and therefore they despise me. but not for long; charles will take care of everything. all i have to do is get orlando to fight, which i'll do now.
put that one aside, too, and let's see another.
let rivers flood and fiends howl for food!
please, rosalind, my sweet cousin, be happy.
this is a happy ballad, and very pretty.
are you going to pay the eight shillings i won from you in a bet?
dear celia, i already look much happier than i feel, but you want me to look even happier? unless you can also teach me how to forget my banished father, you shouldn't try to teach me how to be happy.
let's have some happy ones.
paying debts is for peasants.
well, by this i can see that you don't love me as much as i love you. if your father had banished my father, i could have learned to love your father as my own, as long as i still had you. you'd do the same, if your love for me were as true as mine for you.
here's a very merry one, which goes to the tune of "two maids courting a man." there's hardly a woman west of here that doesn't sing it. it's in great demand, i can tell you.
i'm going to take it from you now. that's how it is.
well, i'll just forget the difficulties of my situation, in order to focus on the happiness of yours.
we can both sing it. if you will sing one part, we can do it, since there are three parts and three of us.
we'll see, won't we? do your best.
you know i'm my father's only child, and he isn't likely to have another. and when he dies, you will inherit his fortune, because whatever he took from your father by force, i will return to you as affection. i swear i will, and if i ever break my promise let me turn into a monster. so please, my sweet rose, my dear rose, be happy.
we learned the tune for it a month ago.
by this sword, i'll kill whichever one of you makes the first thrust. by this sword, i will.
from now on i will, cousin, and i'll think of all kinds of games for us. let me see, what do you think about falling in love?
i can sing my part. as you know, i'm a singer by trade. go ahead.
"by this sword" is an oath, and oaths must be kept.
yes, please do, so we can have a good laugh about it. but don't fall in love for real, and don't take the game too far. you want to get out of it easily, and with your honor intact.
go away, because i must go to a place that you don't know.
corporal nym, if you want to be friends, be friends. if not, then you can be my enemy, too. come on, put it away.
well, then, what should we do for fun instead?
where?
i'll give you a noble a noble is a coin worth slightly less than the eight shil lings he owes nym. noble right now, and i'll give you liquor, too, and friendship and brotherhood. i'll live for nym, and nym will live for me. is that fair? for i'll be selling provisions to the troops, and there'll be profits to go around. give me your hand.
let's go find that hussy, fortune, and and mock her till she starts distributing her gifts more equally.
oh, where?
i'll get my noble?
i wish we could do that, because fortune gives all of her gifts to the wrong people, and she especially gets things wrong where women are concerned.
where?
in cash.
it's true: the women she makes beautiful she also makes slutty, and the women she makes pure and virginal she also makes ugly.
it wouldn't be breaking your promise to tell me your secrets.
well, then, that's how it is.
no, you're getting fortune and nature mixed up: nature determines how we're made, and fortune decides what happens to us.
me, too, let me go with you.
if you ever had a mother, come in quickly to sir john. the poor thing, he is so shaken with a fever that it's terrible to see. sweet men, come to him.
oh, really? well, when nature makes a person beautiful, can't fortune make her fall into a fire, thereby making her ugly after all? and even though nature has given us the wit to have this argument, hasn't fortune sent this fool here to stop us?
or perhaps you are going to the farmhouse or the mill.
the king has done him a bad turn. that's all there is to it.
yes, and now fortune is playing a nasty trick on nature: she's breaking up a show of wit between two naturally witty women with the arrival of a natural fool.
if you are going either place, you are doing wrong.
nym, what you say is true. his heart is broken and corroborate "corroborate" means "strengthened" or "confirmed" and is probably not what pistol means. corroborate .
well, maybe this is nature's work after all. maybe nature sensed that we're not smart enough to be having this high-flown discussion about goddesses, so she sent us this fool to use as a mental whetstone a whetstone is used to sharpen knives. whetstone . after all, smart peoples' wits are always sharpened by the presence of a fool. what's up, you wit? where are you wandering off to?
i'm not going to either one.
the king is a good king, but things must be as they may. he has his moods and his ways.
mistress, you have to go see your father.
what, neither one?
let us go sit with the knight; for, my little lambs, we will survive him.
did they make you the messenger?
neither one.
i must say, the king is taking a bold risk letting these traitors go free.
no, by my honor, but they told me to come get you touchstone is pretending that celia meant, "have you come to arrest us?" the term "messenger" was commonly used to describe some one who came with a warrant. get you .
you've sworn to be my love.
they'll be arrested in a little while.
where'd you learn a phrase like, "by my honor," fool?
you've sworn it more to me. then where are you going? tell me, where?
how smooth and cool they seem! just as if they were perfectly loyal and faithful.
from a certain knight who swore on his honor that the pancakes he was eating were good, and that the mustard on top of them, he swore on his honor, was bad. now, i'll swear to the opposite, that the pancakes were rotten, and the mustard was fine, but even so, the knight wasn't lying.
we'll finish this song soon by ourselves. my father and the gentlemen are having a serious talk, and we should leave them alone. come, bring your pack and follow me. girls, i'll buy things for you both. peddler, give me first choice. follow me, girls.
the king has been informed of all their plans, but they have no idea.
and how, out of your great heap of knowledge, will you manage to prove that?
and you will pay a great deal for them!
no, but it's unbelievable that the man who was his dearest friend, a man he has showered with love and favor, would repay the king with treachery, selling his own sovereign's life to a foreign power!
yes, please; unleash your wisdom.
will you buy any ribbon, or lace for your cape, my dainty little dear, any silk, any thread any ornaments for your head, the newest and finest to wear? come to the peddler money is a meddler when it offers all a man's items for sale.
now that the wind is favorable, let's board the ship. , my lord of cambridge and my good lord of masham and you, my noble knight, what do you think? will our army cut a swath through the fighting force of france, achieving and accomplishing everything i've assembled them to do?
watch me: stroke your chins and swear by your beards that i am a knave.
master, three cart drivers, three shepherds, three cowherds, and three swineherds have arrived, dressed up in animal skins. they call themselves jumpers, and they have a dance that the wenches say is filled with many leaps and hops. if it isn't too energetic for those more used to sedate sports like bowling, it will be greatly pleasing.
no doubt it will, my liege, if each man does his best.
by our beards (if we had them), you are a knave.
send them away! we'll have none of it. there has been too much vulgar foolishness already. i know, sir, that we are tiring you.
i have no doubt about that, since i know there isn't a man among us who isn't with me wholeheartedly, or a soul left behind who doesn't wish us success and conquest.
and i swear by my wickedness (if i had any) that i am a knave. but you can't swear by what you don't have, and this knight had no honor, or if he did, he swore it off before he ever saw those pancakes and that mustard.
you'll tire those that entertain us. please, let's see these four trios of herdsmen.
there never was a monarch better feared and loved than yourself, your majesty. i don't think there's a single unhappy subject living under the protection of your government.
tell me, who is this knight?
one trio tells me that they have danced before the king. and even the worst of the three jumps twelve and half feet exactly.
true. those who were bitter enemies of your father in his time have turned their bitterness to sweetness, serving you loyally and wholeheartedly.
a man old frederick, your father, loves.
stop your chattering. since these good men would be pleased to see them, let them in, and quickly.
yes, i have great cause to be thankful. i'm more likely to forget how to use my own hand than how to reward virtue and merit as they deserve.
if he has my father's love, then that's enough honor for me. enough of this. no more talk about my father; you'll be whipped for slander one of these days.
why, they're right at the door, sir.
and so your subjects serve you all the more energetically, hopeful of success and reward.
it's a pity that fools aren't allowed to speak wisely about the foolish things that wise men do.
oh, father, you'll know more about that soon.
i expect no less. uncle of exeter, release the man who was arrested yesterday for railing against me. i believe he only did it because he drank too much, and now that he's had a chance to think about his actions, i can pardon him.
honestly, you're speaking the truth, ever since the fools were silenced by "silencing" celia may mean the burning of satirical books, in . silenced , the foolishness of wise men has become all the more apparent. here comes monsieur le beau.
hasn't it gone too far? it's time to separate them. he's nave and tells them too much.
that's merciful but a bit careless. he should be punished, your majesty. if we tolerate such behavior, we're in danger of encouraging it.
with his mouth full of news.
come now, handsome shepherd! there is something in your heart that is keeping your mind from enjoying the feast. when i was young and enjoyed love the way you do, i tended to give my girl lots of gifts. i would have ransacked the peddler's silks and treasures and given her them for her approval. you've let him go without buying a thing. if your lass interprets this as a lack of love or a lack of money, you'll have a hard time explaining it, at least if you want her to stay with you.
oh, let us be merciful anyway.
which he'll shove down our throats the way pigeons feed their young.
old sir, i know she doesn't care for such trifles as these. the gifts she wants from me are from my heart, and they are hers already, though i haven't delivered them yet. (to perdita) oh, listen to me telling my private thoughts to this old man, who it seems has been in love on occasion! i take your hand, as soft and as white as a dove's downy feather, or the snow that is blown about by the wind.
your highness could be merciful but still punish.
then we'll be stuffed with news.
what does this mean? how delicately the young man seems to wash the hand that was already beautiful. i've interrupted. but back to your declaration. let me hear more about your love.
sir, it would be merciful to let him live after beating him severely.
well that's good. if we're fattened a recently fed (and thus heavier) bird was worth more at the market. fattened up, we'll be worth more. hello, monsieur le beau. what's the news?
do, and witness how i feel.
i'm afraid your great love and concern for me lead you to deal too harshly with this poor fellow. if minor lapses caused by drunkenness are not to be tolerated, how will we punish capital crimes that result from much planning and forethought? no, i'll have that man released, despite the fact that cambridge, scroop, and grey, in their extreme concern for my safety, would prefer that he were punished. and now, let's turn to our business with the french. who are the new commissioners?
fair princess, you've missed some good sport.
and my companion, too?
i am one, my lord. your highness told me to ask for my commission today.
sport? of what color in other words, what kind of sport. color ?
him, and others, and all men, the earth, the heavens and everything. if i were the most powerful and worthy king, or the most handsome youth to ever draw people's eyes, or if i had greater strength and knowledge than any other man, they would mean nothing to me without her love. i would dedicate them to her service or sentence them to damnation.
you told me to do the same, my liege.
what color, madam? i don't understand, how should i answer that?
well said.
and me, too, my royal sovereign.
however your wit and luck allow.
this shows his strong affection for her.
in that case, there is yours, richard earl of cambridge; there yours, lord scroop of masham; and, sir knight, grey of northumberland, this one is yours. (he gives each of them a piece of paper) read them, and trust that i recognize your true worth. my lord of westmoreland, and uncle exeter, we will set sail night., why, what's this, gentlemen! what's in those papers that makes you change color?, look how pale they're turning! their cheeks are like paper., what are you reading that makes you turn white?
or however the destinies say you should.
but, my daughter, would you say the same to him?
i confess my crime and throw myself on your highness's mercy.
nicely done; you laid that on thick.
i can't speak as well, not nearly as well. but i couldn't say anything more. my own thoughts are echoed in his pure words.
to which we all appeal.
well, if i don't keep up my rank, 
shake hands. it's a deal! and, friendly strangers, you'll be a witness to this. i give my daughter to him in marriage and will make her dowry equal to his fortune.
the mercy that was alive in me a moment ago was smothered and killed by your own advice. for shame, don't talk of mercy. your own arguments turn against you, like dogs who bite their own masters., princes and noble peers, take a look at these english monsters. cambridge here, you know how i favored him and treated him with every respect due his rank. he was bought for a few coins, entering easily into this conspiracy with the french, promising to kill me here in southhampton. and this knight, whom i've treated as generously as i have cambridge, also joined the plot. but, oh, what can i say to you, lord scroop? you cruel, ungrateful, savage, and inhuman creature! you who had access to all my thoughts, who knew me to the inmost part of my soul, who could have had any amount of gold from me if you'd needed it and only asked me: is it possible that a foreign power could find in you even enough evil to injure one of my fingers? though the truth of your treachery is as plain as black on white, i can scarcely believe it, it's so past understanding. treason and murder have always gone together, like two devils joined in a common purpose. that's natural. but you, against all reason, added something new to the equation. you added the sheer improbability that you could do this. whatever fiend it was that seduced you must win the prize for excellence in hell. all other devils who tempt people to treason patch together some motive, put together from shreds
, you'll lose your smell touchstone means he has to keep up his reputation as a jester; rosalind interprets "rank" as "foul smell." smell .
then her dowry must be her virtue, since once my father is dead i will inherit more than you can dream of. it will be enough for you to wonder at it. but, come, bind us together before these witnesses.
and patches of righteousness. but the devil that tempted you gave you no reason why you should commit treason other than to win the name of traitor. the demon who seduced you could stride the world over with the proud gait of a lion, could return to hell and tell the devil's legions, "i will never win another soul as easily as i won that englishman's." how you have poisoned my faith in people! now i am suspicious of everyone. are there men who appear dutiful? why, so did you. are there those who seem serious and knowledgeable? why, so did you. do they come from good families? why, so did you. do they seem religious? why, so did you. do they live in moderation, free from excessive emotion, stable rather than changing their minds constantly, tastefully dressed, not merely seeing but also listening, and trusting no impression without confirmation? that's how sound a man you appeared. your fall has left a blot that opens even the best and brightest to suspicion. you have broken my heart. this treachery of yours is like the second fall of man "fall of man" refers to adam and eve's first sin, eating the fruit of the tree of knowledge, which caused them to lose their innocence and be expelled from eden. fall of man ., their crimes are revealed. arrest and punish them according to the law, and may god pardon them for what they would have done.
you're confusing me, ladies. i was going to tell you all about a good wrestling match that's going on, which you're missing.
give me your hand, and daughter, give me yours.
richard earl of cambridge, i arrest you for high treason. henry lord scroop of masham, i arrest you for high treason. thomas grey, knight, of northumberland, i arrest you for high treason.
tell us about this wrestling.
gentle young shepherd, wait, please. do you have a father?
a just god has discovered our plot. i regret my crime more than my death, and i beg your highness to forgive me, while punishing my body with death.
i'll tell you about the beginning, and if you find that interesting you can see the end. the best is yet to come, and they're going to perform it right here.
i do, but what about him?
for my part, i didn't do it for the money, though i admit the money encouraged me to do what i was planning sooner. but i thank god that i failed in my scheme, and i rejoice in paying the penalty, as i beg god and you to pardon me.
well, we've missed the beginning; it's dead and buried.
does he know about this?
no faithful subject ever rejoiced more at the discovery of most dangerous treason than i now rejoice that i was thwarted in a damnable undertaking. pardon my crime, sovereign, but not my person.
there comes an old man with his three sons, 
he doesn't, and he won't.
may god in his mercy forgive you. this is your sentence. you have conspired against us with a proclaimed enemy and accepted his money in exchange for killing us. in doing so, you would have sold your king to slaughter, his princes and lords to slavery, his subjects to oppression and abuse, and his whole kingdom to ruin. i seek no revenge for myself, but so dearly do i hold the safety of my kingdom, which you sought to destroy, that you must be punished according to her laws. so go to your deaths, poor miserable wretches, the pain of which may merciful god give you the strength to endure. and may you truly regret your terrible crimes. take them away.
it sounds like the beginning of an old folktale.
i think a father is the best guest at his son's wedding. please, once more, has your father become incapable of doing normal tasks? is he senile from age and illness? can he speak and hear? does he know one man from another? can he handle his own estate? is he confined to his bed and unable to do the things he did when he was younger?
and now, my lords, off to france. this invasion will be as glorious to you as it is to me. i have no doubt that it will be a swift and successful war, since god so graciously exposed this dangerous plot. i'm now sure that every bump in the road has been removed. let's go forth, dear countrymen. our strength is god. let's get going. we're off to sea, banners flying. i'll be no king of england if i'm not also king of france.
three proper young men, all good looking and with great presence, 
no, good sir, he is healthy, and indeed he is even stronger than most people of his age.
please, sweet husband, let me come with you as far as the town of staines.
right, and they wore proclamations around their necks, saying, "be it known to all men by these presents this is a phrase found at the beginning of legal documents. rosalind is punning on the word "presence." presents , "
by my white beard, if this is so then you are wronging him in a way unsuitable for a son. it's reasonable that a son should choose a wife, but it's just as reasonable that his father should be able to have some say in the matter, since all his joy is in his family.
no, because my manly heart is grieving. bardolph, be happy., nym, rouse your bragging spirits., boy, be brave. falstaff is dead, and we must mourn him.
the eldest of the three brothers wrestled with charles, the duke's wrestler. immediately, charles threw the brother, breaking three of his ribs; it's not likely he will survive. charles did the same to the second brother, and the third. they're lying over there, and the poor old man, their father, weeps so piteously over them that the whole audience has joined him in grieving.
i agree with all you're saying. but there are other reasons, my serious sir, which it's best you don't know regarding why i don't tell my father of this.
i wish i were with him, wherever he is, in heaven or in hell.
oh, dear!
let him know about it.
oh, no, he's surely not in hell. he's in arthur's bosom the hostess means abraham's bosom, the proverbial resting place of good christians, but has king arthur on the brain. arthur's bosom , if any man ever went to arthur's bosom. he died as peacefully as a baby. he departed right between twelve and one, just as the tide was turning. for after i saw him fumbling with the sheets and playing with imaginary flowers and smiling at the ends of his fingers, i knew it was the end. his face was gaunt and he was babbling about green fields. "now, now, sir john!" i said. "what's all this? cheer up!" and he called out "god, god, god!" three or four times. to soothe him, i told him not to think of god, that i hoped it wasn't yet time to bother with such thoughts. so he asked me to put more blankets on his feet. i put my hand into the bed and felt his feet, and they were stone-cold. then i felt his legs, and they were stone-cold, and so i moved upward and upward, and his whole body was stone-cold.
but tell me, monsieur, what sport are the ladies missing?
he won't know about it.
they say he cried out against sherry.
why, the one i just told you about.
please, let him.
yes, he did.
men must be getting wiser every day; that's the first time i've heard that rib-breaking was appropriate entertainment for ladies.
no, he must not.
and women.
me too, i swear.
let him know, my son. he won't grieve when he hears your choice.
no, he did not.
doesn't anyone else want to see this, and hear breath wheezing out from broken ribs? does anyone else love rib breaking? shall we go watch this wrestling, cousin?
come, come, he must not know. sign our contract.
yes, he did. he said they were devils incarnate.
you're going to have to, if you stay here. this is the place they're scheduled to wrestle, and they're ready to go.
sign your divorce, young sir!
he could never bear carnation. it was a color he never did like.
yes, i see them coming. let's stay and watch.
i don't dare call you son. you are too lowly for me to acknowledge. you are the heir of a king, and you want to be a shepherd! (to the shepherd) you old traitor, i'm sorry that hanging you will only shorten your life by a week! (to perdita) and you, you skilled little witch, you must know you are dealing with a royal fool, 
he once said the devil would get him because of women.
come on. since the youth won't be reasoned with, he'll have to suffer for his stubbornness.
oh, my heart!
he did touch on women a bit, but his body was aching with fever and he talked about the whore of babylon.
is that the man?
i'll have your beautiful face scratched with thorns and made worse than your social rank. (to florizel) as for you, foolish boy, if i ever find out that you've so much as sighed about not seeing this whore again, as i mean you won't, i'll bar you from inheriting the throne. i won't consider you related to me at all. listen to me: follow me to the court, you delinquent, because this time i'll let you off easy, even though i am full of rage. (to perdita) and you, witch, you're only good enough for a herdsman, and would be for florizel, too, who lowers himself to the position of shepherd, if not for the royal blood in his veins. if you ever come near him or put your arms around him again, i'll devise a death for you that is as cruel as you are vulnerable to it.
don't you remember how he saw a flea land on bardolph's nose and said it was a black soul burning in hell?
that's him, madam.
we're ruined even here! i was not very afraid. once or twice i was about to speak and tell him bluntly that the same sun that illuminates his court doesn't hide its face from our cottage but looks down here all the same. will you please leave, sir? i told you what would come of this. please, take care of yourself. now that i'm awake, i won't act the queen anymore but will milk my ewes and weep.
well, the fuel the "fuel" bardolph refers to is the drinks falstaff bought him, which made his face even redder. fuel that sustained that fire is gone. that's all the wealth i ever earned in his company.
alas, he is too young. yet he seems capable.
why, what about you, father? speak before you die.
shall we get moving? the king will already have left southampton.
what's up, daughter and niece? have you snuck over here to watch the wrestling?
i can't speak, or think, or dare to know what i know. oh. sir! you have ruined a man of sixty-three. i thought i would go to my grave in peace, to die in the bed my father died in, and be buried close to his honest bones. but now a hangman will put a burial shroud on me and put me in an unconsecrated grave. (to perdita) oh, cursed girl, you knew this was the prince and dared to exchange vows with him! undone! if i can die within the hour, i will have died when i wish.
come, let's be on our way. my love, let me kiss your lips. look after my goods and possessions. keep on your toes: the rule is "cash down, no credit." trust no one. for oaths are as easily broken as straws, and men's faith crumbles like crackers, and you can only rely on what you can hold onto. let caution be your guide. go dry your eyes. brothers in arms, we're off to france, like leeches, my boys: to suck, to suck, their very blood to suck!
yes, my lord, if you give us permission.
(to perdita) why do you look at me like that? i am only sorry, not afraid. our plans are delayed, but not altered. i was in love, and i still am. now i'm all the more determined to move forward for having been held back. i won't be pulled against my will.
i've heard that's not the most nourishing food.
you won't enjoy it much, i can tell you, the odds are so against this young man. because he's so young, i've tried to discourage him, but he won't listen. talk to him, ladies. see if you can persuade him.
my gracious lord, you know your father's temper. just now he won't let you speak, which i guess you don't plan to do anyway, and i fear he can hardly stand to look at you yet. so, until his anger settles, don't approach him.
kiss her soft mouth, and we'll be off.
call him over here, good monsieur le beau.
i won't try it. is it you, camillo?
farewell, hostess. (kisses her)
go ahead. i'll make myself scarce.
it is i, my lord.
i can't kiss, that's just how it is, but farewell.
mister challenger, the princess wants to speak to you.
how often have i told you it would be this way! how often have i said that my dignity would only last as long we weren't discovered!
be thrifty. and keep yourself hidden, i command you.
i'll wait on them with all respect and duty.
your dignity will only be hurt if i break my promise to you, and if i do, may nature crush the earth and any sources of life within it! lift up your eyes. let my father disown me as his heir. i am heir to my love.
farewell. adieu.
young man, have you challenged charles the wrestler?
be careful.
the english army is advancing on us at full strength. it is more important that we respond majestically than that we respond carefully. therefore the dukes of berri, bretagne, brabant, and orlans shall advance, and you, prince dauphin, will swiftly entrench and fortify our fortress towns with men of courage and the means to defend themselves. the king of england's approach is as forceful as a whirlpool. it is right for us to prepare like people who are afraid, as we've been taught by the recent lessons the king of france is referring to french defeats at crcy (in ) and poitiers (in ). recent lessons given us by the deadly and underestimated english on our own soil.
no, lovely princess. he is the general challenger. i have only come in, like the others have, to try to fight him with the strength of my youth.
i am, by my heart. if my reason will obey love, i'll welcome reason. if not, i will be happier with madness and will welcome it gladly.
my most feared father, it is certainly appropriate for us to arm ourselves against the enemy, because even in peace time, when no war or conflict is at hand, a kingdom should not lose its edge, but always be ready, with defenses, men, and training, as though it expected a war. therefore, i agree that we should all go and inspect those french territories that are weak. let's do it with no show of anxiety, no, with no more fear than if we'd heard that the english were busying themselves with folk dancing. because, my good king, england is so poorly led, her scepter so foolishly borne by a vain, silly, shallow, impulsive youth, that she's hardly a threat.
young gentleman, you are too bold for your age. you have seen the cruel proof of this man's strength. if you took a good look at yourself, or if you thought about this more carefully, your fear would teach you to act more cautiously. we beg you, for your own sake, to respect your safety and give up.
this is a desperate act, sir.
oh, please, prince dauphin! you are completely wrong about this king. talk to the ambassadors who've just come back: ask them how majestically he responded to their message, how well supplied he was with good advisors, how restrained in expressing his displeasure, and, moreover, how terrifyingly firm he was in his resolve. you'll discover that his youthful follies were like the persona that lucius junius brutus in roman history, a nobleman named lucius junius brutus pretended to be feebleminded so king tarquin wouldn't recognize he was a threat. lucius junius brutus adopted to deceive tarquin, cloaking wisdom in folly the way gardeners cover the most delicate roots with manure when they first sprout up.
please, young sir. we'll make sure your reputation isn't hurt; we'll take it upon ourselves to argue with the duke that the wrestling match should be called off.
you may call it that, but it does make good on what i just said, so i think it is an honest act. camillo, i won't break my promise to perdita for bohemia, or all the glamour of being its king, or even for all the world the sun shines on, or the caves under the earth, or the depths hidden by the sea. i don't mean to see my father again. so, please, as you have been his closest friend, speak wise words to him and soothe his anger when he realizes i'm gone. let me wrestle with fortune for some time. you can tell my father that i've gone to sea with the woman i'm not allowed to hold on shore. luckily for us, a vessel is close by, though it was not there for this purpose. it won't help either of us for me to tell you where we're going.
well, you're wrong, my lord high constable. but even if i thought you were right, it doesn't matter. when it comes to defense, it's best to assume that the enemy is more powerful than he seems. that way, we fill the gaps in our defenses. otherwise, if we do it on the cheap, we'll be like the miser who spoils his new coat by not buying quite enough cloth to make it.
i beg you not to think poorly of me, though i suppose anyone who could deny anything to such beautiful women deserves to be scorned. but please, send me good thoughts in this match. if i'm beaten, the shame is all mine, and i wasn't in anyone's good graces to begin with. if i'm killed, it will only be the death of a man who was willing to be dead. i won't wrong any of my friends, because i don't have any to mourn for me, and i won't have wronged the world, because i don't have anything in the world. in this world, i'm only taking up space. if i leave, maybe someone more worthy will fill it.
oh, my lord! i wish you had a greater inclination to take advice, or that you were stronger.
i think king harry is strong, so the rest of you princes make sure to arm yourselves to meet him with strength. his ancestors got their first taste of blood in battle with us, and he is born of that warlike strain that haunted us on our home ground. reflect on the battle of crcy, where, to our everlasting shame, all our princes were taken prisoner by the prince of wales, he whom they called edward the black prince. remember how his mountain-bred father, standing high on a mountain,
i wish i could give you the little strength that i have.
listen, perdita.
crowned by the golden sun, observed his heroic son and smiled to see him mangle the work of nature, french youth whose fathers and god had nurtured for twenty years, since they were babies. this king is a branch of that same victorious stock. so let us be wary both of his inborn might and of his destiny.
mine too, to join hers.
(to camillo) camillo, i'll listen to you in a moment.
ambassadors of harry, king of england, request a hearing with your majesty.
good luck. i hope to god i'm wrong about your chances.
he's made his mind up to flee. i would be happy if i could make this departure serve my own purposes. i can save him from danger and treat him with love and honor, and i can also gain sight of dear sicilia and that unhappy king who is my master, and whom i long to see again.
we'll see them immediately. bring them right in.
i hope you get what you desire!
now, good camillo, i'm so overwhelmed with this strange undertaking that i've forgotten my manners.
notice, my friends, how closely this hunter follows his prey.
come on, where's the young show-off charles is asking "who wants to be buried?" as well as making a suggestive pun. show-off who's so eager to lie with mother earth?
sir, i think you have heard of the modest services and the love i have given your father?
turn and face them and you'll stop the pursuit. the cowardly pack barks loudest when the quarry is way out front. my good king, surprise the english and let them know what kind of kingdom you rule over. self-love, my liege, is not so great a sin as self-neglect.
ready, sir, but i have more modest ambitions.
the praise is well-deserved. my father delights to speak of your actions, and he hopes that he repays them as much as he praises them.
from our brother monarch, the king of england?
you get only one round.
well, my lord, if you do believe that i love the king and what he holds most dear, which is you, take my advice: if your determined course might be altered a bit, i swear i'll show you a place where you'll be received in a manner fit for your highness. there you'll be able to enjoy life with your sweetheart, from whom i can see there is no chance of separating you except, heaven forbid!, through your ruin. marry her, and i'll strive in your absence to talk down your unhappy father and turn him to approval.
yes, from him. thus he greets your majesty. he commands you, in the name of god: give up. relinquish the stolen titles that, by the gift of heaven and the laws
no, i'm sure your grace won't be able to persuade him to try a second round, even though you couldn't dissuade him from trying the first.
how might this near miracle be accomplished, camillo? if you can do it, i would say you're something more than a man and would always trust you.
of nature and of nations, belong to him and his heirs. that is, give up the crown and all the extensive titles that go with it, according to custom and long use. so that you'll know this is no dubious or farfetched claim, he sends you his family tree, every line of which supports the claim. look over this document, and when you see that he is directly descended from his most famous of famous ancestors, edward the third, he demands that you resign your crown and kingdom, which you wrongfully hold at the expense of himself, the true and natural owner.
you should mock me after you've beaten me, not before. come on.
have you thought about where you'll go?
and what will happen if i don't?
hercules hercules, a prominent figure in greek and roman mythology, was famous for his physical prow ess. hercules give you speed, young man!
not any place yet. but since an unforeseen accident caused us to take this course of action, we'll pledge ourselves to fate and go where the wind blows us.
bloodshed will force you to. no matter how deeply you hid the crown, even if you hid it in your own hearts, he'd dig it up. that's why he's coming after you like a fierce storm, with thunder and earthquakes like jove in roman mythology, jove (also known as ju piter) was the king of the gods. jove could stir up. so, if asking you for the crown doesn't work, he will force you to give it to him. in the name of god, then, he asks that you deliver up the crown. he says to take pity on the poor souls whom this ravenous war will swallow up. the widows' tears, the orphans' cries, the dead men's blood, the girls mourning for their husbands, the fathers and the men they might have married will all be your fault. this is his claim, his threat, and my message. if the dauphin is here, i have a message for him, too.
i wish i were invisible, so i could grab that strong fellow by the leg.
then listen to me. if you won't change your mind and are determined to flee, head to sicilia, and present yourself and your fair princess before leontes. she should be dressed in a way suitable for the wife of a prince. i think leontes will open his arms and will weep as he bids you welcome. he'll ask your forgiveness as though he were your father, and he'll kiss your princess's hands. he's caught between berating himself for his past unkindness to your father and trying to be more kind now.
i'll think it over. tomorrow, i'll let you know what i've decided and what answer you should deliver to the king of england.
oh, what an excellent young man!
worthy camillo, what reason should i give him for my visit?
regarding the dauphin, you can speak to me. what's the message from the english king?
if i could shoot lightning bolts from my eyes, i can tell you who'd be on the ground.
tell him you are sent by your father to greet him and comfort him. i'll write you a note containing things known by the three of us telling you what to say. that and the manner with which you greet him will make him believe that you represent your father's feelings.
scorn and defiance, indifference, contempt, and any insult that wouldn't disgrace the mighty sender, that's the value he puts on you. and my king goes on: if your royal father does not sweeten the bitter insult you sent my king and grant all our demands, henry's artillery will give you so resounding an answer that the very caves and vaulted cathedrals of france shall echo your mocking of him back in your face.
no more, no more.
i owe you for this. there's life in this plan.
say this: if my father sends a friendly answer, it is against my will. i want nothing but conflict with england. to that end, i presented him with the tennis balls, the perfect expression of his inexperience and frivolity.
oh, come on, your grace, i'm barely out of breath.
it's a much more promising way of doing things than simply throwing yourself on unmarked waters and strange shores, which will certainly lead you to plenty of misery. there would be no hope to help you aside from casting off one shore to find another. your anchors would be your only certainty, and the best they can do is hold you in a place you'll be loath to remain. besides, you know that good fortune keeps love strong, and that affliction will change the freshness of your affection and the feelings of your heart.
he'll make your palace tremble for this insult, even if it were the mightiest in all of europe. and, make no mistake, you'll find, as we his subjects have, an amazing difference between the king as a young man and the way he is now. now he uses his time wisely, as you will see by your own casualties, if he remains in france.
how are you doing, charles?
one of those is true. affliction may make us less fresh, but it won't alter our feelings.
we'll give you an answer tomorrow.
he can't speak, my lord.
do you say so? there won't be anyone like you born at your father's house for many years.
don't take too long, unless you want our king to come after me to ask what's holding things up, because he's already landed here.
carry him away. what is your name, young man?
my good camillo, she is as superior to her upbringing as she is inferior to our noble rank.
you'll have your answer soon. a night isn't much time for addressing matters of this importance.
orlando, my lord, the youngest son of sir rowland de boys.
i can't say it's a pity she's uneducated, because she seems more intelligent than those that teach.
and so, on the wings of imagination and at the speed of thought, our scene flies swiftly on. imagine that you have seen the well-equipped king at dover pier set sail in full royal regalia and his noble fleet fan the rising sun with its silken banners. give your imagination free rein. picture the cabin boys climbing around the rigging. hear the shrill whistle that brings order to the hubbub. picture the linen sails driven by the invisible and subtle wind as they pull the vast hulls through the wrinkled sea, breasting the high waves. pretend that you're standing on the shore, watching a city dance on the shifting waves, and you'll have an idea of the look of this majestic fleet as it holds a straight course for harfleur. follow it, follow it! hitch your minds to this navy's sterns and leave your england, silent as midnight, guarded by grandfathers, babies, and old women. for what male subject is there old enough for his chin to be graced with even one hair who doesn't want to follow this select band of hand-picked knights to france? once there, make your thoughts work harder, and witness a siege. take in the wheeled canons with their deadly gaping mouths trained on the walled city of harfleur. imagine the french ambassador returning to inform harry that the king offers him
i wish you were someone else's son. the whole world thought your father was an honorable man, but he was always my enemy. your victory would have pleased me more if you'd been someone else's son. but good luck; you are a brave young man. i wish you had told me you had a different father.
pardon me, sir, i'll thank you with my blushing.
his daughter, katherine, with some insignificant, unprofitable dukedoms as her dowry. the offer doesn't go over well, and the nimble gunner now moves to ignite the devilish canon.
if i were my father, cousin, would i do this?
my pretty perdita! but, oh, the danger we're in! camillo, you've rescued my father and now me. you heal our family. what will we do? i'm not dressed like the king's son, and i certainly won't look like royalty once we reach sicilia.
down goes everything in their path. indulge us further and supplement our performance with your own imaginings.
i'm proud to be sir rowland's son, his youngest son, and i would never change that, not even to be frederick's adopted heir.
my lord, don't worry about it. i think you know that my fortune is still in sicilia. i'll make sure you are dressed as royally as if i were dressing you for a play i had written. let me have a word with you, to reassure you that you won't be left in need.
attack the breach in the city wall once more, dear friends, attack it once more, or else let's close it up with english corpses. in peacetime, nothing looks better in a man than restraint and humility. but when the battle trumpet blows in our ears, then it's time to act like the tiger. with muscles taut and blood stirred up, hide your civilized nature under the guise of ugly rage. lend your eyes a terrifying gleam and let them jut out from the portholes of the head like brass cannon. make your brow jut out over your eyes like a frightening cliff over the wild and desolate ocean. now grit your teeth and let your nostrils flare. take a deep breath and draw on every impulse to its fullest strength. on, on, you noblest englishmen, descended as you are from battle-tested fathers, fathers who, like so many alexander the greats, have fought in these regions from morning until night, sheathing their swords only when there was no one left to fight. don't dishonor your mothers! prove that the men you call your fathers did truly conceive you. serve as an example to men of common birth and teach them how to fight. and you, good farmers, whose limbs were made in england, show us here the vigor of your upbringing. prove you are worthy of your birth, which i do not doubt for a moment. for there isn't one of you so low-born that your eyes don't shine with noble luster. i see you're standing like greyhounds
my father loved sir rowland as much as he loved his own soul, and the rest of the world shared my father's opinion. if i had known this young man was his son, i would have tried harder to convince him not to fight.
ha ha! honesty is such a fool, and trust, his brother, is so nave! i have sold all my goods, not a fake stone, or a ribbon, glass, brooch, book, ballad, knife, tape, glove, shoelace, bracelet, or ring made of horn remains in my pack. they crowded around me to see who could buy first, as if my trinkets were blessed and brought grace to the buyer. it let me know who had the fullest purse, and what i saw i remembered to put to use later. the yokel, who lacks just one quality to be a reasonable man, loved the girls' song so much that he wouldn't leave until he had bought both the tune and the words. and all the others were so entranced that it was as though all their other senses were committed to hearing. you could have stolen a skirt because no one could feel anything. it was easy to strip a purse from a codpiece part of a man's clothing attached to the front of his hose and covering his genitals. codpiece , and i could have used a file to take keys off a chain. there was no hearing or feeling anything except for that song, and admiration for it. so while they were spellbound i stole most of their purses, which were filled with money for the festival. if the old man hadn't come in wailing about his daughter and the king's son and scared my little birds from the feed, i would have taken purses from every one.
on a leash, straining for the moment when you'll be let loose. the hunt is on! follow your spirit, and as you charge cry, "god for harry, england, and saint george!"
gentle cousin, let's go thank him and encourage him. my my father's rude and envious behavior is like a knife through my heart. (to orlando) sir, you fought very well. if you live up to your potential in love as well, your wife will be a very happy woman.
no, but my letters will be there as soon as you arrive, and they'll clear up that question.
on, on, on, on, on! to the breach, to the breach!
(giving him a chain from her neck) gentleman, wear this for me. i'm a woman who's down on her luck, and i'd give more if i could. shall we go, cousin?
and the letter that you'll get from king leontes, 
please, corporal, stop! the fighting is too violent. speaking for myself, i only have one life, not dozens. too violent! that's just how it is, the plain truth of it.
yes. good luck, fair gentleman.
will set your father at ease.
the plain truth doesn't lie. you can see how it is all around. fighting comes and goes, god's loyal servants drop and die. (he sings) and sword and shield in bloody field will win immortal fame.
(to himself) can't i even say "thank you"? i left my brain back on the wrestling field. what's left of me is a dummy, just a lifeless block.
may you be happy! all your plans are good.
i wish i were in an alehouse in london! i would give all my glory for a mug of ale and safety.
he's calling us back. my pride rosalind implies that he conquered her as well, in the sense that she's fallen in love with him. pride fell when my fortunes did; i'll ask him what he wants., did you call us, sir? sir, you wrestled well and conquered more than just your enemies.
who is this?
me too. (he sings) if wishes could avail me, my purpose would not fail me, it's there that i would go.
will you come on, cousin?
we'll use this man, since we should use anything that will help.
(singing) as surely but more poorly than birds sing on the bough.
i'm coming. farewell.
if they've overheard me, i'll be hanged.
up to the breach, you dogs! go! get a move on, you scrotems!
what is this passion that ties up my tongue? i can't speak to her, even though she asked me to. oh, poor orlando, you've been overthrown! either charles or some prettier thing has mastered you.
how are you, good fellow? why are you shaking? don't worry, man, we don't intend you any harm.
great duke, be merciful to mortal men. calm your rage, your manly rage! calm your rage, great duke! dear man, calm your rage. be lenient, dearest!
good sir, as a friend, i advise you to leave this place. although you deserve praise, applause, and love, right now the duke misconstrues everything you've done. the duke is temperamental. i'm sure you can imagine what i mean without my having to spell it out.
i am a poor man, sir.
this is healthy talk. your honor's is unhealthy talk.
thank you, sir. now please tell me this: which of the two ladies who were at the wrestling match is the duke's daughter?
why, be still. no one here will steal from you. but we need your poor-looking clothes. undress right now, it's urgent, and swap clothes with this gentleman. the bargain is bad for him, but wait, (giving him money) there's something more in it for you.
young though i am, i've been observing these three blowhards closely. i am "man", which is to say, servant, to all three of them. yet not one among them, if all three were to wait on me, could be my "man," because three such fakes don't amount to a man. take bardolph: he is cowardly and blustery. he acts tough, but he doesn't fight. pistol, meanwhile, has a lethal tongue but an inert sword. he destroys words but keeps his weapon in one piece. as for nym, he's heard men of valor are men of few words, so he refuses to pray lest he should be thought a coward. but he has as few good deeds as he has bad words, for he never cracked anyone's head but his own, and that was against a post when he was drunk. they will steal anything and call it spoils. bardolph stole a lute case, carried it for thirty-six miles, and sold it for a penny and a half. nym and bardolph are sworn brothers in crime, and in calais they stole a fire shovel: i could see from that that they had no pride. they would like me to be as familiar with men's pockets as their gloves and handkerchiefs, which goes against my manhood, because to take something from another's pocket and put it into my own is plain stealing. i must leave them and seek some better employment. their villainy nauseates me, and i must therefore vomit it up.
neither one is his daughter, to judge from their good manners. but really, the smaller one is his daughter. the other is the daughter of the banished duke. duke frederick keeps her for his daughter's sake; the love between the two of them is stronger than the bond between sisters. but i will tell you that lately the duke has been displeased with his niece, and for no other reason than that people praise her virtues and pity her for her father's sake. i swear, one day the duke's malice toward rosalind will suddenly erupt. goodbye, sir. later, in a better world than this, i'd love to get to know you.
i am a poor man, sir. (aside) i know you well enough.
captain fluellen, you must come straight to the tunnels. the duke of gloucester wants a word with you.
i'm indebted to you. goodbye.
no, please, hurry. the gentleman is already half undressed.
the tunnels! tell the duke i'm not so keen to come to the tunnels. for the tunnels, see, are not strictly in accordance with the proper practice of war. they're not deep enough. for the enemy, see, and you can explain this to the duke, see, has dug its own tunnels four yards below ours. by jesus, i think they will blow up everything if we don't improve our tactics.
out of the frying pan and into the fire, from a tyrant duke to a tyrant brother! but, oh, heavenly rosalind!
are you serious, sir? (aside) i think it's a trick.
the duke of gloucester, who has command over the siege, is in consultation with an irishman, a very valiant gentleman indeed.
what's going on, rosalind? cupid have mercy! you won't utter a single word?
hurry, i beg you.
it's captain macmorris, right?
i don't even have one to throw at a dog.
indeed, i think it is sincere, but i can't believe it.
i think so.
no, your words are too precious to be wasted on dogs. throw some of your words at me. come on, throw your words at me like you would throw stones at a dog.
unbuckle, unbuckle.
jesus, he's an ass if there ever was one! i will say as much to his face. he knows no more about the proper practice of war, see, the ancient practices, than a puppy.
then there would be two cousins lying sick in bed: one hurt by reasons and the other gone crazy without any.
(to perdita) lucky mistress, may you be lucky yet! you must take a disguise. put on your sweetheart's hat and pull it down over your eyes, wrap up your face, take off your outer garments, and, as much as you can, change your appearance as much as possible. that way i hope you'll get to the ship without being discovered, for i fear that people are watching for you.
here he comes with captain jamy, the scots captain.
is all of this about your father?
i understand that what we're doing means i have to play a role.
captain jamy is a wonderfully valorous gentleman, that's certain, one with great learning and knowledge concerning ancient warfare, i happen to know from his maneuvers. by jesus, he will defend his position on the practices of the ancient roman wars as well as any military man in the world.
no, some of it is about my child's father. oh, this working-day working-day=wearisome. working-day world is full of thorns!
there's no helping it. are you done there?
good day to you, captain fluellen.
they're only burrs, cousin, thrown at you because you took a holiday from conventional behavior. if we walk on the well-worn paths, they won't get caught in our petticoats.
if i ran into my father now, he wouldn't know me as his son.
good evening to your worship, good captain james.
those burrs i could shake off my clothing, but these are in my heart.
no, you won't have a hat.
tell me, captain macmorris, have you left the tunnels? have the excavators stopped work?
cough them up.
come along, lady, come. farewell, my friend.
christ, it's a disaster. the work is stopped, the trumpet has sounded the retreat. i swear by this hand and my father's soul, the whole thing is a disaster. it's all stopped. i could have blown up the town in an hour. oh, it's a disaster, a disaster, by this hand, it's a disaster.
i'd try it, if i could cry "hem" and have him.
goodbye, sir.
captain macmorris, i beg your pardon, but would you grant me a discussion or two with you, see, partly touching on or concerning the practice of war, the roman wars, for the sake of argument, see, and friendly conversation? partly to confirm my opinion and partly for the satisfaction, see, of my mind, with respect to the demands of proper military practice, that's the point?
come on, take control of your feelings.
oh, perdita, we've forgotten something now! please, let's have a word.
oh, this is fine, good captains. and i'll answer you, if i may, when i get a chance. indeed i will.
but they're siding with a better wrestler than myself.
(aside) next i'll tell the king that they've escaped and where they are going. then i hope i can persuade him to follow after them, and in his company i'll then return to sicilia, which i've longed to see again.
this is no time to have a discussion. christ! the day is hot and between the weather and the wars and the king and the dukes, it's no time for a discussion. the town is besieged, and the trumpet calls us to the gap, and we talk and do nothing, by christ. it's a disgrace to us all. god save me, it's a disgrace, by this hand, when there are throats to be cut and work to be done, and nothing gets done, christ save me.
oh, that's a good wish! you'll fight with him eventually, and fall celia means both that rosalind will be "defeated" by her affections for orlando and that she will "fall" to him sexually. fall . but let's put these jokes aside for a moment, and speak earnestly. is it possible that you could have fallen in love with orlando, sir rowland's youngest son, this suddenly?
may fortune speed us! so we set forth to sea, camillo.
i swear by the mass, before i close my eyes to go to sleep, i'll put in some good fighting, or i'll lie in the ground dead. and i'll kill as valiantly as i can, that's for sure. that is the long and the short of it. but truly, i would love to hear the two of you discuss warfare.
the duke, my father, loved his father very much.
the faster the better.
captain macmorris, i think, see, correct me if i'm wrong, there are not many of your nation, 
does that necessarily mean you should love his son? by that kind of logic, i should hate orlando, since my father hates his father. but i don't hate orlando.
i think i understand this matter and am hearing it right. it's necessary for a thief to have an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand. a good nose is needed, too, to find work for the other senses. i see that this is a time when the unfair man thrives. what an exchange this would have been even without payment! what a profit i got through this exchange! surely the gods are indulging us, and we can do whatever we want on a whim. the prince himself is doing wrong, sneaking away from his father with his girlfriend. if i thought it were an honest deed to tell the king, i wouldn't do it. i think it is more dishonest to conceal it, so i'll remain true to my profession and say nothing.
my nation? what is my nation? it's a villain and a bastard and a coward and a rascal. what is my nation? who talks of my nation?
no, please don't hate him, for my sake.
aha, here is more to do for a sharp mind. every lane, every shop, church, meeting, or hanging gives a careful man an opportunity.
captain macmorris, if you take my words in some way other than how they were meant, see, i'll have to think you're not treating me with the good will you ought to, see, since i am as good a man as yourself, both in the practice of war and in my country of origin and in other respects.
why shouldn't i? doesn't he deserve it?
see, look at the situation you are in now! there's no way out but to tell the king that she's a changeling a child believed to have been secretly swapped for the parents' real child by fairies. changeling and not your flesh and blood.
i do not know that you are as good a man as myself. so, by christ, i'll cut off your head.
let me love him because he deserves it, and you can love him because i do. look, here comes the duke.
perhaps, but listen to me.
now, now, both of you gentlemen! you go out of your way to misunderstand each other.
he looks angry.
no, listen to me.
yes, and that's a serious failing.
madam, hurry as fast as you can get out of my court.
go on, then.
the town is asking for a pause in the fighting for negotiation.
me, uncle?
since she's not actually related to you, your family hasn't offended the king, and so he shouldn't punish your family. show him what secret things you've found with her, everything but what she has on her. once that's done, the law will have nothing on you, i guarantee you.
captain macmorris, when we have more leisure, see, i will be so bold as to show you i know about the practice of warfare, and that's that.
you, niece. in ten days time, if you're found within twenty miles of the court, you'll die for it.
i'll tell the king everything, yes, every word, and i'll reveal his son's pranks, too. i must say, his son isn't an honest man to either his father or to me, trying to make me the king's brother-in-law.
what has the governor of the town decided? this is the final discussion i will grant. so submit to my mercy or, like men who revel in their own destruction, challenge me to do my worst. for, as i am a soldier, the name i think suits me best, once i begin my attack on harfleur again, i will not leave the half-conquered town until she lies buried in her own ashes. the gates of mercy will be closed by then, and harsh and hard-hearted soldiers, who have tasted blood, will have free reign to commit whatever violence they want, mowing down your lovely young virgins and budding infants. what will it matter to me, since you will have brought it on yourselves, if sacrilegious war, dressed in red like satan, his face blackened by smoke, should commit every form of savage destruction and ruin? what will it matter to me if your innocent maidens are raped, since you will have asked for it? what power can rein in promiscuous evil once it's gotten rolling? we might as well send orders to the whale to come ashore as try to restore order in soldiers carried away with their looting. therefore, you men of harfleur, take pity on your town and on your people while i still have control over my men, while the cool and moderate winds of mercy still have power to disperse the depraved, infected clouds of murder, plunder, and crazed soldiers defile your shrieking daughters with their foul hands, and your fathers dragged by their silver beards, their reverend heads dashed against the walls. expect to see your naked babies skewered upon pikes while their
please, your grace, tell me what crime i have committed. if i know my own thoughts and desires, and i'm not dreaming or crazy, which i'm sure i'm not, then, dear uncle, i've never had so much as a half-formed thought that would have offended you.
indeed, brother-in-law is the furthest you could be from him, and your blood would have been not at all more valuable.
grief-crazed mothers tear the clouds with their loud cries, just as the women of judea did when herod slaughtered their infants. what do you say? will you surrender and avoid all this or be called to account for the destruction of this town?
all traitors protest like this. if they could purge their guilt simply by saying that they were innocent, they'd all be as innocent as god himself. i don't trust you. enough said.
(aside) very wise, gullible men!
today our hopes are at an end. the dauphin, whom we asked for reinforcements, sends back the answer that he's not yet in a position to raise so great an army. therefore, great king, we surrender our town and lives to your kind mercy. enter our gates and do as you like with us and our possessions, for we cannot defend ourselves any longer.
but your mistrust alone can't make me a traitor, on what basis do you suspect me?
well, let's go to the king. there is something in this bundle that will make him reconsider things.
open your gates.
you are your father's daughter. that's enough.
(aside) i don't know how this complaint might hinder the flight of florizel, my master.
come, uncle exeter, enter harfleur. stay there and fortify it well against the french. deal with them all mercifully on my behalf, dear uncle. meanwhile, with winter coming on and sickness growing among our troops, we'll withdraw to calais. tonight in harfleur we will be your guest; tomorrow we'll march on.
i was his daughter when your highness took my father's dukedom. i was his daughter when you banished him. treason is not inherited, my lord. but even if we did inherit it from our family, what does that have to do with me? my father wasn't a traitor. so, please, my lord, don't assume that i'm treacherous just because i'm poor, with no titles to my name.
let's hope that he's at the palace.
(speaking in french, for the entire scene) alice, you have been to england and you know the language.
dear master, listen to me.
(aside) even if i'm not naturally honest, sometimes i happen to be. let me take off my peddler's beard.
(speaking in french, for the entire scene) a little, madam.
yes, celia, we kept her here for your sake. otherwise, she would have been banished with her father.
hello, countrymen! where are you going?
please teach me english. i must learn to speak it. what is the word for la main in english?
at that time, i didn't beg you to keep her here; you wanted her here, and you felt guilty. i was too young at the time to appreciate her value, but now i know her. if she's a traitor, why then, so am i. we have always slept together, woken up together, learned, played, and eaten together. wherever we went, we went together and inseparable.
to the palace, if it pleases your worship.
la main? that is "de hand."
she's too devious for you. her smoothness, her silence, and her patient suffering appeal to the people, and they pity her. you're a fool. she's robbing you of the attention you deserve. you will seem even brighter and more virtuous when she's out of the picture. so be quiet. the sentence i've passed down on her is firm and unshakeable. she is banished.
tell me what your business is there, and with whom, what's in that bundle, where you live, your names, ages, what you own and your parents, or anything else that ought to be known.
"de hand." and les doigts?
then lay that sentence on me too, my lord. i cannot live without her.
we're just ordinary fellows, sir.
les doigts? good lord, i forget les doigts. but it will come to me. the word for les doigts, i believe, is "de fangres." yes, "de fangres."
you are a fool., you, niece, prepare to leave. on my honor and by my word, if you outstay the ten days, you will die.
that's a lie. you're ragged-looking and hairy. don't lie to me. it only works for tradesmen, and they often call us soldiers liars and cheat us at the same time. but we pay them for it with coins rather than swords, so they're not really giving us lies since we're paying.
la main, "de hand"; les doigts, "de fangres." i think i am a very apt student! i have learned two words of english already. what is the word for les ongles?
oh, my poor rosalind, where will you go? do you want to exchange fathers? i'll give you mine. i insist, don't be more distressed than i am.
you would have given us a lie if you hadn't stopped yourself in the middle.
"les ongles?" that is "de nails."
i have more reason to be distressed.
are you from the court, if you please, sir?
"de nails." listen! tell me if i'm saying it right. de hand, de fangres, et de nails."
no you haven't, cousin. please, be cheerful. don't you realize the duke has also banished me, his daughter?
i am from the court, whether it please me or not. don't you see an air of the court in my clothes? don't i walk as though i'm from the court? don't you smell the odor of the court on me? don't i treat your base rank with the contempt of the court? do you think that because i subtly draw out your business from you, that i'm not from the court? i am a courtier from head to foot. and i'll either push along or prevent your business there, so i command you to tell me what it's about.
well done, madam. excellent english.
no, he hasn't.
my business, sir, is with the king.
tell me the english for le bras.
oh, he hasn't? well, then, you don't have the affection that would teach you that you and i are one. will we be separated? should we part, sweet girl? no. let my father find another heir. so, help me plan how we'll escape, where we'll go, and what we'll take with us. don't even try to take this all upon yourself, bearing your grief alone and leaving me out. i swear by the heavens, which have grown pale in sympathy with us, i'm going with you, whatever you say.
do you have an advocate with him?
"de arm," madam.
but where will we go?
i don't know.
and le coud?
to the forest of arden, to find your father.
an advocate means a pheasant at the court the yokel thinks advocate means bribe, and game birds like pheasants were supposedly given as bribes at local courts. advocate means a pheasant at the court ; say you don't have one.
"d'elbow."
but what danger we'll put ourselves in, two young, innocent women traveling so far! fresh beauty attracts thugs and thieves even more than money.
none, sir. i don't have a pheasant, either a male or a female one.
"d'elbow." let me practice all the words you've taught me so far.
i'll put on some poor and ragged clothes and smudge my face with dirt. you do the same, and we'll be able to travel without attracting any attackers' attention.
how blessed are we that are smart! yet nature could have made me just like them, so i won't treat them with contempt.
it's too difficult, i think, madam.
wouldn't it be better, since i'm unusually tall for a woman, to dress myself like a man? i'll wear a big sword in my belt, carry a boar-spear in my hand, and hide all my womanish fear in my heart. we'll maintain a swaggering, warrior look, like so many cowardly men, whose manner has nothing to do with what they're feeling.
he must be a great man at the court.
i beg to differ, alice. listen: "de hand, de fangres, de nails, d'arma, de bilbow."
what should i call you when you're a man?
his garments look expensive, but he doesn't wear them well.
"d'elbow," madam.
i'll take no lesser name than that of jove's in classical mythology, jove, king of the gods, fell in love with the mortal boy ganymede and carried him to mt. olympus to be his cup bearer. jove's own servant. so call me ganymede. and what will you be called?
his oddness makes him seem even more noble. i'll bet that he's a great man. i know by the toothpicks he uses ornate toothpicks were fashionable at the time. toothpicks he uses .
oh, lord, i forgot! "d'elbow." what is the word for le col?
something that refers to my current state. instead of celia, call me aliena.
what about that bundle there? what is in the bundle? and in the box?
"de neck," madam.
cousin, what if we brought that clownish fool of your father's court, touchstone? wouldn't he be a comfort to us in our travels?
sir, the bundle and the box hold secrets that only the king may know, and which he'll know within the hour if i can speak to him.
"de nick." and le menton?
he'd walk the whole wide world with me. leave me alone to go convince him. let's go gather our jewels and money. we'll figure out the best time and safest route to avoid being found out by my father's guards, whom he'll send out as soon as he discovers i've gone. now, we go contentedly to freedom, not banishment.
old man, you have wasted your work.
"de chin."
now, my companions and brothers in exile, hasn't experience made this simple life sweeter than a life of glittery pomp and circumstance? aren't these woods less perilous than the court, with all its jealousies and intrigues? out here we feel the changing of the seasons, but we're not bothered by it. when the icy fangs of the brutal, scolding wind bite and blow on my body, even though i'm shivering with cold, i can appreciate the weather's honesty. i smile and think, "thank goodness the wind doesn't flatter me: it's like a councilor who makes me feel what i'm really made of." adversity can have its benefits, like the ugly, poisonous toad toads were thought to be poisonous, and to each have a jewel embedded in its forehead. toad that wears a precious jewel in its forehead. in this life, far away from the civilized world, we can hear the language of the trees, read the books of the running streams, hear sermons in the stones, and discover the good in every single thing.
why, sir?
le col, "de nick"; le menton, "de sin."
i wouldn't change my situation for anything. you're lucky, my lord, to be able to see the peace and sweetness even in what bad luck has brought you.
the king isn't at the palace. he's gone on a new ship to ease his sadness and to refresh himself. if you are able to grasp such serious things, you know that the king is full of grief.
yes. if i may say so, your highness pronounces the words just like a native english speaker.
come, shall we hunt some deer for dinner? it bothers me, though, that these poor spotted innocents, who, after all, are this deserted city's native citizens, should be gouged with arrows.
so it is said, sir, because his son meant to marry a shepherd's daughter.
i have no doubt i'll learn it, and in a short time, too, god willing.
indeed, my lord, the gloomy jaques grieves over these deaths. he swears that when you kill the deer, you're a worse usurper than your brother was for banishing you. today, lord amiens and i followed jaques. we saw him lie down along a brook under an oak tree whose ancient roots peeked out from the earth. a poor, lonely stag who had been hurt by a hunter's arrow came to rest there, where he heaved such heavy groans that the effort seemed to stretch his hide to bursting. big, round tears ran piteously down the animal's innocent nose. the hairy fool, watched closely by sad jaques, stood on the very edge of the brook, adding his own tears to the streaming water.
if the shepherd hasn't been arrested already, he should flee. he'll suffer curses so fierce and tortures so terrible that it would break the back of a man and the heart of even a monster.
you haven't forgotten what you just learned?
and what did jaques say? didn't he take the opportunity to draw a moral from the scene?
do you think so, sir?
no, i'll recite it for you right now: "de hand, de fangres, de nails, "
oh, yes, he created a thousand comparisons. first, he spoke of the deer's needless addition to the stream's water supply. "poor deer," he said, "you're just like a human: you add more to what already has too much." then, about the deer's being alone, abandoned by his velvety companions: "it's appropriate," he said, "that a miserable creature should excuse itself from company." just then, a carefree herd of deer, having just eaten their fill of pasture grass, bounded along without stopping to greet their wounded brother. "sure," said jaques, "hurry on, you fat and greasy citizens. why stop and notice this poor, broken, bankrupt creature here?" in this way, he most insightfully pierced to the heart of the country, the city, the court, and even our lives out here in the forest, swearing that we are mere usurpers and tyrants, frightening and killing animals in their own homes.
he won't suffer these harsh and bitter punishments alone, either. all those who are related to him, even if they are very distant relatives, will hang, too. it's a great pity, but it's necessary. that an old shepherd and rogue would act as a broker and offer to have his daughter marry into the royal family! some say he'll be stoned, but that manner of death is too soft for someone who tried to drag the throne into a sheep's pen! he can't die too many times, or in too painful a way.
"de nails," madame.
and did you leave him like this?
have you heard if the old man has a son?
"de nails, de arme, de ilbow."
we did, my lord, weeping and carrying on about the sobbing deer.
he has a son who will be whipped, then covered with honey and put on a wasp's nest until he is three quarters of the way to death. then he'll be revived with liquor or some other hot drink. then, raw as his flesh is, on the hottest day that can be predicted he'll be set against a brick wall with the sun beating down upon him, and where he will be swarmed with flies. but why are we talking about these traitors, whose offences are so terrible that their misery should cause us happiness? tell me, since you seem to be honest, ordinary men, what business do you have with the king? since i'm well-respected at court, i'll take you to his ship, bring you into his presence, and whisper to him a recommendation on your behalf. if there is any man beside the king who can help your case, that's me.
forgive me, de elbow.
take me to him. i love to argue with him when he's having one of these fits, because then he always has a lot to say.
he seems to have a great deal of authority. approach him and give his some money. no matter how stubborn and untamable authority may be, a little money can make him docile. let him put his hand into your purse, and no more fuss. remember: "stoned," and "flayed alive."
that's what i said, "de elbow, de nick, et de sin." what are the words for le pied and la robe?
i'll bring you to him right away.
if it pleases you, sir, to take on this business for us, here is all the gold i have. i'll pay you an equal amount more, and i'll leave you this young man as a guarantee until i can bring the rest to you.
"de foot," madame, and " de count by "count," alice means "gown." de count ."
can it be possible that no one saw them leave? it cannot be. some villains in my court must have known about this and let it happen.
after i have done what i have promised?
"de foot" and "de count"! oh, lord, those are vulgar words, wicked, ugly, immodest, not fitting for respectable girls to speak. i would not utter those words in the presence of the lords of france for all the world. ugh! "le foot" and "le count"! nevertheless, i will recite my lesson one more time all together: "de hand, de fangres, de nails, de arm, de elbow, de nick, de sin, de foot "foot" and "count" sound to katherine like the french foutre and con: to have sex and vagina, respectively. de foot , de coun."
i can't find anyone who saw her leave. her ladies-in-waiting saw her go to bed, and early this morning the bed was empty.
yes, sir.
that is excellent, madame!
my lord, that dirty clown whom you laughed at so often is also missing. hisperia, the princess's gentlewoman, confesses that she overheard your daughter and her cousin praising the good looks and skills of the wrestler who recently beat the muscular charles. hisperia believes that, wherever they have gone, that young man is likely with them.
well then, give me the first half. are you part of this deal?
that's enough for one lesson. let's go to lunch.
send a message to his brother. bring that swinger orlando here. if he's not around, bring his brother oliver to me. i'll make oliver find him. do this immediately, and don't stop searching and interrogating until you've brought home these foolish runaways.
in a way, sir. but even if my skin is pitiful, i hope i won't be whipped out of it.
he's certainly crossed the river somme.
who's there?
oh no, that's what will happen to the shepherd's son. he'll be hanged as an example.
and if he advances unopposed, my lord, let us abandon france. let us leave everything and give our vineyards to the barbarous nation.
my young master! oh, my gentle master! my sweet master! oh, you living memory of old sir rowland! what are you doing here? why are you so strong and good? why do people love you? and why are you noble, strong, and brave? why would you be so foolish as to beat the moody duke's favorite champion? your praise has beaten you home. don't you know, master, that some men's best qualities do them in? yours are like that, complete and utter traitors to you. oh, what a world this is, when even what is beautiful in a man poisons him!
(to the shepherd) what a comfort! we must go to the king and show him our amazing proof. he must know that perdita isn't your daughter or my sister, or we'll be dead. (to autolycus) sir, i will give you as much money as this old man does once the business is concluded, and until then, i'll stay with you as a guarantee for payment.
god alive! shall a few offshoots of our nation, born of our father's lust, our branches grafted to wild and savage trunks, grow to such a height that they look down with contempt on the plants from which they first sprang the dauphin is referring to the nor man invasion of , in which william the conqueror and natives of normandy conquered england. sprang ?
why, what's the matter?
i trust you. walk straight ahead toward the sea. go along the right hand side of the road. i just need to go to the bathroom and i'll follow you.
normans, nothing more than bastard normans, norman bastards! i hope i die! if they march along unopposed, i will sell my dukedom for a sodden, filthy farm in that craggy isle of albion.
oh, unlucky boy! don't walk through these doors. in this house lives a man who despises all that is good in you. oliver, your brother, no, not your brother; and yet he's the son, but no, i won't call him the son, of that great man i was about to call his father, has heard about how well you did in the wrestling match, and tonight he's planning on burning your house down, with you in it. and if he fails at that, he will find other ways to kill you. i overheard him and his plans. this is no place for you; this home is now a slaughterhouse. hate it, fear it, do not come inside.
we're blessed to have this man with us, i say, blessed.
god of battles! where do they get this spirit? isn't their climate foggy, cold, and dark? doesn't the sun shine palely down on them, as though in contempt, killing their fruit with frowns? can boiled water (beer, they call it), a drink for broken-down horses, heat their cold blood to such a valiant level? and shall our lively blood, quickened by wine, be so frosty? oh, for the
then where would you have me go, adam?
let's go before he has to tell us again. he was put here to help us.
honor of our land, let us not hang like ropes of icicles off the thatched roofs of our houses while men of a more frosty temperament sweat off their own gallant youth in our rich fields! our fields may be rich, but they are ruled poorly.
it doesn't matter where, so long as it's not here.
even if i wanted to be honest, i see fate wouldn't let me. she drops profits right in my pocket. i have two opportunities here: to get gold and to do something good for my master the prince, and who knows how that will help me in the future. i will bring these two gullible men aboard the ship with him. if he thinks their complaint to the king has nothing to do with him and wants to put them back on shore again, let him call me a rogue for being so interfering. i can't be hurt by that name, or any shame attached to it. i'll present them to him. there might be money in it.
by faith and honor, our wives mock us, telling us brazenly that our vigor has been so bred out of us that they plan to give their bodies to the lusty youth of england to resupply france with men who, though bastards, will at least be warriors.
what, would you have me beg for my food? or become a lowlife, sticking up travelers on the road? this is all that's left for me to do, but i won't do it. i'd rather give myself up to the hatred of a violent brother who refuses to recognize that we are brothers.
(to leontes) sir, you have done enough and have shown the sorrow and piety of a saint. you have redeemed every mistake you might have made, and have paid more penance than you have done wrong. at last, forgive your sins as heaven has forgiven it, and forgive yourself.
they tell us we'd be better off in english dancing schools, where we could teach the latest dances, as our grace is all in our heels; we are no better than high-class deserters.
but don't do that. i have five-hundred gold coins, which i carefully saved when i was working for your late father. i meant to use it for my retirement, to help me when my old body was lame and forgotten in some dark corner. but take the money, and god, who feeds even the raven and looks after even the sparrow, will comfort me in my old age. here is the gold, i give it all to you. let me be your servant. i know i may be old, but i'm strong and healthy, because in my youth i never drank nor lived recklessly. therefore, my old age is like a blustery winter: cold, but kindly. let me go with you. i'll do everything a younger man could do for you.
as long as i remember her and her virtue, i can't forget how i attacked them, and i still think of the wrong i did. my misbehavior was so terrible that it has left my kingdom without an heir and destroyed the sweetest companion that a man could hope would bear his children.
where is montjoy, the herald? send him on his way quickly. tell him to greet the king of england with our sharp defiance. rise, princes, and, with a spirit of honor more sharply edged than your swords, rush to the battlefield: charles delabreth, high constable of france; you dukes of orlans, bourbon, berri, alenon, brabant, bar, and burgundy; jaques chatillon, rambures, vaudemont, beaumont, grandpr, roussi, and fauconberg, foix, lestrale, bouciqualt, and charolois. high dukes, great princes, barons, lords and knights, for the sake of the great positions you hold, rid yourselves of this great shame. stop harry of england, who is now sweeping through our land with banners drenched in the french blood he spilled at harfleur. rush on his army the way the melting snow of the alps spits on the low valleys below them. descend on him: you have power enough. and bring him into rouen as our prisoner.
oh, good old man, you're a great example of that old work ethic, where people worked because it was their duty, not just for the money. your approach isn't the fashion these days, when no one works hard except for a promotion, and, as soon as they've got it, they stop working. but in working for me, old man, you are pruning a rotten tree: despite all your pains and efforts, it won't yield a single blossom. come along, though. we'll go together, and before we've spent all the savings of your youth, we'll find a way to make a living.
it is too true, my lord. even if you wedded every woman in the world one by one, or took the best quality from each and made the perfect woman, the woman you killed couldn't be matched.
now that's a mission worthy of great men! i'm only sorry that his numbers are so few and those men he has sick and starving on the march. when he sees our army, i'm sure his heart will sink with fear and he'll offer us a large sum in exchange for avoiding battleof.
go on, master, and i will follow you, with truth and loyalty to my last breath. from the time i was seventeen, over sixty years ago, i have lived in this house, but now i will live here no more. many men seek their fortune at seventeen; at eighty, it's a bit late. but fortune could not reward me better than to let me die well, without owing my master anything.
i think so, too. killed! the woman i killed! i did, but you wound me deeply to say it so bluntly. you say it as bitterly as i think it. now, please, don't say it often.
have montjoy hurry, then, lord constable, and have him ask the king of england what he is willing to pay us to get out of the war. prince dauphin, you'll stay with me in rouen.
oh lord, my spirits are tired!
never say that, good lady. there are a thousand other things you could have said that would have been of greater benefit and would have made you seem kinder.
no, please, i beg your majesty.
i wouldn't care about my spirits, if my legs weren't tired.
you are one of the people who want him to marry again.
be patient, because you're staying with me. go now, lord constable and all you princes, and quickly bring us news of england's defeat.
i'd insult my manly wardrobe by weeping like a woman if i didn't have to comfort the weaker vessel here, as the jacket and hose doublet (jacket) and hose (heavy, pants-length stockings) were traditional men's clothing. jacket and hose ought to be brave for the sake of the petticoat. so, have courage, good aliena.
if you wouldn't have him marry again, you don't care anything for the state, or for the continuance of his royal name. think about what dangers might befall his kingdom, and how anxious citizens might suffer, if he doesn't have a son. what is more virtuous than to rejoice that the former queen is in heaven? what would be holier than the king producing a child to restore the royal family and to make the realm safe and happy for the present and the future?
greetings, captain fluellen! have you just come from the bridge?
please bear with me. i can't go any further.
there is no one worthy to take the place of the queen who is gone. besides, the gods are fulfilling their intentions. didn't divine apollo say, through the words of his oracle, that king leontes should not have an heir until his lost child is found? and that seems as unlikely as the notion that my antigonus, whom i am sure died along with my infant, will rise from his grave and return to me. your advice is that my lord should go against the heavens and oppose their wills.
i assure you, there are some excellent military operations being carried out at the bridge.
i'd rather bear with you than bear by "bear you," touchstone means "carry you." bear you. but if i did carry you, it would be no cross elizabethan coins had crosses stamped on them. cross to bear, because i'm pretty sure you don't have any money.
don't worry about a son. the crown will find an heir. great alexander left his kingdom to the worthiest of his followers, so that his successor would be the best leader possible.
is the duke of exeter safe?
well, this is the forest of arden.
good paulina, i know you honor the memory of hermione. i wish that i had listened to you! then i would now be able to look into my queen's eyes and kiss her treasured lips, 
the duke of exeter is as courageous as agamemnon agamemnon was the leader of the greek army in the trojan war. mark antony fought brutus for control of the roman empire. agamemnon and a man whom i love and honor deeply, with my soul, and my heart, and my duty, and my life, and my livelihood, to the very utmost of my being. he is not, god be praised and blessed, hurt in any way but is holding the bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline. there is a standard-bearer there at the bridge. i truly think he is as valiant a man as mark antony. he is a man of no rank or consequence, but i saw him fight as gallantly as though he were.
yes, now i'm in arden, and that makes me the bigger fool. when i was at home, i was in a better place. but travelers have to be content.
and been the richer for having done so.
what is his name?
yes, be content, good touchstone.
you speak the truth. no wife such as that exists, so there will be no wife. for me to take a wife less perfect, and to treat her better, would make hermione's ghost arise again, and she'd appear here to me and say, "why insult me like this?"
he is called ensign pistol.
look who's coming: a young man and an old man, having a serious talk.
if she were able to, she'd be justified.
i don't know him.
what you're doing is the way to make her scorn you continually.
she would be, and she'd drive me to murder the woman i married in her place.
here he is.
oh, corin, i wish you could understand how much i love her!
i should think so. if i were hermione's ghost, i'd tell you to look at that new woman's eyes and tell me what about their dullness attracted you. then i'd shriek, and your ears would hurt to hear me. and then i'd say, "remember my eyes."
captain, i have a favor to beg of you. you're on very good terms with the duke of exeter.
i'm sure i can guess. i have been in love too, you know.
they were like stars, and next to them all other eyes look like dead coals! don't fear, paulina, i won't take another wife.
yes, god be praised, i have managed to earn his favor.
no corin, since you're old, you cannot guess, even if you were as dedicated a lover in your youth as there ever was, sighing and mooning all night long. if your love was anything like mine, and i'm sure that no man has loved as i love now, exactly how many ridiculous actions did your fantasizing lead you to?
will you swear to never marry unless i give you my permission?
bardolph, a soldier who is loyal and stout-hearted and full of valour, has, by a cruel trick of fate and a turn of silly fortune's wildly spinning wheel, that blind goddess who stands upon an ever-rolling stone, 
oh, a thousand of them, all of which i've forgotten.
never, paulina, on my life!
now, now, ensign pistol. fortune is depicted as blind, with a scarf over her eyes, to signify that she is blind. and she is depicted with a wheel to signify, this is the point, that she is turning and inconstant, and all about change and variation. and her foot, see, is planted on a spherical stone that rolls and rolls and rolls. truly, artists do wonderful things with the image of fortune. she provides an excellent moral.
oh, then you never loved as wholeheartedly as me. if you can't remember the stupidest little thing love made you do, you haven't loved. or if you haven't sat as i do now, boring your listener with all your lover's virtues, then you haven't loved. or if you haven't broken away from human company, as my feelings now lead me to do, you haven't loved. o phoebe, phoebe, phoebe!
then, my good lords, witness his oath.
fortune is bardolph's enemy. she frowns on him, for he has stolen a pax pax: a metal tablet bearing a picture of the crucifixion. "pax" is latin for "peace," and during the mass, the pax would be kissed by the priest and then by the congregation in a "kiss of peace." pax from a church and he must be hanged. a damnable death! it's fine for dogs to be hung, but men should go free and not have their windpipes strangled with hemp. but exeter has pronounced a death sentence, and for a cheap little pax. therefore, go and speak for him! the duke will listen to you. don't let bardolph's life be brought to an end by a length of cheap rope and with this shame. save his life, captain, and i will repay you.
oh, poor shepherd! listening to you speak of your wounded heart reminds me of my own pain.
you test him too much.
ensign pistol, i think i understand you.
me too. i remember when i was in love, i broke my sword on a stone, and told him to take that for coming at night to see jane smile. i remember kissing her washing stick and the cow's udders that her pretty, chapped hands had milked. i remember wooing a pea plant in her name, and then taking two pea pods and begging her to wear them "for my sake." those of us who are really in love will do the strangest things. but everything that lives is mortal, including the foolishness of love.
unless he sees another woman who looks as much like hermione as her picture, 
i'm glad to hear it.
you speak more wisely than you know.
good madam, 
actually, you shouldn't be, because, see, even if he were my own brother i'd want the duke to stick to his plan and have bardolph executed. discipline must be kept.
nah, i'll never be aware of my own wit, until i break my shins on it.
i'm done. yet, if my lord decides to marry despite everything, let me choose your queen. she won't be as young as your former wife, but she'll be someone who even your first queen would rejoice to see in your arms.
then die and be damned! and i'm giving the finger to your friendship!
by god! this shepherd's condition is like my own.
my faithful paulina, i won't marry until you tell me to.
very well.
and like mine, but i'm getting a little tired of it.
that will be when your first queen is alive again, not until then.
and the spanish finger the "spanish fig" (also "figo" or "fico") is an ob scene hand gesture. spanish finger to you!
please, one of you go ask that man over there if we can buy some food off him. i'm faint with hunger.
a man who calls himself prince florizel, son of polixenes, asks to see you. with him is his princess, who is the fairest lady i have ever seen.
very good.
(to corin) hey, clown!
what is this? he arrives without the ceremony someone of his station requires. that he appears so suddenly and unexpectedly tells me that it wasn't a planned visit, but one forced by circumstances. how many does he have with him?
why, that man is a total fraud and rascal. i remember him now. a pimp, a pickpocket.
shut up, fool. he's not your relative.
only a few, and those of rather low rank.
at the bridge he spoke as excellently as anyone i've ever heard, i promise you. but that's alright. what he just said to me, it's alright. i assure you, when the time comes, 
who's calling?
you say his princess is with him?
why, he's a fool, an idiot, a moron, a man who now and then joins the army so as to be able to give himself airs when he gets back to london and masquerades as a soldier. such fellows have memorized the names of famous commanders, and they can tell you, having learned such things by rote, not by experience, where this or that battle was fought, at such and such fort, at such and such wall, with such and such protective escort. and they can say who fought well, who was
your superiors.
yes, and she is the most incomparable woman that the sun has ever shone upon.
shot, who was disgraced, what terms the enemy insisted on. and they study how to express these things in proper military jargon, which they embellish with fashionable oaths. and what a beard trimmed like the general's or a rough uniform will do among foaming mugs and brains washed with ale, you wouldn't believe. but you must learn to recognize such liars, or you will be greatly taken advantage of.
if they weren't my betters, they'd be pretty wretched indeed.
oh, hermione, just as every era thinks it's better than the one past, so must you make way for a new woman. sir, you yourself have said and written that she was never, and never would be, equaled in beauty, but now you change your mind. your poetry was once filled with reports of her beauty, but it must have declined since you say that you have seen someone more beautiful.
i tell you what, captain gower; i perceive that he is not the man that he would have the world think he is. if i find an opportunity, i will give him a piece of my mind.
(to touchstone) stop it, i say., good evening to you, friend.
pardon, madam. i'm sorry to say i've almost forgotten hermione. when you see this other woman, you'll be speechless, too. if she started her own religion, it would put an end to the zeal of any other and make followers of anyone she called.
listen. the king is coming, and i must speak with him about what went on at the bridge., god bless your majesty!
good evening to you, too, noble sir, and to all of you.
what? not women, though?
tell me, fluellen: did you just come from the bridge?
please sir, if love or money can buy anything in this empty place, tell us where we can rest and feed ourselves. we'll pay you for the information. we have a young woman here who is very tired from traveling and faint with hunger.
women will love her because she is a woman more worthy than any man. men will love her because she is the most exceptional of women.
yes, your majesty. the duke of exeter has held the bridge very gallantly. the french have retreated, see, and there were great acts of courage. indeed, the enemy nearly took the bridge, but he was forced to retreat, and the duke of exeter holds the bridge. i can tell your majesty, the duke is a brave man.
dear sir, i pity the lady and wish, more for her sake than my own, that i was more able to help her. but i'm a hired hand: i don't profit from the flocks i tend. my master is a brutish man and doesn't care much if he gets to heaven by deeds of hospitality or not. besides, his cottage, his flocks, and his grazing rights are on sale now, and since he's not there, there's nothing to eat at our house. but let's see what's on hand. if i have anything to say about it, you will be most welcome there.
go, cleomenes. with the help of your friends, bring them back here for my welcome.
what men have you lost, fluellen?
who wants to buy the flock and the pasture?
still, it is strange that he comes to us so suddenly.
the enemy's losses have been very great, pretty substantial. to tell the truth, though, i think the duke hasn't lost a single man, except for one who will probably be executed for robbing a church, one bardolph, i don't know if your majesty knows the man. his face is all pustules and pockmarks, and pimples and inflammation, and his lips blow up toward his nose, which is like a red-hot coal, sometimes blue, sometimes red. but his nose is dead, and the fire's put out.
that young man who was just here. but he doesn't really care about buying anything.
if your prince, the most prized of children, were alive to see this, he would have gotten along well with this lord. they were born less than a month apart.
i want all such offenders to be dealt with that way, and i give precise orders that in our progress through the country there shall be nothing seized from the villages, nothing taken that is not paid for, none of the french harassed or abused in disrespectful language. for when mercy and cruelty compete for a kingdom, the gentler player is bound to win.
please, if you can do it without taking advantage of the young man, buy the cottage, pasture, and flock for us, and we'll pay you for it.
please, no more. stop. you know it's like he dies again for me when you talk about him. when i see this gentleman, your words will make me think of that which makes me go mad. they are here.
you know from my clothing who i am.
and we will raise your wages. i like this place. i could see myself wasting time here.
your mother was a faithful wife, prince, because in bearing you she has produced a copy of your royal father. you look and act so much like your father that if i were twenty-one, i'd call you brother just like i called him, and speak of some wild escapade we'd gotten into. you are very welcome here, and your fair princess, like a goddess! oh, alas, i've lost two who might have stood there, too, in wonderment, as you do. and then through my own folly i lost the company and friendship of your brave father, whom i wish i could see once more in this lifetime, even if it caused me sadness.
well then, i know who you are. what do you have to tell me?
the thing is definitely going to be sold. come with me. if you like what you see of the land, the profit that's possible, and this rustic life, i'll be your faithful servant, and buy the place with your gold right away.
i've come to sicilia at his command, and i bring from him all the greetings that a king and a friend can send to his brother. if it weren't for the infirmity of age that somewhat hinders him, he would travel here himself to greet you. he told me to tell you that he loves you, more than all the other kings alive.
my master's decision.
(singing) whoever wants to lie with me, under the greenwood tree, and turn his merry song to follow the sweet bird's singing, come here, come here, come here. here you will find no enemy besides winter and rough weather.
oh, my brother, good gentleman! i feel the wrongs i've done to him all over again. and your exceptional kindness shows me how slow i've been in greeting you. you are as welcome here as the spring is to the earth. and has he sent this most lovely woman here, too, across the dangerous and rough sea, to greet an unworthy man?
go ahead.
more, more, please, more.
my lord, she came from libya.
my king says this: "tell harry of england: though we appeared dead, we were only asleep. strategy makes a better soldier than haste. tell him we could have driven him back at harfleur but thought it unwise to burst a pustule before it had fully ripened. now the time is right for us to speak, and we do so with imperial authority. the king of england will regret his foolishness, discover his weakness, and marvel at our restraint. tell him therefore to consider what ransom he can offer as a prisoner of war. it must be commensurate with the losses we have suffered, the subjects we
it's only going to make you sad, monsieur jaques.
where the fierce smalus, that honorable lord, is both feared and loved?
have lost, and the indignity we have endured, for which he is too insignificant to sufficiently pay us back. his coffers are too poor to atone for our losses, his entire kingdom too small to account for the amount of blood we've shed, and the sight of him kneeling at our feet an empty satisfaction compared to the indignity we have put up with. add defiance to all this and, by way of conclusion, tell him that he has betrayed the men who follow him, whose death sentence has been pronounced." my king and master's message delivered, my task is done.
i'm glad about that. more, please, more. i can suck sadness out of a song the way a weasel sucks eggs. more, please, more.
most royal sir, from there, and from her father, who cried at her departure. from there, with a good south wind, we have crossed the sea to carry out my father's request to visit you. i have sent the best men of my entourage back to bohemia, to let my father know both that my trip to libya was successful and that my wife and i arrived here safely.
what is your name? i know your position.
my voice is ragged. i know i won't please you.
may the gods keep the air fresh and healthy while you are here! you have a great and graceful father, against whom i have committed a sin. in return, the angry heavens have left me childless, while your father is blessed by heaven with you, as he deserves. what might my life have been like if i had a son and daughter as lovely as you two to look at!
montjoy.
i don't want you to please me, i want you to sing. come on, another stanza, is that what you call 'em, "stanzas"?
most noble sir, if i didn't have such firm proof you wouldn't believe what i'm about to tell you. sir, polixenes himself greets you through me. he asks you to hold his son, who has abandoned his royal status and responsibilities, and who has fled from his father and his hope of the throne with a shepherd's daughter.
you do your job well. go back and tell your king i do not seek an encounter with him now but would be willing to march on to calais without interference, for, to be honest, though it's probably unwise to confess this to a powerful enemy who has the advantage, my men are considerably weakened by illness, my numbers reduced, and those few men i have almost no better than so many frenchmen, though when they were in good form, i tell you, herald, i thought three frenchmen walked on every pair of english legs. but god forgive me for bragging. it's a vice i've picked up since i've been here, and i must get rid of it. anyway, go tell your master i am here. my ransom is my own fragile, worthless body, my army but a weak and sickly escort. but, before god, tell him we will advance, even if the king of france himself and another foe as strong should stand in our way. (giving him money) that's for your trouble, montjoy. go tell your master to consider carefully. if we're allowed to pass, we will. if we're prevented, we'll discolor your golden ground with your red blood. and so, montjoy, farewell. this is our whole answer: we do not seek a battle nor will we avoid one. tell your master this.
call them whatever you want, monsieur jaques.
where is polixenes? tell me.
i'll deliver the message. i thank your highness.
nah, i don't care what their names by "names," jaques is thinking of the signatures on i.o.u notes, in which the name legally requires that the debt be honored. names are; they owe me nothing. will you sing?
here in your city. i just came from him. i'm astonished, as suits my message. it seems that while he was hurrying here to your court in pursuit of this fair couple, he met the father and brother of the lady, who had both left their country with the prince.
i hope they don't attack us now.
okay, but only because you want me to.
camillo has betrayed me, though his honor and honesty had been steadfast until now.
we're in god's hands, brother, not in theirs. march to the bridge. night is approaching. we'll set up camp across the river and continue on tomorrow. give the order to march.
well then, if i've ever thanked a man, i'll thank you now. but two men complimenting each other is like two baboons getting together. whenever a man compliments me, i feel like he's a beggar and i just gave him a penny, an embarrassing exchange. come on, sing, and those of you who won't sing, shut up.
you may charge him with that yourself. he's with the king, your father.
nonsense. i have the best armor in the world. i wish it were day!
well, i'll finish the song i started., meanwhile, sirs, set the table. the duke will drink under this tree., he's been looking for you all day, you know.
who? camillo?
you have wonderful armor, but give my horse his due.
and i've been avoiding him all day. he's too argumentative for me. i think of as many things as he does, but i just thank heaven and don't show off about it. come, warble for me.
camillo, sir. i spoke with him, and he now has the poor men in question. i've never seen anyone tremble as they do. they kneel, and kiss the earth, and take back what they've said every time they speak. polixenes refuses to listen and threatens them with various tortures.
it is the best horse in europe.
(singing) whoever shuns ambition and loves to live in the sun, hunting the food he eats pleased with what he finds, come here, come here, come here. here he will findno enemy but winter and rough weather.
oh, my poor father! the heavens set spies on us and refuse to let us celebrate our vows.
will it never be morning?
i wrote a verse to this tune, though it's not very imaginative. i'll give it you.
you are married?
my lord of orlans, and my lord high constable, are you talking about horses and armor?
and i'll sing it. (taking a paper fromjaques) it goes like this: (sings) if it should come to pass that any man turns into an ass and leaves his wealth and ease simply to please his stubborn will ducdame, ducdame, ducdame. here he will see fools as stupid as he if he will only come to me.
we aren't, sir, and it seems impossible that we will be. i see that the stars will fall to the earth first. chance works equally for the high- and the lowborn.
you are as well provided in both respects as any prince in the world.
what's that word " ducdame"? the actual meaning of "ducdame" is heavily debated. jaques's answer seems to be mainly a jab at the noblemen who have followed duke senior into the woods. ducdame"?
my lord, is this the daughter of a king?
what a long night this is! i will not trade my horse for any that walks on four legs. he leaps from the ground as if his insides were light as hairs. he's a flying horse, a pegasus, breathing fire out of his nostrils. when i sit astride him, i soar, i am a hawk. he trots on air. the earth sings when he touches it. the lowest part of his hoof is more musical than pan's pipe.
it's a greek invocation, calling fools into a circle. i'm going to take a nap, if i can, if i can't, i'll curse all the first-born children of egypt.
she will be, once she is my wife.
he's the color of nutmeg.
and i'll go find the duke; his banquet is ready.
i think that "once" will not be soon, given your father's speed in coming here. i am very sorry that you have gone against his wishes and your duty, and as sorry that your lady isn't as rich in rank as she is in beauty, so that you could marry her.
and hot as ginger. he is an animal worthy of perseus. he is pure air and fire. the duller elements of earth and water have no part in him, except in the moment of patient stillness when his rider mounts him. he is indeed worthy of the name "horse," and you can call all the rest beasts.
dear master, i can't go any farther. oh, i'm dying of hunger. i'll lie down here and measure out my grave. farewell, kind master.
dear, cheer up. even if fate, which is apparently our enemy, has chased us with my father, she has no power to change our love for each other. please, sir, remember when you were my age. thinking of such love, come forward in my defense. if you request it, my father will grant precious things as though they were nothing.
indeed, my lord, he is a perfectly wonderful horse.
hey, what's this, adam? no braver than this? live a little, be comforted a little, cheer up a little. if i can find any animal in this wild forest, i'll either be food for it or bring it as food for you. you're not as close to death as you think you are. for my sake, make yourself comfortable; keep death at arm's length for a while. i'll be back soon, and if i haven't brought you anything to eat, i will give you permission to die. but if you die before i return, you'll have made a mockery of my efforts. there we go! you look happier already, and i'll be back quickly. but you're lying out in the cold. come, i'll carry you to shelter. and you won't die for lack of dinner, if there's anything at all to eat in this desert-like forest. cheer up, good adam.
i'd beg your precious mistress's pardon if he counted her as nothing.
he is the prince of horses. his neigh is like a monarch's command. his face demands respect.
i think he must have turned into an animal, because i can't find him anywhere looking like a man.
my lord, you are too dazzled by youth. your queen deserved those admiring glances more than this woman only a month before she died.
enough, cousin.
my lord, he just left here. he was happy here, listening to a song.
i thought of her, even as i looked upon this woman.
no, the man who cannot extol the virtues of my horse from dawn to dusk is not particularly clever. it's a subject as worthy of endless discussion as the changing sea. if each grain of sand had a tongue to eulogize, my horse would be a topic for them all. he is a subject for a king to contemplate, and for a king's king to ride on, and for the world at large, both friend and stranger, to stop whatever they are doing and marvel at. i once wrote a sonnet in his praise which began, "wonder of nature, "
if that man, who's made up of conflicts, becomes musical, then there must be something wrong with the universe. go find him. tell him i want to speak with him.
but i haven't answered your request. i will tell your father that you haven't let your desire to marry this girl overwhelm your honor. i support both you and your wish. i'll go to him now on this errand. follow me, and watch where i go. come, my lord.
i have heard a sonnet to one's mistress that began like that.
he saved me the trouble: here he comes.
please, sir, were you there when it was revealed?
then the writer imitated the one i composed to my steed, for my horse is my mistress.
well, what's going on, mister? what kind of life do you lead that your poor friends must beg for your company? what, you look amused.
i was there when the bundle was opened, and heard the old shepherd tell how he found it. then, after some shock, we were all told to leave the room. but as i went, i thought i heard the shepherd say he found the child.
your mistress is a good mount.
a fool, a fool! i met a fool fools were conventionally distin guished by their motley (multi-colored) costume fool in the forest, wearing motley. what a miserable world! as sure as i eat to stay alive, i met a fool who was lying in the sun and complaining about his fortune. he spoke smartly, though he was a fool. "good morning, fool," i said. "no, sir," he said, "don't call me a fool until heaven has sent me my fortune fortune is supposed to favor fools. fortune ."
i would love to know the result of it.
a good mount for me, and that's the highest praise and very definition of a good mistress, that she belong to one alone.
then he pulled a watch from his bag and, looking at it solemnly, said, "it's ten o'clock. this way, we can see how the world moves. only an hour ago it was nine, and in another hour it will be eleven. and so, from hour to hour we ripen, and from hour to hour we rot. and there's a story behind that." when i heard that motley fool moralizing on the subject of time, i began to crow like a rooster. hearing a fool speaking so contemplatively made me laugh non-stop for an hour. oh, noble fool! a worthy fool! motley is the only thing to wear.
i could only hear bits and pieces of the conversation. but i could hear the king and camillo speaking in tones of admiration. they looked at each other so intently and with such astonishment that it seemed as if their eyes might pop out. even their inability to speak communicated something, and so did their gestures. they looked as if the world had been taken hostage, or destroyed. they were obviously amazed. but even the most astute observer would be unable to say if it was joy or sorrow they felt, though obviously a great deal of one or the other.
yes, but yesterday i could have sworn your mistress gave you a bumpy ride.
who is this fool?
here comes a gentleman who perhaps knows more. any news, rogero?
so, perhaps, did yours.
a worthy fool! he's been a courtier and says, "if ladies are young and pretty, they always know it." his brain in shakespeare's time, people thought different brains, with different amounts of moisture, processed information differently. a "dry" brain took a long time to be "impressed" by information brain is dry as a sailor's biscuit and crammed with all sorts of strange observations, which he presents in mangled fashion. oh, i wish i were a fool! i'm ambitious for one of those motley coats.
only of celebration. the oracle is fulfilled. the king's daughter is found. so many amazing things have happened this hour that ballad-makers won't be able to express them ballads were often composed about sensational events. ballad-makers won't be able to express them .
mine wasn't wearing a bridle.
you shall have one.
here comes lady paulina's servant. he can tell you more. what's happening now? this true story seems so much like a fable that it's hard to believe. has the king found his heir?
oh, then i guess she was old and gentle, and you rode barelegged, like an irish yokel.
that's all i ask from you, as long as you promise to rid yourself of any rotten idea that i am wise. like the wind, i must have the freedom to blast anyone i please, as fools do. and whoever is most irritated by my foolishness has to laugh the hardest. why, sir, must he? well, it's as plain as the beaten path to a parish church. any person who thinks i'm satirizing them would be stupid if they didn't pretend not to be hurt by my joke. otherwise, they'd be admitting i was talking about them, and the fool would expose the wise man's foolishness with a joke that wasn't even meant for him. dress me up in motley. let me speak my mind, and i'll rid the world of its sickness, if it will only tolerate my medicine.
it's very true, if truth was ever proven by evidence. all the stories match up and are consistent. it all shows that perdita is certainly the king's daughter, the cloak of queen hermione, the jewel that was found around her neck, letters in antigonus's handwriting found with her, how much she looks like her mother, her noble bearing, which shows her to be more than a shepherd's daughter, and many other things. did you see the meeting of the two kings?
you're a good judge of horsemanship.
to hell with you! i know what you'd do.
no.
take a tip from me, then. those who don't take care when they ride often find themselves thrown into a messy situation. i'd rather have my horse than a mistress.
what would i do besides good?
then you've missed something indescribable. you would have seen one joy upon another. it was so emotional that they both wept. they raised their eyes to heaven, clasped hands, and their faces were so contorted with emotion that you could only recognize them by their clothing. our king, overcome with joy at having found his daughter, cried out, "oh, your mother, your mother," as if that joy had become a loss. then he asked polixenes for forgiveness, then embraced his son-in-law, and then harassed his daughter with embraces. then he thanks the old shepherd, who stands there weeping like a stone statue. i've never heard of such an event. it's impossible to tell what happen, or to describe it.
i'd prefer to keep my mistress rather than some lame horse.
you would be committing a wicked sin by chiding other people for sinning, because you yourself have been a terrible sinner, as carnal in your appetites as lust itself, and all the swollen pustules of sin that you acquired in your freedom you now want to burst and shoot back into the world at large.
what became of antigonus, who carried away the child?
i'll tell you this, constable, my mistress has his own hair.
but if i cry out against pride in general, how can anyone say i'm accusing a particular person? aren't we talking about a problem as vast as the sea, that keeps flowing until all the wealth in the world is almost used up by everyone showing off?
that itself is like an old story, which will take effort to recount and is hard to believe. he was torn to pieces by a bear. the shepherd's son swears so, and not only does he seem innocent enough to be believed, but he also has a handkerchief and rings that paulina recognized as belonging to antingonus.
i could make the same boast even if i had a pig as my mistress.
what woman in the city am i talking about when i say that the clothes on a city-woman's unworthy back are rich enough to suit a prince? who can say i mean just her when all her neighbors are exactly like her? and when some lowlife protests that his fancy clothes aren't my problem, isn't he basically admitting that i'm talking about him? well, then. tell me how i've wronged him. if i was right about him, he's the one who's done wrong. if he isn't guilty of the faults i'm talking about, well then, my accusations fly by like wild geese, whom no one owns, since they don't apply to any man. but who is this?
what happened to his ship and his companions?
"the dog returns to its own vomit, and the newly washed sow to its mud puddle." you'd take anything for a mistress.
stop, and eat no more.
they were wrecked at the same time their master was killed. the shepherd saw it happen. so all those who helped exile the child were lost. paulina was caught between joy and sorrow! she was saddened at the loss of her husband but elated that the oracle was fulfilled. she lifted the princess in a hug, as if she could pin her to her heart so as never to lose her again.
at least i don't have a horse for my mistress, or a saying so beside the point.
but i haven't eaten anything yet.
this is a scene worthy of an audience of kings and princes, who were also the actors in it.
my lord constable, are those stars or suns i saw on the armor in your tent tonight?
and you won't until the needy eat.
one of the most moving things of all, which brought me to tears, was when the king bravely and sadly told his daughter how the queen died. how intently perdita listened! she went from sorrow to sorrow, and finally said, "alas," and seemed to bleed tears. i would say my heart nearly broke. even the most hardened onlooker was affected. some fainted, and all mourned. if the world could have seen it, everyone would have felt sorrow.
stars, my lord.
what kind of fighting cock is this?
have they returned to the court?
i hope some will fall off tomorrow.
are you acting so boldly from hardship or because you despise good manners? why do you seem so lacking in civility?
no. the princess heard that paulina keeps a statue of her mother that was made over many years and just recently finished. it was done by that italian master, julio romano, who makes his subjects so close to life that, if he could breathe life into his statues, he would replace nature. he has replicated hermione so closely that they say that you might speak to her and expect an answer. they've gone to see it, and they intend to dine there.
and yet i'll still have plenty.
you were right the first time. my piercing distress has stripped me of smooth manners. but i wasn't raised in the forest, and i was somewhat well-bred. but stop, i say. whoever eats this fruit before i've been taken care of dies.
i thought paulina had some important business there. ever since hermione died, she has visited that remote place privately two or three times a day. shall we go there and join the celebration?
no doubt, for you wear too many in the first place, and it might be more seemly to make do with fewer.
if you won't listen to reason, i'll have to die.
who wouldn't go who has access? every moment you look will show a new wonder. our absence will make us poorer in knowledge. let's go.
yes, like your horse, who, staggering under your boasts, would trot more easily if some of them dismounted.
what would you like? gentlemanly manners have more sway around here than force does.
now, if i didn't have a trace of my former life in me, the king would favor me. i brought the old man and his son aboard with the prince, and told him i heard them talk about a bundle and so on. but he was distracted by his fondness for the shepherd's daughter, who he still thought her to be at the time, and with the bad weather they both began to suffer from sea-sickness. the mystery remained undiscovered. but it's all the same to me. if i had revealed this secret, it wouldn't have gone well with my other misdeeds.
i only wish i could load him up with all the praise he deserves! oh, will it never be day? i will ride out a mile tomorrow and leave the road paved with the faces of dead englishmen.
i'm dying for food, so let me have some.
here come those men i have helped against my will, and they already are enjoying their good fortune.
i'd say the same thing, but i'm afraid i'd be faced out of my way. but i do wish it were morning "faced out of my way" would normally mean "bullied" or "pushed off the road," but the constable is just making a joke about all the faces in the dauphin's image. morning , for i long to be mixing it up with the english.
sit down and eat, and welcome to our table.
come, my boy. i won't have any more children, but your sons and daughters will be the children of a gentleman.
would anyone like to bet he's suggesting they play a game of chance, using as stakes the englishmen they plan to capture the next day. bet twenty prisoners with me?
do you really speak like such a gentleman? i beg your pardon. i thought everything out here was wild, which is why i acted so stern and commanding. but whoever you are, you who sit in the dark shade, losing track of time in this remote forest, if you have ever seen better days or been to church or sat at a man's table for a feast or wiped a tear from your eye, if you know what it is to pity and be pitied, let my kindness and nobility persuade you. with that hope, i'll blush at my rudeness and put away my sword.
(to autolycus) good to see you, sir. you refused to fight me the other day because i wasn't a gentleman's son. do you see these clothes? tell me you don't see them and still think i'm not a gentleman's son. you'd be better off saying these clothes aren't from a gentleman. lie to me, and see whether i'm not a gentleman's son.
you'll have to take some chances yourself before you catch them.
we have in fact seen better days and been summoned to church by the ringing of the holy bell and sat at good men's feasts and cried tears of pity, therefore, sit down and take whatever will satisfy your needs.
now i know you are a gentleman, sir.
it's midnight. i'll go put my armor on.
then please, put off your eating for a little while i, like a mother doe, find my fawn and bring it food. there is a poor old man who, purely out of love, has limped after me for miles. he's burdened by two debilitating evils, age and hunger. until he's fed, i won't eat a thing.
yes, and have been so for these past four hours.
the dauphin really wants it to be morning.
go find him. we won't touch a thing till you return.
and i've been, too, boy.
he wants to eat the english.
thank you, and god bless you for your hospitality.
you have. but i became a gentleman before my father, because the king's son took me by the hand and called me "brother." then the two kings called my father "brother." and then my brother the prince, and my sister the princess called my father "father." and so we all wept, and those were the first tears we shed as gentlemen.
i think he'll eat in other words, he won't kill anyone. eat everyone he kills.
you see, we're not alone in our unhappiness. this wide, universal theater has more sad plays than our own little scene.
may we live to shed many more, son.
by my mistress's white hand, he's a gallant prince.
the whole world is a stage, and all the men and women merely actors. they have their exits and their entrances, and in his lifetime a man will play many parts, his life separated into seven acts. in the first act he is an infant, whimpering and puking in his nurse's arms. then he's the whining schoolboy, with a book bag and a bright, young face, creeping like a snail unwillingly to school. then he becomes a lover, huffing and puffing like a furnace as he writes sad poems about his mistress's eyebrows. in the fourth act, he's a soldier, full of foreign curses, with a beard like a panther, eager to defend his honor and quick to fight.
yes, or it would be tough luck, being in such preposterous state the yokel confuses preposterous with prosperous, thus inadvertently mocking his rise in social rank. preposterous state as we are.
swear by her foot, so she can stamp out the oath.
on the battlefield, he puts himself in front of the cannon's mouth, risking his life to seek fame that is as fleeting as a soap bubble. in the fifth act, he is a judge, with a nice fat belly from all the bribes he's taken. his eyes are stern, and he's given his beard a respectable cut. he's full of wise sayings and up-to-the-minute anecdotes: that's the way he plays his part. in the sixth act, the curtain rises on a skinny old man in slippers, glasses on his nose and a money bag at his side. the stockings he wore in his youth hang loosely on his shriveled legs now, and his bellowing voice has shrunk back down to a childish squeak. in the last scene of our play, the end of this strange, eventful history, our hero, full of forgetfulness, enters his second childhood: without teeth, without eyes, without taste, without everything.
i humbly beg you, sir, to forgive me for all the ways i have offended you, and to speak well of me to the prince, my master.
he's definitely the most active gentleman of france.
welcome. set the honorable old man down and let him eat.
yes, son, do so. we have to be gentle, now that we are gentlemen.
performing is activity, and he is always doing that.
i thank you very much on his behalf.
you'll reform yourself?
he never did harm that i heard of.
you had better do that. i can barely speak to thank you myself.
yes, as it pleases you.
and he's not going to do any tomorrow. that part of his reputation will stand.
welcome. eat. i won't trouble you yet with questions about your situation., some music, please, and, good friend, sing.
give me your hand. i will swear to the prince that you are as honest as any man in bohemia.
i know him to be valiant.
(singing) blow, blow, winter wind. you aren't as harsh as men's ingratitude.your teeth aren't as sharp, as you are invisible, even though your breath is an assault. heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! sing to the green holly. most friendship is false, most love simply foolishness. then heigh-ho, to the holly. this life is really jolly. freeze, freeze, you bitter sky, your bite isn't as painful as when good deeds are forgotten. even though you can freeze water your sting is not as sharp as the friend who is forgotten. heigh-ho! sing, heigh-ho! sing to the green holly. most friendship is false, most love simply foolishness. then heigh-ho, to the holly. this life is really jolly.
you may say it, but don't swear it.
i was told that by one who knows him better than you.
if you really are sir rowland's son, as you've just whispered to me, and i can absolutely see the likeness in your face, you are truly welcome here. i am the duke who loved your father. come to my cave and tell me the rest of your story., good old man, you are as welcome here as your master is. give him your arm. give me your hand, and explain your situation to me.
don't swear it, now that i am a gentleman? let peasants and farmers simply say it. i'll swear it.
who was that?
you haven't seen him since? sir, sir, that can't be true. if i weren't a merciful man, i'd forget about your missing brother and punish you in his place. but do this: find your brother, wherever he is. bring him here dead or alive within the next year, or get out off my land. i'm seizing your lands and all that you possess until your brother gives testimony that absolves you of any guilt.
what if it turns out to be untrue, son?
why, he told me so himself, and he said he didn't care who knew it.
i wish your highness knew my true feelings in this matter: i have never in my life loved my brother.
even if it's untrue, a true gentleman will swear it on behalf of his friend. (to autolycus) and i'll swear to the prince that you are a brave man of action and that you won't be drunk. i know you aren't a brave man of action and that you will be drunk. but i'll swear it, and i hope you'll be a brave man of action.
he doesn't have to care. his virtue is not hidden.
that makes you an even bigger villain., well, throw him out, and have my officers seize his house and lands. do this immediately, and send him packing.
i'll do my best to prove so, sir.
oh, but it is, sir. no one but his valet ever saw it. his courage is hidden, and when it is revealed, it will shrink.
hang there on this tree, you lines of poetry, and bear witness to my love. and you, goddess of the moon diana, in greek and roman mythology, goddess of the moon and the hunt, was the patron of virgin maidens like rosalind. goddess of the moon , queen of the night, with your chaste eye, from your pale home up above, watch your huntress, who has the power to control my life. oh, rosalind, these trees will be my books, i'll write my thoughts down on their bark. that way, everyone who passes through this forest will find your virtues everywhere. run, run, orlando, on every tree carve praises of her beauty, her virtue, and her inexpressibility.
yes, prove yourself a brave fellow. if i'm not amazed how you dare to be drunk, not being a brave man myself, don't trust me. (noise off-stage) look! the kings and the princess, our family, are going to see the queen's statue. come, follow us. we'll be your kind masters.
ill will never prompted anything well said.
and how are you liking the shepherd's life, master touchstone?
oh, serious and good paulina, you have given me great comfort.
i'll challenge that proverb with one of my own: "there is flattery in friendship."
well, in and of itself, it is a good life, but given that it's a shepherd's life, it's worthless. in the fact that it's solitary, i enjoy it very much; but in the sense that it's private, it's terrible. now, i'm very pleased with it being outdoors, but in its not being at the court, it is boring. being a simple life, it suits me very well, but being a life without plenty, it doesn't suit me at all. are you any kind of philosopher yourself, shepherd?
sir, even if i didn't always succeed in doing well, i always meant well. you've repaid all my services. the fact that you've vowed to visit my poor house with your royal brother and the heirs of each of your kingdoms shows your immense grace, which i'll never be able to repay.
and i'll match that with "give the devil his due."
only in that i know that the sicker one gets, the worse one feels, and that the man who lacks money, employment, and happiness is without three good friends. i know that rain makes things wet and fire burns things. i know that a good pasture makes sheep fat, that the main cause of night is the absence of sun, and that the man who isn't smart by nature and hasn't learned anything from his schooling will complain of his lack of good manners, or he comes from very dull parents indeed.
oh, paulina, we honor you by disturbing you. but we came to see the statue of my queen. we've passed through your gallery, which has many amazing items, but we didn't see what my daughter came to see: the statue of her mother.
very apt! your friend is equated with the devil. i'll go straight for that proverb with "to hell with the devil."
you're a natural-born philosopher! were you ever at court, shepherd?
just as she was without peer in life, i believe that her dead statue is more beautiful that anything you've seen or that man has created. so i keep it apart from the others. but here it is. prepare to see life mimicked as well as sleep mimics death. look, and say it is beautiful.
you are better at proverbs than i am by as much as "a fool shoots quickly and overshoots his mark."
honestly, no.
i like your silence. it shows how awed you are. but you, my lord, answer first, doesn't it look like her?
you have overshot.
then you are damned.
just as she stood! reprimand me, dear stone, that i say that you are indeed hermione. or rather, don't reprimand me, since you are so like her and she had a tender nature. but still, paulina, hermione wasn't this wrinkled and not as old as this statue appears.
i've outshot you, and not for the first time.
i hope not.
oh, not at all.
my lord high constable, the english lie within fifteen hundred paces of your tents.
yep, you're damned like a roasted egg: eggs were roasted in ashes and had to be rotated frequently to avoid burning. egg: all on one side.
that shows how excellent the sculptor is. he thinks about what she would look like now, sixteen years having passed, and makes her look as though she lived now.
who measured the ground?
i'm damned for not having been at court? explain.
this statue comforts me now, as she might have done, as much as it pains me to look at it. oh, when i first courted her she stood just this way, with as much majesty and warmth as this stone has coldness. i am ashamed. doesn't the stone chastise me for being colder than it is? oh, royal piece of art, there's magic in your regal appearance, which has brought all my foul deeds to mind and has made your admiring daughter stand as still as stone like you.
the lord grandpr.
well, if you were never at court, you were never exposed to good manners; if you never witnessed good manners, your manners must be wicked; wickedness is a sin, and committing sins leads to damnation. you are in a perilous state, shepherd.
let me kneel and implore her blessing, and don't say it is superstition. lady, dear queen, who died just as i was beginning to live, give me your hand to kiss.
a very valiant and knowledgeable gentleman. if only it were day! poor harry of england! he doesn't long for the dawn as we do.
not at all, touchstone. the good manners of the court look as silly in the country as country behavior is laughable at the court. you told me that you don't salute at the court but kiss hands. now, if courtiers were shepherds, that kind of courtesy would be unclean.
oh, wait! the statue is still new, and the paint isn't dry.
what a miserable and obstinate fellow this king of england is, to blunder with his fat-headed followers so far beyond his capacity.
give a quick example. come, explain.
my lord, your sorrow is too deep. sixteen winters haven't blown it away, and many summers haven't dried it. no joy lives that long, and neither has any sorrow.
if the english had any sense, they would run away.
why, because we're always handling our ewes, and their fleece, as you know, is greasy.
my dear brother, since i was a cause of this situation, let me take some grief from you to make a part of myself.
well, obviously they don't. if there were anything inside their heads, they could never wear such heavy helmets.
what, don't courtiers' hands sweat? and isn't a sheep's grease as wholesome as a man's sweat? that's a poor example. a better example, come on.
indeed, my lord, if i had thought seeing this poor statue would have made you so distraught, i wouldn't have shown it to you. (she moves to close the curtain.)
that island of england breeds very valiant creatures. their hounds are unequaled in courage.
besides, our hands are hard and calloused.
don't draw the curtain.
foolish dogs, blindly running straight toward a russian bear only to have their heads crushed like rotten apples. you might just as well say, "that's a valiant flea that dares to eat its breakfast on the lip of a lion."
then your lips will feel them more quickly. shallow thinking, yet again. come on.
don't look at it any longer, or you'll imagine soon that it moves.
yes, exactly. and the men resemble their english hounds in their loud, showy ferocity, too, leaving their brains behind with their wives. give them hefty meals of beef and iron and steel, and they will eat like wolves and fight like devils.
our hands are often covered in tar, from performing surgery on our sheep sheep wounds were treated with tar. sheep .would you have us country folks kiss each other's tarred hands? courtiers' hands are perfumed.
let it be. if only i were dead, but i think already, who made it? look, my lord, wouldn't you say it took a breath? and that those veins were filled with blood?
yes, but these english are seriously short of beef.
you shallow thinker! you worthless man! you are about as much of a thinker as worm's meat is a nice steak. learn from the wise, and comprehend: the courtier's perfume is made from cat discharge, much more disgusting than tar. fix your example, shepherd.
it's masterfully done. her mouth seems warmed with breath.
then tomorrow we'll find that they feel only like eating, not like fighting. it's time to put our armor on. shall we get started?
your wit is too courtly for me. i'll rest now.
her eyes seem to move, as though we are mocked by art.
it's two o'clock now. but let me see, by ten we shall each have captured a hundred englishmen.
you're going to rest while you're still damned? god help you, foolish man. pray god does some surgery on you: you need to be fixed.
i'll draw the curtain. my lord is so overwhelmed that soon he'll think it lives.
now summon up the image of stealthy murmurs and engulfing darkness filling the wide vessel of the universe. from camp to camp through the dark cave of night, the noise from both armies grows so quiet that those standing watch almost think they can hear the whispered secrets of one another's sentinels. one by one, fires are lit on both sides, and through their pale flames, each army thinks he sees the smoke-tinged faces of the other. the horses of each army answer one another's proud, threatening neighs as they pierce the dull night, and from the tents the sound of the blacksmiths' hammers as they fit out the knights, closing rivets up, adds a note of fear to the preparations. the country cocks crow and the clocks toll, sounding a drowsy three o'clock in the morning. proud of their army and secure in their numbers, the confident and overeager french play dice, betting on how many worthless englishmen each will capture. they scold the limping, slowly moving night, which, like an ugly old woman, takes so long to pass. the poor doomed english, like sacrificial beasts, sit patiently, and privately contemplate the dangers that will arrive with morning. with their grave faces, emaciated cheeks, and war-torn coats, they seem to the gazing moon like so many horrifying ghosts. now, whoever spots the royal captain of this ruined army walking from camp to camp, from tent to tent, let him cry "praise and glory on his head!" for out he goes visiting all his troops. he bids them good morning with a modest smile and calls
sir, i'm a true, simple laborer: i earn what i eat, get what i wear, hate no man, envy no man's happiness, am happy for other men's good fortune and satisfied with my own bad fortune, and the source of my greatest pride is watching my ewes graze and my lambs feed.
oh, sweet paulina, make me think so for twenty more years! no sanity would match the pleasure of that madness. leave it alone.
them brothers, friends, and countrymen. there is no indication of the mighty army that surrounds them in his expression, nor has the long, sleepless night robbed his face of an ounce of color. instead, he looks fresh and covers any signs of fatigue with a show of cheerfulness and sweet majesty that every sad and pale wretch takes comfort in when they see him. his generous eye notices everyone, doling out a bounty as far-reaching as the sun, thawing cold fear, so that low and well-born alike may all experience (for want of a better way of putting it) a little touch of harry in the night. with that, our scene rushes on toward the battle, which we will represent with four or five worn-out fencing foils, a travesty of battle, forgive us!, that disgraces the name of agincourt. still, stay to watch, imagining the way it really was from our own inadequate imitation.
that's another sin arising from your ignorance: you bring ewes and rams together and make your living by their copulation. you act as a pimp to a young ewe by forcing her to have sex with a crooked-headed, horny old ram, a totally unreasonable match. if you're not damned for that, then the devil must be keeping shepherds out of hell; i can't see how else you can hope to escape.
i'm sorry, sir, that i've made you so agitated, but to leave it would make it worse.
gloucester, it's true that we are in great danger. but our courage should only be the greater for that. good morning, brother bedford. god almighty, there must be some essential goodness even in evil, if men would only look for it. in our case, our bad neighbors over their make us early risers, a healthy and sensible thing to be. besides, they act as outward consciences and preachers to us all, a visible reminder that we should prepare ourselves for death. think like that, and you'll manage to get honey out of a common weed and find a moral lesson in the devil himself.
here comes young mr. ganymede, my new mistress's brother.
do leave it, paulina. this agitation is as sweet as any revitalizing comfort. still, i think air is coming from her. what amazing artist could cut breath from stone? don't let anyone make fun of me, but i will kiss her.
good morning, old sir thomas erpingham! a nice, soft pillow would be a more suitable place to lay that good white head than france's hard, cold ground.
(reading, as ganymede) from the far east to the west indies there is no jewel like rosalind. her worth is carried on the wind and it blows throughout the world, carrying the name of rosalind. all the most beautiful paintings are black when compared to rosalind. don't think of any beauty but the beauty of rosalind.
don't do it, my lord. the red of her lips is wet. you'll ruin it if you kiss it, and you'll get your own lips covered in oil paint. shall i draw the curtain?
not at all, my liege. i prefer these quarters, since they allow me to say, "now i live like a king."
i could rhyme like that for eight years in a row, excepting meal times and sleeping hours. that awful, plodding rhyme sounded like a row of dairy women stomping off to market.
no, not for twenty years.
it's good for men to be given an example of how to take pleasure in discomfort. it eases the spirit. and when the mind is engaged, the rest of the body, dead and dull before, wakes up and comes to life with a new nimbleness and sensitivity, like a snake shedding its dead skin. lend me your cloak, sir thomas. brothers, give my regards to the princes in our camp. say good day to them from me and ask them to come to my tent.
oh, stop, fool.
i could stand here that long, looking at her.
we shall, my liege.
let me try: if there's a buck who needs a doe tell him rosalind will do. a cat in heat will look for a mate, and rosalind certainly will too. winter garments need to be filled with something, and so does skinny rosalind. after you harvest, you have to sheaf and bind so throw ripe rosalind on the harvest cart. the sweetest nut has the sourest rind and rosalind is that kind of nut. the man who finds the sweetest rose will be pricked by it, and by rosalind. this is exactly the false way that verses gallop along. why bother with them?
either resist the temptation and leave the chapel, or prepare yourselves for more amazement. if you can take it, i'll make the statue move, step down from her pedestal, and take you by the hand. but then you'll think i'm a witch, though i swear i am not.
shall i accompany your grace?
quiet, you stupid fool. i found them on a tree.
whatever you can make her do, i'm happy to watch. whatever you can make her say, i'm happy to hear, because it must be as easy to make her speak as it is to make her move.
no, my good knight. go with my brothers to my english peers. i need to be alone with my thoughts for a while and don't want any company.
well, the tree bears rotten fruit.
it's necessary that you have faith. so everyone hold still, and anyone who thinks this is bad business should leave now.
the lord in heaven bless you, noble harry!
i'll graft you onto that tree, and when i do i'll be grafting onto it a medlar in other words, touchstone will be "rotten," or decomposing in his grave, before he's "ripe," or wise. medlar fruits were eaten when they were rotten. medlar . the fruit the tree bears will be the earliest to ripen in the country because, god knows, you'll be rotten before you're half-ripe, which is how medlars are.
go ahead. no one will move.
bless you, old soul! your words cheer my heart.
all right, you've had your say, but we'll let the forest judge whether or not you spoke wisely.
music, wake her!
(speaking in french) who goes there?
quiet! here comes my cousin, reading something; step aside.
it's time. come down, and no longer be stone. come forward. make everyone who looks at you be amazed. come, i'll fill up your grave. move, no, move away, let death have your numbness since life is taking you from him that is, from death. him . you see she moves.
a friend.
(reading, as aliena) why should this place be a desert just because there are no people in it? no, i'll hang these poems on every tree, and they will voice the thoughts of a city. some will be about how man's brief life is spent in wandering, his entire life contained in the width of an open hand. some poems will be about betrayals committed by friends. but on the prettiest branches or at the end of every sentence i'll write "rosalinda," teaching everyone who can read that the essence of every spirit is contained in this one woman. heaven commanded nature to fill her one body with all the graces that women contain. nature took helen's beautiful helen, cleopatra, atalanta, and lucretia are beautiful women featured in greek and roman mythology. beautiful face, but not her fickle heart; cleopatra's majesty, the best of atalanta, and unhappy lucretia's modesty.
don't jump. her actions are pure, and this spell is no evil enchantment. don't shun her, because if you do, you'll kill her all over again. no, put your hand forward. you courted her when she was young. now in old age does she have to court you?
declare yourself to me. are you an officer? or are you low, vulgar, and of the common people?
so, by heaven's decree, rosalind was composed of different faces, eyes, and hearts, so that she might have the most prized touches of all. heaven wanted rosalind to have these gifts and me to live and die as her slave.
oh, she's warm! if this is magic, it should be as ordinary as eating.
i am a gentleman of a company.
oh, lord, what tedious sayings about love have you been wearing out your congregation with? shouldn't you have warned, "be patient, good people"?
she embraces him.
do you carry a pike?
what are you saying?, shoo, shepherd, go a little ways away., go with him, touchstone.
she hugs him. if she is really alive let her speak, too.
exactly. what about you?
come on, shepherd, let's make an honorable retreat, though not with all the trappings of a full army; just with a shepherd's pouch and the stuff he puts in it.
yes, and tell us where she has lived, or how she's come back to life.
i'm as good a gentleman as the emperor.
were you listening to these verses?
if you were told she was alive, you would consider it a fable. but it seems she is alive, even though she doesn't speak. look for a while. (to perdita) please, intervene, fair madam. kneel down and ask for your mother's blessing. look, good lady, our perdita is found.
then you're a better man than the king.
oh yes, i heard them all, and more, too. some of those lines had more feet than the verses each verse of poetry is supposed to have only a certain number of "feet," or accented syllables. bad poets, like orlando, cram their lines with too many words. verses could bear.
you gods, look down and pour your blessings upon my daughter's head! tell me, my child, where have you been kept safe? where have you lived? how did you find yourself in your father's court? paulina told me the oracle gave hope that you were still alive, so i stayed alive to see you someday.
the king's a dear boy with a heart of gold, he's a lively lad, a wag, born of fine parents, good with his fists. i kiss his dirty shoe, and from the bottom of my heart i love the lovely boy. what is your name?
that's not a problem: the feet can bear the verses.
there's enough time for that later, and they might want you to answer the same questions. go together, you happy people, and all rejoice. like an old turtledove, i'll take myself off to a solitary bough and mourn my husband, who will never be found again.
harry le roy.
sure, but these feet were lame rosalind is making fun of the poor quality of orlando's poetry. lame , and couldn't have stood up without the support of the verses. they stood lamely in the verse.
oh, peace, paulina! you should take a husband that i approve of, as i take a wife that you approve of. this is a contract, vowed between us. you have found mine, though i don't know how, since i saw her and believed her to be dead, and i've futilely said several prayers on her grave. i won't have to look far to find you an honorable husband, since i know his mind already. come, camillo, take her by the hand. her worth and honesty is well known and affirmed by both polixenes and me. let's leave this place. (to hermione) look at my brother! i beg both your pardons for having suspected sin in your innocent glances. this is your son-in-law, the son of polixenes, who is engaged to your daughter. good paulina, lead us away from here, and we'll each answer for what we've all done in this wide expanse of time since we first separated. quickly, lead us away.
le roy? that's a cornish name. are you with a cornish company?
but did you listen to all that poetry without even wondering about what your name is doing on all these trees?
no, i am a welshman.
i was working through my wonder when you arrived. look at what i found on a palm tree. i haven't been rhymed about like this since my past life, when i was an irish rat in ireland, poets aimed satirical verses at their enemies. supposedly, they killed rats by rhyming them to death. irish rat , but i can hardly remember that.
in the beautiful city of verona, where our story takes place, a long-standing hatred between two families erupts into new violence, and citizens stain their hands with the blood of their fellow citizens. two unlucky children of these enemy families become lovers and commit suicide. their unfortunate deaths put an end to their parents' feud. for the next two hours, we will watch the story of their doomed love and their parents' anger, which nothing but the children's deaths could stop. if you listen to us patiently, we'll make up for everything we've left out in this prologue onstage.
do you know fluellen?
do you know who wrote these?
gregory, i swear, we can't let them humiliate us. we won't take their garbage.
yes.
was it a man?
(teasing sampson) no, because then we'd be garbagemen.
tell him i'll take the leek out of his hat on saint davy's day and slap his head with it.
and he had a chain that once belonged to you hanging around his neck. are you blushing?
what i mean is, if they make us angry we'll pull out our swords.
you'd better not wear your dagger in your cap that day, or he might slap your head with it.
please, who?
maybe you should focus on pulling yourself out of trouble, sampson.
are you his friend?
oh god, god! it's difficult to bring two friends together, but even mountains can be moved together by earthquakes.
i hit hard when i'm angry.
yes, and his relative, too.
no, who are you talking about?
but it's hard to make you angry gregory continually implies that sampson isn't as tough as he's acting. angry .
then i'm giving you the finger.
is it possible?
one of those dogs from the montague house can make me angry.
thank you. god be with you.
no, i'm begging you now, tell me who it is.
angry enough to run away. you won't stand and fight.
my name is pistol.
oh, this is wonderful, wonderful, just wonderful wonderful! and another wonderful, and beyond-my-ability-to-express wonderful!
a dog from that house will make me angry enough to take a stand. if i pass one of them on the street, i'll take the side closer to the wall and let him walk in the gutter.
the name suits your fierceness.
good grief, do you think that just because i'm dressed like a man, i have a man's patience? every second you delay is as long and dull as a journey to south seas. i'm begging you, tell me who it is quickly, and speak fast. i wish you could just stammer this hidden man out of your mouth like wine out of a narrow-necked bottle: either too much at once or none at all. i'm begging you, take the cork out of your mouth so i can drink the news.
that means you're the weak one, because weaklings get pushed up against the wall.
captain fluellen!
so you want to put a man in your belly.
you're right. that's why girls get pushed up against walls, they're weak. so what i'll do is push the montague men into the street and the montague women up against the wall.
in the name of jesus christ, keep it down! it never ceases to amaze me the way people ignore the correct, traditional principles and rules of war. if you would take the trouble to study the tactics of pompey the great, i can tell you that you would find no tittle-tattle or pibble-pabble in pompey's camp. i tell you, you would find the rituals of war and, i promise you, its ceremonies and its solicitudes and its forms and its gravity and its discipline all to be quite counter to all this noise.
did god make him? i mean, what sort of man is he? is he enough of a man to wear a hat and grow a beard ?
the fight is between our masters, and we men who work for them.
but the enemy is loud. you can hear them all night long.
no, he has only a little beard.
it's all the same. i'll be a harsh master to them. after i fight the men, i'll be nice to the women, i'll cut off their heads.
and if the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating idiot, does that mean, you think, that we should also be an ass and a fool and a prating idiot? think about it.
well, eventually god will send him some more hair, if he thanks him. i'll wait till his beard grows in, if you'll just hurry up and tell me what chin that beard is on.
cut off their heads? you mean their maidenheads "maidenhead" = virginity. maidenheads ?
i will lower my voice.
it's orlando, who triumphed over both the wrestler and you in the same instant.
cut off their heads, take their maidenheads, whatever. take my remark in whichever sense you like.
i'd be very glad if you would.
damn you for mocking me. speak seriously and honestly.
the women you rape are the ones who'll have to "sense" it.
though he seems a little old-fashioned, there is much care and courage in this welshman.
really, cousin, it's him.
they'll feel me as long as i can keep an erection. everybody knows i'm a nice piece of flesh.
brother john bates, isn't that dawn breaking over there?
orlando?
it's a good thing you're not a piece of fish. you're dried and shriveled they are joking about sampson's private parts. dried and shriveled like salted fish. 
i think it is. but we have no great reason to long for day.
orlando.
pull out your tool now. these guys are from the house of montague.
that's the beginning of the day we see, but i don't think we'll see the end of it., who goes there?
oh no! what am i going to do in my man's clothing? what did he do when you saw him? what did he say? how did he look? where did he go? what brings him here? did he ask about me? where is he staying? how did he say good-bye? and when will you see him again? answer me in a word.
i have my naked sword out. fight, i'll back you up.
a friend.
you'd better get me gargantua's "in a word" means "quickly," but celia teasingly takes rosalind literally, "in one word." gargantua was a giant with an enormous appetite for food and drink featured in gargantua and pantagruel, by the late-medieval writer rabelais. gargantua's mouth first. the word's too big for any mouth nowadays. answering "yes" and "no" to all those questions would be harder than answering a catechism a catechism is a summary of a religious doctrine, often in the form of questions and answers. catechism .
how will you back me up, by turning your back and running away?
what captain do you serve?
but does he know that i'm here in the forest and dressed in men's clothing? does he look as bright and handsome as the day we saw him wrestling?
don't worry about me.
sir thomas erpingham.
it's easier to count specks than to answer a lover's millions of questions. but taste my story, and relish it by paying attention. i found orlando under a tree, like a dropped acorn.
no, really. i am worried about you!
a veteran commander and a very kind gentleman. tell me, what does he think of our situation?
that tree could be called god's tree, since it drops such wonderful fruit.
let's not break the law by starting a fight. let them start something.
we're men beached on the sand, hoping to be washed out by the next tide.
let me talk, good lady.
i'll frown at them as they pass by, and they can react however they want.
he hasn't told this to the king, has he?
go on.
you mean however they dare. i'll bite my thumb at them. that's an insult, and if they let me get away with it they'll be dishonored. (sampson bites his thumb biting the thumb is a gesture of disrespect. bites his thumb )
no, nor would it be right for him to. though it's not my place to say so, i think the king is, after all, only a man, the same as me. the violet smells to him the same as it does to me. the sky appears to him much as it does to me, and all his senses are those of a mortal man. without his fine clothes, the king appears just like any other naked man. and though his feelings may be pitched higher than ours, when they plummet, they plummet that much farther. therefore, when he has reason to fear, as we do, his fears are without question of the same order. still, it stands to reason that he mustn't betray his fear, as it might dishearten his army.
he lay there, stretched out like a wounded knight.
hey, are you biting your thumb at us?
he can act as brave as he wants, but i believe on a cold night like this he wishes he were neck-deep in the thames, and i wish he were, too, and i with him, whatever the danger, so long as we were far away from here.
though that must have been a pitiful sight, the ground looked beautiful.
i'm biting my thumb.
i'll tell you truly what i think about the king in my heart. i don't think he wants to be anywhere but where he is.
cry, "whoa!" to your tongue, please. it's leaping about like a frisky horse. he was dressed like a hunter.
are you biting your thumb at us?
then i wish he were here alone. he'd be sure to be ransomed, and many a poor man's life saved.
oh, that's ominous! he has come to kill my heart.
(aside to gregory) is the law on our side if i say yes?
oh, i'm sure you don't dislike him so much as to wish he were here alone, even though you say this to find out how the rest of us feel. i don't think there's anywhere i'd rather die than in the king's company, as his cause is just and honorable.
i'd like to sing my song solo. you're making me go off-key.
(aside to sampson) no.
that's more than we know.
don't you know that i'm a woman? whatever i think, i have to say. sweetheart, go on.
(to abram) no, sir, i'm not biting my thumb at you, but i am biting my thumb.
yes, and more than we should seek to know. it's enough that we know we're the king's subjects. if his cause is wrong, our obedience to the king clears us of responsibility for it.
you've made me lose the tune. quiet! isn't that him heading this way?
are you trying to start a fight?
but if the cause is not just, the king himself will have a lot to answer for, when all those legs and arms and heads chopped off in battle shall join together on judgment day crying, "we died at such and such a place." some will be swearing, some crying for a surgeon, some for the wives that are destitute without them, some about the debts they owed, some for their children left unprovided for. i think few die well who die in battle. how can a person expect to resolve anything in a christian manner when they've passed their lives killing? now, if these men don't die in a state of grace, it will be a heavy charge against the king who led them into battle, whom they, as his subjects, could not disobey.
that's him. let's slink off, and watch him from a hiding place.
start a fight? no, sir.
the king isn't responsible for the particular end each soldier comes to, nor is the father responsible for his son's final end or the master for his servant's. the father and the master and the king didn't order their subordinates' deaths when they ordered their services. besides, there's no king, however pure his cause, who, if it comes to a trial by combat, can rely on using completely blameless soldiers. perhaps some may be guilty of plotting murder, some of seducing maidens with lies and then abandoning them; some, of looting and stealing before they were even hired as soldiers. even if these men have escaped the law and punishment at home, they cannot escape god. war is god's agent of justice. war is vengeance. so there are men here who have broken the king's law earlier and are punished now in his war. when they feared death, they escaped with their lives; and now where they imagine they're safe, they perish. so, if they die unprepared, the king is no more guilty of their damnation than he was guilty of the earlier crimes they're finally being punished for. every subject's duty is the king's, but every subject's soul is his own. therefore, every soldier should do as any man who is sick in his bed would do: clear his conscience of any stain. then if he dies, his death serves him. or, if he doesn't die, the time he spent preparing himself was at least blessed. and in the case of the man who survives, one could be forgiven for supposing that god spared him exactly because he was so ready to die; now he can live to appreciate god's greatness and teach others to prepare.by this reasoning, if a son is sent by his father on business and drowns at sea while still in a state of sin, his wickedness is his father's fault. or if a servant, carrying a sum of money for his master, is attacked by robbers and dies without confessing his sins, we can say that the master's business is to blame for the servant's damnation. but that isn't so.
thanks for your company but, really, i would have preferred being alone.
if you want to fight, i'm your man. my employer is as good as yours.
it's clear, every man must take responsibility for the manner of his own death. the king is not responsible for it.
me too, but still, for the sake of good manners, i'll say thanks for your company.
but he's not better than mine.
i don't expect him to answer for me, and yet i'm determined to fight vigorously for him.
goodbye. let's meet as little as we can.
well then.
i myself heard the king say he would not be ransomed.
i also hope that we can be better strangers.
(speaking so that only sampson can hear) say "better." here comes one of my employer's relatives.
sure, he said so to make us fight cheerfully. but when our throats are cut, he could be ransomed without our being any the wiser.
please don't ruin any more trees by carving love poems on their barks.
(to abram) yes, "better," sir.
if i live to see it, i'll never trust his word again.
please don't ruin any more of my poems by reading them so badly.
you lie.
yeah, right, go get him. that's a lame threat from a toy gun, a poor individual's private displeasure with a monarch. you may as well try to turn the sun to ice by fanning its face with a peacock feather. you'll "never trust his word again." come on, that was a stupid thing to say.
your love's name is rosalind?
pull out your swords, if you're men. gregory, remember how to slash.
your scolding is somewhat overblown. i'd be angry with you if the occasion allowed.
yes, that's it.
(pulling out his sword) break it up, you fools. put your swords away. you don't know what you're doing.
let it be a quarrel between us, if you live.
i don't like her name.
what? you've pulled out your sword to fight with these worthless servants? turn around, benvolio, and look at the man who's going to kill you.
i'm game.
they weren't looking to please you when they christened her.
i'm only trying to keep the peace. either put away your sword or use it to help me stop this fight.
how will i recognize you in the future?
how tall is she?
what? you take out your sword and then talk about peace? i hate the word peace like i hate hell, all montagues, and you. let's go at it, coward!
give me some trinket of yours, and i will wear it in my hat. then, if you dare to acknowledge it, i'll take up my quarrel with you.
just as tall as my heart.
use your clubs and spears! hit them! beat them down! down with the capulets! down with the montagues!
here's my glove; give me one of yours.
you're sure full of smooth answers. are you friendly with goldsmiths' wives, and memorized your little speeches off of their rings? gold rings were of ten inscribed with lines from trite love poems. rings?
what's this noise? give me my long sword! come on!
here.
no, but i can answer you just like those painted cloths painted cloths were sometimes hung in place of tapestries and featured trite, moralistic sayings. painted cloths , where i suppose you memorized all your questions.
a crutch, you need a crutch, why are you asking for a sword?
i'll also wear this in my cap. if you come to me after tomorrow and say, "that's my glove," i swear by this hand, i will take it and give you a box on the ear.
you have a quick wit; i think it must be made out of atalanta's the mythical atalanta was a very fast runner. atalanta's heels. why don't you sit down with me? the two of us can complain about our mistress, the world, and all our miseries.
i want my sword. old montague is here, and he's waving his sword around just to make me mad.
if i ever see it, i will challenge you.
i won't blame anyone in this world but myself, whose faults i'm most familiar with.
capulet, you villain! (his wife holds him back) don't stop me. let me go.
you may as well undertake to be hanged.
your worst fault is being in love.
you're not taking one step toward an enemy.
i'll do it even if i find you in the company of the king himself.
well, it's a fault i wouldn't trade for your best virtue. i'm tired of you.
(shouting at the rioters) you rebels! enemies of the peace! men who turn their weapons against their own neighbors, they won't listen to me?, you there! you men, you beasts, who satisfy your anger with fountains of each others' blood! i'll have you tortured if you don't put down your swords and listen to your angry prince. (montague, capulet, and their followers throw down their weapons) three times now riots have broken out in this city, all because of a casual word from you, old capulet and montague. three times the peace has been disturbed in our streets, and verona's old citizens have had to take off their dress clothes and pick up rusty old spears to part you. if you ever cause a disturbance on our streets again, you'll pay for it with your lives. everyone else, go away for now. (to capulet) you, capulet, come with me. (to montague) montague, this afternoon come to old free-town, the court where i deliver judgments, and i'll tell you what else i want from you. as for the rest of you, i'll say this once more: go away or be put to death.
keep your word. farewell.
well, i was looking for a fool when i found you, so i suppose i shouldn't be surprised.
who started this old fight up again? speak, nephew. were you here when it started?
be friends, you english fools, be friends: we have enough enemies on the french side, if either of you could count.
he's drowned in the brook: look in, and you'll see him.
your servants were fighting your enemy's servants before i got here. i drew my sword to part them. right then, that hothead tybalt showed up with his sword ready. he taunted me and waved his sword around, making the air hiss. as we were trading blows, more and more people showed up to join the fight, until the prince came and broke everyone up.
indeed, the french can bet twenty french crowns to one that they'll beat us, they have such an army. but it's no treason for an englishman to cut off a french crown, a head, i mean, and tomorrow the king himself will do some snipping.
there i'll see only myself.
oh, where's romeo? have you seen him today? i'm glad he wasn't here for this fight.
upon the king! "let's lay everything upon the king: our lives, our souls, our debts, our anxious wives, our children, and our sins." i must bear responsibility for all of it. what a painful condition responsibility is. it goes along with being born to greatness, but it makes you get badmouthed by every fool who only has his own suffering to care about. what infinite peace do king's give up that private men enjoy? what do kings have that private men do not, besides the pomp of their position? and what is this useless ceremony of kings? what kind of god is ceremony, which suffers more than its worshippers do? what income, what profit does it bring in? oh, ceremony, only show me your value! why are you adored? do you amount to anything besides position, status, and ritual, which inspire awe and fear in others? you're less happy, being feared, than they are in fearing you. what do you get to drink, instead of sweet obedience, but poisonous flattery? try being sick, great greatness, and see if ceremony can cure you! do you think fiery fever can be put out by the windy puff of titles? will it be chased away by bowing and scraping? you can command a beggar to bow on bended knee, but can you take possession of his health? no, vain illusion, so intricately bound up with a king's rest. i who understand you, gorgeous ceremony, because i'm a king the outward symbols of kingship king and i know that neither the balm, the scepter, and the ball, the robe layered in gold and pearls, the fancy title that precedes the king, the throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp that beats upon the high shore of this world , not all of these put together, not all of these laid down at night in an imperial bed, can cause the king to rest so soundly as does the miserable wretch who turns in at night with a full stomach and an empty mind, fed on the bread of his daily struggle. he never wakes to horrifying darkness, born of hell, but sweats in the hot sun from dawn to
which is either a fool or a nothing.
madam, i had a lot on my mind an hour before dawn this morning, so i went for a walk. underneath the sycamore grove that grows on the west side of the city, i saw your son taking an early-morning walk. i headed toward him, but he saw me coming and hid in the woods. i thought he must be feeling the same way i was, wanting to be alone and tired of his own company. i figured he was avoiding me, and i was perfectly happy to leave him alone and keep to myself.
dusk and all night long sleeps in peace. come morning, he wakes and helps the sun into his chariot and so wears out the ever-rolling years until his death. apart from ceremony, this poor creature who spends his days in toil and his nights in sleep is better off than the king. the peasant enjoys his country's peace without ever worrying his dull head about the vigil the king must keep to maintain that peace.
i'm not going to waste any more time with you. goodbye, good mr. love.
he's been seen there many mornings, crying tears that add drops to the morning dew and making a cloudy day cloudier with his sighs. but as soon as the sun rises in the east, my sad son comes home to escape the light.
my lord, your noble subjects are looking for you all over the camp. they're anxious to see you.
i'm glad to see you go. adieu, good mr. depression.
he locks himself up alone in his bedroom, shuts his windows to keep out the beautiful daylight, and makes himself an artificial night. this mood of his is going to bring bad news, unless someone smart can fix what's bothering him.
good old knight, gather them all together at my tent. i'll meet you there.
(speaking so that only celia can hear) i'm going to talk to him like i'm an insolent boy, so i can play a trick on him., can you hear me, forester?
my noble uncle, do you know why he acts this way?
consider it done, my lord.
very well. what do you want?
i don't know, and he won't tell me.
oh god of battles, bolster my soldiers' courage. don't let them know fear. rob them of the ability to count before the numbers against them overwhelm their courage. and just for today, oh, lord, just today don't think of the crime my father committed in seizing the crown! i've transferred richard's body to a new grave and on it poured more tears of remorse than it has shed drops of blood. i've hired five hundred almsmen to hold up their withered hands to heaven, praying for my pardon twice a day throughout the year. and i've built two chapels where solemn priests sing continually for richard's soul. i will do more, though nothing i can do is any good since this remorse comes after the crime, asking for pardon.
(as ganymede) please, what's the hour?
have you done everything you could to make him tell you the reason?
my liege.
you should ask me what time of day it is, instead. there's no clock here in the forest.
i've tried, and many of our friends have tried to make him talk, but he keeps his thoughts to himself. he doesn't want any friend but himself, and though i don't know whether he's a good friend to himself, he certainly keeps his own secrets. he's like a flower bud that won't open itself up to the world because it's been poisoned from within by parasites. if we could only find out why he's sad, we'd be as eager to help him as we were to learn the reason for his sadness.
my brother gloucester's voice? yes, i know why you've come. i'll go with you. the day, my friends, and everything await me.
then there must be no lovers in the forest, either, because they're as good as a clock, marking the lazy foot of time with a sigh every minute and a groan every hour.
look, here he comes. if you don't mind, please step aside. he'll either have to tell me what's wrong or else tell me no over and over.
the sun glints off our armor. awake, my lords!
why didn't you say "the swift steps" of time instead of the "lazy foot"? wouldn't that have been just as appropriate?
i hope you're lucky enough to hear the true story by sticking around. (to his wife) come, madam, let's go.
mount up our horses! bring my horse, lackey! ha!
no, not at all, sir. time travels at different speeds for different people. i can tell you who time strolls for, who it trots for, who it gallops for, and who it stops cold for.
good morning, cousin.
oh, brave spirit!
okay, who does it trot for?
is it that early in the day?
he'll take me through flood and field.
well, it trots for a young woman between the time she gets engaged and the time she marries: the time that's passed may only be a week, but it always feels like seven years.
it's only just now nine o'clock.
is that all? how about air and fire?
who does time amble for?
oh my, time goes by slowly when you're sad. was that my father who left here in such a hurry?
just the heavens, cousin orlans.
for a priest who doesn't know his latin or a rich man who is free from the gout. the one sleeps easily because he isn't up late studying and the other lives merrily because he's free from pain. the first lacks the burden of intense, exhausting study, and the second is spared the burden of heavy, exhausting poverty. time ambles for both men.
it was. what's making you so sad and your hours so long?
is it time, my lord constable?
who does it gallop for?
i don't have the thing that makes time fly.
listen to our horses neighing, longing to be working.
for a thief on his way to the gallows. such a man walks as slowly as possible and, even so, gets there too soon.
you're in love?
mount them and dig your spurs into their flanks so that their hot blood may spurt in english eyes and douse them with some of the spare courage we have around. ha!
who does it stand still for?
out.
what, you want them to weep our horses' blood? then how will we see their own natural tears?
for lawyers on vacation, because they sleep their holidays away, with no sense of how time moves.
out of love?
the english are in the field, french lords.
where do you live, pretty young man?
i love someone. she doesn't love me.
to our horses, you gallant princes. let's mount straight away. all we have to do is look at that poor starving army, and our wonderful display of strength will eat away their souls, leaving them the mere husk of men. there isn't enough work out there to keep us all busy, and hardly enough blood in all their sickly veins put together to put a stain on each of our swords, which our french knights will take out and then put away again, with nothing to do. let's blow on them. the breath of our valor will send them sprawling. there's no question, lords, but that those extra servants and peasants swarming uselessly around our battle formations would be sufficient to rid this field of such a good-for-nothing foe, while we ourselves stood at the base of this mountain idly looking on. but our honor wouldn't stand for that. what's there to say? doing the very least will do the whole job. let the trumpets sound the signal to mount up and march. our advance will so dazzle the enemy that england will cower in fear and surrender.
with this shepherdess, my sister, on the outskirts of the forest. we live like fringe on the edges of a petticoat.
it's sad. love looks like a nice thing, but it's actually very rough when you experience it.
what are you waiting for, lords of france? those island-bred skeletons, terrified for their bones, are an offensive sight on the morning field. their ragged banners hang in shreds and the very air of france makes them shiver as it blows by. the god of war looks like a pathetic bankrupt in this miserable army, peeking timidly through a rusty visor. the horsemen stand frozen like candlesticks, torches in their hands. the poor
were you born here?
what's sad is that love is supposed to be blind, but it can still make you do whatever it wants. so, where should we eat? (seeing blood) oh my! what fight happened here? no, don't tell me, i know all about it. this fight has a lot to do with hatred, but it has more to do with love. o brawling love! o loving hate! love that comes from nothing! sad happiness! serious foolishness! beautiful things muddled together into an ugly mess! love is heavy and light, bright and dark, hot and cold, sick and healthy, asleep and awake, it's everything except what it is! this is the love i feel, though no one loves me back. are you laughing?
horses droop their heads, their flanks and hips sagging, pus seeping from eyes as pale as death, and in their colorless mouths, the motionless bit is smeared with chewed grass. meanwhile, their executors executors: people who dispose of whatever the dead leave behind executors , malicious crows, fly over them, impatient for their moment. it's beyond the power of words to describe an army so bereft of life.
just like the rabbit, who lives where she is born.
no, cousin, i'm crying.
they've said their prayers, and now they wait for death.
your speech is more refined than i would expect in such a remote place as this.
good man, why are you crying?
shall we go send them food and fresh clothing and feed their starving horses before we fight them?
many people have told me so. actually, an old religious uncle of mine taught me how to speak, and he was brought up in the city. he knew too much about courtship, because he fell in love back there, and when he came here he constantly lectured against it. thank god i'm not a woman and afflicted with all the giddiness that troubles that entire sex.
i'm crying because of how sad you are.
i'm just waiting for my flag-bearer. but, never mind, i can't wait. to the field! i'll take the banner from a trumpeter and use that. come, let's be off! the sun is up and we're wasting the day!
what were the primary evils he claimed women were guilty of?
yes, this is what love does. my sadness sits heavy in my chest, and you want to add your own sadness to mine so there's even more. i have too much sadness already, and now you're going to make me sadder by feeling sorry for you. here's what love is: a smoke made out of lovers' sighs. when the smoke clears, love is a fire burning in your lover's eyes. if you frustrate love, you get an ocean made out of lovers' tears. what else is love? it's a wise form of madness. it's a sweet lozenge that you choke on. goodbye, cousin.
where is the king?
there were no primary ones. all of women's faults are as alike as one half-pence is to another. each of a woman's faults seems monstrous until you're presented with the next one, which is just as bad.
wait. i'll come with you. if you leave me like this, you're doing me wrong.
the king rode out alone to view their troops.
please, tell me some of them.
i'm not myself. i'm not here. this isn't romeo, he's somewhere else.
they have fully sixty thousand fighting men.
no, i won't give my medicine away to anyone but the sick. there's a man haunting this forest who abuses the trees by carving "rosalind" on their barks. he hangs his odes on the hawthorns and his elegies on the brambles, each of these poems praising to the heavens one "rosalind." now if i could find this man, this dream-catcher, i would give him some good advice, because he is truly love-sick.
tell me seriously, who is the one you love?
that's five to one. besides, they're fresh.
well, i'm the man you're speaking of. please, tell me your cure.
seriously? you mean i should groan and tell you?
may god's arm strike on our side! these are frightening odds. god be with all of you, princes. i'll go and join my men. if we don't meet again before we meet in heaven, still we'll meet joyfully. my noble lord of bedford, my dear lord gloucester, and my good lord exeter, and my kind kinsmen, warriors all, adieu.
but you don't have any of the symptoms my uncle told me about. he taught me how to recognize a man in love, and you're not a prisoner of love, i'm sure.
groan? no. but tell me seriously who it is.
farewell, good salisbury; and may good luck go with you.
what did he say the symptoms were?
you wouldn't tell a sick man he "seriously" has to make his will, it would just make him worse. seriously, cousin, i love a woman.
farewell, kind lord. fight valiantly today. but then i do you wrong to say as much, since you are the very embodiment of bravery.
a thin face, which you don't have; a sleepless, sunken eye, which you don't have; an irritable temper, which you don't have; a neglected beard, which you don't have, but that might not be so telling, since you don't have much beard anyway. your stockings should be falling down around your ankles, your hat flying off your head, your sleeves unbuttoned, your shoes untied, and everything about you demonstrating carelessness and misery. but you're no such man. you're so neat and well put-together that you look like you love yourself more than anyone else.
i guessed that already when i guessed you were in love.
he is as full of courage as of kindness, princely in both.
young boy, i wish i could make you believe that i'm in love.
then you were right on target. the woman i love is beautiful.
oh, if only we had with us here ten thousand of those men back home in england who aren't working today.
make me believe it? you might as well make the one you love believe it, which she's more likely to do than admit that she does, that's one of the ways that women fool their own consciences. but really, are you the one who's been hanging on the trees those poems that speak so admiringly of rosalind?
a beautiful target is the one that gets hit the fastest.
who wishes that? my cousin westmoreland? no, my dear cousin. if we are slated to die, the fewer, the better for our country, and if we're slated to live, the fewer men, the greater the share of honor for each of us. in god's name, i beg you not to wish for one more man. by god, i am not selfish when it comes to money: i don't care who eats at my expense. it doesn't bother me when people borrow my clothing, i don't care about these concrete things. but if it is a sin to be selfish about honor, i am the most guilty soul alive. no, my cousin, don't wish that even one man who is now in england were here instead. by god, i wouldn't lose as much honor as a single man more would cost me, i think, not even if it meant giving up my best hope for victory. oh, do not wish one more! instead, make this known throughout the army: whoever has no spirit for this fight, let him depart. he will be given safe conduct and money for his passage home. we would not want to die in the company of a man who fears to die with us. this day is called the feast of saint crispian: he who lives to see this day out and comes home safe will stand tall when this day is named and raise himself up at the mention of crispian. he who survives this day and lives to see old age shall yearly entertain his neighbors on the eve, saying, "tomorrow is saint crispin's day there are actually two different saints honored on this day, crispin and crispian. henry switches back and forth between them in his speech. saint crispin's day ." he'll roll up his sleeve and show his scars, saying, "i got these wounds on st. crispin's day." old men forget. but these men will remember every detail of what they did today long after they've forgotten everything else. and as the wine flows, our names, familiar as household words, will be invoked again: harry the king, bedford and exeter, warwick and talbot, salisbury and gloucester. good men will tell their sons this story and the feast of st. crispin will never
i swear to you by rosalind's own pretty hand that i am that unfortunate man.
well, you're not on target there. she refuses to be hit by cupid's cupid, the roman god of love, shoots arrows at humans that make them fall in love. diana is the roman goddess of virginity and hunting. cupid's arrow. she's as clever as diana, and shielded by the armor of chastity. she can't be touched by the weak and childish arrows of love. she won't listen to words of love, or let you look at her with loving eyes, or open her lap to receive gifts of gold. she's rich in beauty, but she's also poor, because when she dies her beauty will be destroyed with her.
go by, from this day to the end of time, without our being remembered: we few, we happy few, we band of brothers, for whoever sheds his blood with me today shall be my brother. however humble his birth, this day shall grant him nobility. and men back in english now safe in their beds will curse themselves for not having been here, and think less of their own manhood when they listen to the stories of those who fought with us here on st. crispin's day.
are you really as in love as your poems declare?
so she's made a vow to be a virgin forever?
my sovereign lord, join us quickly: the french are all arrayed in battle formation and will charge us at any moment.
neither rhyme nor reason can express how much i love her.
yes she has, and by keeping celibate, she wastes her beauty. if you starve yourself of sex you can't ever have children, and so your beauty is lost to future generations. she's too beautiful and too wise to deserve heaven's blessing by making me despair. she's sworn off love, and that promise has left me alive but dead, living only to talk about it now.
we're ready if our minds are ready.
love is merely a form of insanity, and i tell you, lovers deserve the nuthouse just like crazy people do. the only reason they don't get punished and cured is that the disease is so commonplace that the nuthouse nurses are usually suffering from it, too. but i promise it can be cured with some guidance.
take my advice. don't think about her.
let any man perish who isn't ready now!
have you ever cured anyone this way before?
teach me to forget to think!
you don't wish we had more help from england anymore, cousin?
yes, one, and this is how i did it. he had to imagine that i was the girl he was in love with. i made him woo me every day. when he did, being the changeable boy i am, i'd mope, act effeminate, switch moods, long for him, like him, be proud and standoffish, be dreamy, full of mannerisms, unpredictable, full of tears and then smiles; be passionate about everything, then nothing. most boys and women act just like this. i'd like him one minute and despise him the next; cry for him, then spit at him, until finally i drove love out and anger in. he abandoned the world, and hid himself away in a monastery. so i cured him, and i'll cure you just the same, leaving you as clean as a sheep's heart, without one spot of love in you.
do it by letting your eyes wander freely. look at other beautiful girls.
god almighty, my liege, i wish that you and i could fight this royal battle all alone.
i don't want to be cured, boy.
that will only make me think more about how beautiful she is. beautiful women like to wear black masks over their faces, those black masks only make us think about how beautiful they are underneath. a man who goes blind can't forget the precious eyesight he lost. show me a really beautiful girl. her beauty is like a note telling me where i can see someone even more beautiful. goodbye. you can't teach me to forget.
there! now you've unwished five thousand men, which i prefer to your wishing for one more., you know your places. god be with you all.
i could cure you, if you just called me rosalind and came by my cottage every day to woo me.
i'll show you how to forget, or else i'll die owing you that lesson.
once more i come to ask you, king harry, if you're ready to negotiate your ransom before your certain defeat. for assuredly, you are so near the abyss that you're bound to be swallowed up. moreover, out of mercy, the constable urges you to remind your men to make their peace with god and repent, so that their souls may depart sweetly and peacefully from these fields where, poor wretches, their bodies will likely fall and fester.
by my faith in love, i will, then. tell me where you live.
(continuing a conversation) but montague has sworn an oath just like i have, and he's under the same penalty. i don't think it will be hard for men as old as we are to keep the peace.
who sent you this time?
come with me, i'll show you, and along the way, you can tell me where you live. will you come?
you both have honorable reputations, and it's too bad you've been enemies for so long. but what do you say to my request?
the constable of france.
wholeheartedly, good young man.
i can only repeat what i've said before. my daughter is still very young. she's not even fourteen years old. let's wait two more summers before we start thinking she's ready to get married.
be good enough to take back the same answer i gave before. tell them to capture me, then sell my bones. good god! why do they mock poor fellows this way? the man that once sold the skin of a lion while the beast still lived died hunting him. a good many of our bodies, i imagine, will end up in english soil. and on their graves, i trust, the story of this day's work will be written in brass. and those who leave their valiant bones in france, dying like men though buried in your dunghills, they'll be remembered, too. the sun will rise on them here and draw their glory up to heaven, leaving their mortal remains to choke your land: the smell of rotting flesh will breed a plague in france.
no, you have to call me rosalind., sister, you're coming?
girls younger than she often marry and become happy mothers.
then will you notice the abundant valor of our englishmen, who will embark on a second round of mischief like a ricocheting bullet, killing again as they fall to their deaths. let me speak proudly: tell the constable we're only workaday soldiers. our finery and shining metal are all rusty from long, painful marches in the rain. there's not a strand of feather left in our whole army, a good sign, i hope, that we won't fly away like birds, and time on the field has made us slovenly. but, by god, our hearts are in good shape. and my poor soldiers tell me that before night they'll be in cleaner clothes. if not, they'll pull the bright new coats of the french over their heads and send them on their way. if they do this, as they will, god willing, my ransom will soon be raised. herald, spare yourself. don't come again to ask for my ransom, good messenger. i swear the only ransom will be these bones of mine. and if the french get them in the state in which i intend to leave them, they won't be worth much use to anyone. tell the constable that.
come on, sweet audrey. i'll get your goats, audrey. well now, what do you think, audrey? am i the man for you, audrey? do my simple features please you?
girls who marry so young grow up too soon. but go ahead and charm her, gentle paris; make her love you. my permission is only part of her decision. if she agrees to marry you, my blessing and fair words will confirm her choice. tonight i'm having a feast that we've celebrated for many years. i've invited many of my closest friends, and i'd like to welcome you and add you to the guest list. at my humble house tonight, you can expect to see dazzling stars that walk on the ground and light the sky from below.
i shall, king harry. and so farewell. you'll never hear from the herald again.
your features, god help us! what features?
you'll be delighted by young women as fresh as spring flowers. look at anyone you like, and choose whatever woman seems best to you. once you see a lot of girls, you might not think my daughter's the best anymore. come along with me.
i'm afraid you'll come to me again for ransom.
well, i'm out here with you and your goats goths sounds like goats. touchstone makes a series of puns, none of which audrey catches. goats , in the same way that the witty poet ovid was abandoned to the barbaric goths.
(to peter, handing him a paper) go, little fellow, walk all around verona. find the people on this list and tell them they're welcome at my house tonight.
my lord, most humbly on bended knee i beg you to grant me the leading of the vanguard.
(to himself) oh, knowledge put to such bad use is worse than a god cooped up in a hut.
find the people whose names are on this list? it is written that shoemakers and tailors should play with each others' tools, that fisherman should play with paints, and painters should play with with fishing nets. but i've been sent to find the people whose names are written on this list, and i can't read! i'll never find them on my own. i've got to find somebody who knows how to read to help me. but here come some people, right in the nick of time.
take it, brave york. now, soldiers, advance. and you, god, bestow today's victory however it pleases you.
when a man's jokes fall that flat, it's as depressing as getting a large bill for a short stay in a little room. really, audrey, i wish you were more poetical.
(to romeo) come on, man. you can put out one fire by starting another. a new pain will make the one you already have seem less. if you make yourself dizzy, you can cure yourself by spinning back around in the opposite direction. a new grief will put the old one out of your mind. make yourself lovesick by gazing at some new girl, and your old lovesickness will be cured.
surrender, dog!
i don't know what "poetical" means. is it "chaste in word and action"? does it mean being truthful?
the plantain the plantain leaf was thought to have healing powers. plantain leaf is excellent for that.
(speaking in french) you seem like a gentleman of high rank.
not really, for the truest poetry is often the most artificial. lovers are fond of poetry and often concoct great lies in their poems.
for what, romeo?
qualtitie calmie custure pistol is speaking nonsense as though it were a real for eign tongue. custure me! are you a gentleman? what is your name? expound.
but you still wish the gods had made me poetical?
for when you cut your shin.
(speaking in french) oh, god above!
i do, in fact. right now you swear to me that you are a virgin; if you were a poet, i might have some hope you were lying.
what? romeo, are you crazy?
this man, one o. signieur dew pistol misunder stands the french man to be saying his name is "o. ignieur dew." be cause "seigneur" means "lord," pis ol thinks his pris oner is a nobleman. o. signieur dew , must be a gentleman. consider my words, o. signieur dew, and take note: o. signieur dew, you'll be killed with my sword unless you pay me an absurd amount of money for your ransom.
what, you don't want me to be chaste?
i'm not crazy, but i'm tied up tighter than a mental patient in a straitjacket. i'm locked up in a prison and deprived of food. i'm whipped and tortured, (to peter) good evening, good fellow.
(speaking in french) oh, have mercy! take pity on me!
not really, unless you were ugly. chastity and beauty together in one woman is like sweetening sugar with honey.
may god give you a good evening. excuse me, sir, do you know how to read?
(mistaking moi, the french word for "me," as a unit of money) one moy is not enough. i must have forty moys, or i will reach into your throat and pull out some moys, along with a lot of blood.
(to himself) a sensible fool.
i can read my own fortune in my misery.
(speaking in french) is it impossible to escape your mighty arm?
well, i'm not beautiful, so i hope that i can at least be chaste.
perhaps you've learned from life and not from books. but please tell me, can you read anything you see?
(mishearing bras, the french word for "arm," as "brass") brass, you dog! you damned lazy mountain goat, do you offer me brass?
yes, but wasting chastity on a dirty slut is like putting good meat in a dirty dish.
yes, if i know the language and the letters.
(speaking in french) oh, spare me!
i'm not a slut, i keep myself clean, but i thank god i am ugly.
i see. well, that's an honest answer peter assumes romeo means he does not know his letters. honest answer . have a nice day.
really? is that a lot of moys? come over here, boy and ask this slave in french what his name is.
well, praise the lord you're ugly. maybe sluttishness will follow. be that as it may, i'm going to marry you. to that end, i've spoken with sir oliver martext, the vicar from the next village, and he's promised to meet us here and marry us.
stay, fellow. i can read. (he reads the letter) "signor martino and his wife and daughters, count anselme and his beautiful sisters, vitruvio's widow, signor placentio and his lovely nieces, mercutio and his brother valentine, my uncle capulet and his wife and daughters, my fair niece rosaline and livia,
(speaking in french) look, what's your name?
(to himself) this i'd like to see.
signor valentio and his cousin tybalt, lucio and the lively helena." that's a nice group of people. where are they supposed to come?
(speaking in french) monsieur le fer.
well, god bless this marriage!
up.
he says his name is master fer.
amen. you know, some men, who have fear in their hearts, might falter at this point. after all, these woods aren't a proper church men whose wives cheated on them (called cuckolds) were imagined as having horns. touchstone plays on the connection between a deer's horns and a cuckold's horns. church , and there's no congregation here but horned animals. but who cares? i'll be brave. horns may be hateful, but they're also necessary. they say, "many a man doesn't know the full extent of what he owns." exactly: many a man will see no end to the horns his wife furnishes him with.
where? to supper?
master fer! i'll fer him, and firk firk = "beat" firk him, and ferret ferret = "tear" ferret him: expound as much to him in french.
well, that's what the wife brings to the marriage. he didn't do anything to get them. horns? well, there they are. only for poor men? no, no. the nobleman's are as huge as the underfed villager's. is the single man lucky, then? no. just as a town protected by a wall around it is worth more than a low-lying village, a married man's horned forehead is more honorable than a bachelor's bare forehead. just as it's better to be skilled at self-defense than it is to avoid fighting, it's better to risk a horn by marrying. here comes sir oliver.
to our house.
i do not know the french for "fer," and "ferret," and "firk."
sir oliver martext, we're glad to see you. will you marry us here, under this tree, or should we follow you to your chapel?
whose house?
tell him to prepare himself for death, for i'm going to cut his throat.
is there anyone to give the bride away?
my master's house.
(speaking in french, to the boy) what is he saying, sir?
i don't want to take another man's second-hand goods.
indeed, i should have asked you before who he was.
(speaking in french) he told me to tell you to prepare to die, for this soldier here is of a mind to cut your throat without delay.
no, someone has to give her away or the marriage isn't legal.
now i'll tell you so you don't have to ask. my master is the great and rich capulet, and if you don't belong to the house of montague, please come and drink a cup of wine. have a nice day!
(trying to speak french) yes, cut your throat, by god, you peasant, unless you give me gold coins, good gold coins. if not, you'll be mangled by this sword of mine.
(coming forward) go on, proceed, i'll give her away.
the beautiful rosaline whom you love so much will be at capulet's traditional feast, along with every beautiful woman in verona. go there and compare her objectively to some other girls i'll show you. the woman who you think is as beautiful as a swan is going to look as ugly as a crow to you.
(speaking in french) oh, i beseech you, for the love of god, spare me! i am a gentleman of good family: spare me and i will give you two hundred cus.
good evening, mr. what'shisname. how are you, sir? we're glad to see you. god bless you for being here. i'm very glad to see you. this is just a trifling matter here, sir. no, no, put your hat back on.
if my eyes ever lie to me like that, let my tears turn into flames and burn them for being such obvious liars! a woman more beautiful than the one i love? the sun itself has never seen anyone as beautiful since the world began.
what does he say?
do you want to get married, fool?
come on, you first decided she was beautiful when no one else was around. there was no one to compare her to except herself. but let your eyes compare her to another beautiful woman who i'll show you at this feast, and you won't think she's the best anymore.
he begs you to spare his life. he is a gentleman of a good family, and for his ransom, he will give you two hundred crowns.
just as the ox has his yoke, the horse its bridle, the falcon a tether, a man has his desires, to keep in check.
i'll go with you. not because i think you'll show me anything better, but so i can see the woman i love.
tell him my fury will abate, and i'll take the crowns.
and, being a man of your breeding, you're going to be married under some shrubs like a beggar? get yourself to a church and have a proper priest, who can tell you what marriage is all about, marry you. this man here will slap you two together like two pieces of wood panelling. then one of you will warp and pull away, and there goes your marriage.
nurse, where's my daughter? tell her to come to me.
(speaking in french) young sir, what does he say?
(to himself) i'd rather have this guy marry us, because he is not likely to marry us well, and if we're not married properly, i'll have a better excuse later to leave my wife.
i swear to you by my virginity at age twelve, i already told her to come. come on! where is she? what is she doing? what, juliet!
(speaking in french) once again, that it would be breaking his oath to pardon any prisoner. nevertheless, for the crowns that you've promised him, he is willing to give you freedom, liberty.
come with me and let me advise you.
what is it? who's calling me?
(speaking in french) on my knees i thank you again and again. and i consider myself fortunate to have fallen into the hands of a knight, to my mind, the noblest, most valiant, and most distinguished gentleman of england.
come, sweet audrey. we have to be married properly. otherwise, we'll be living in sin., goodbye, sir oliver. we're not singing, oh, sweet oliver touchstone is singing a popular song of the day. sweet oliver oh, sweet oliver don't leave me behind, but, go away, wind go, i say, i'm not going to marry you.
your mother.
explain, boy.
it doesn't matter to me. none of these deranged rascals can shake me from my profession.
madam, i'm here. what do you want?
he thanks you on his knees many times and considers himself fortunate to have fallen into the hands of one, as he thinks, who is the bravest, most valorous, and thrice-worthy gentleman of england.
don't talk to me. i'm going to cry.
i'll tell you what's the matter, nurse, leave us alone for a little while. we must talk privately, nurse, come back here. i just remembered, you can listen to our secrets. you know how young my daughter is.
as i get to leech him, i will show some mercy. follow me.
go ahead if you want, but remember that crying doesn't suit a man.
yes, i know her age down to the hour.
(speaking in french) follow the mighty captain.
but don't i have good reason to cry?
she's not even fourteen.
i never heard so loud a voice issue from such an empty heart. it's true what they say: "the empty vessel makes the greatest sound." bardolph and nym had ten times more courage than this roaring stage villain, whose nails any joe could cut with a wooden dagger, but they are both hanged. so would this man if he had the nerve to steal anything bravely. i have to stay with the servants, who are with our camp's luggage. we're sitting ducks for the french, if they only knew it, for there is no one guarding it but boys.
as good a reason as any. so go ahead and cry.
i'd bet fourteen of my own teeth, but, i'm sorry to say, i only have four teeth, she's not fourteen. how long is it until lammastide lammastide = august . lammastide ?
o, hell!
i mean, his hair judas, the disciple who betrayed jesus, was commonly depicted with red hair. hair is even red, the same color as that lying judas.
two weeks and a few odd days.
o lord, the day is lost! all is lost!
no, it's a shade browner than judas's judas betrayed jesus to the romans with a kiss. judas's , but his kisses are just like judas's.
whether it's even or odd, of all the days in the year, on the night of lammas eve, she'll be fourteen. she and susan, god rest her and all christian souls, were born on the same day. well, susan died and is with god. she was too good for me. but like i said, on the night of lammas eve, she will be fourteen. yes, she will. indeed, i remember it well. it's been eleven years since the earthquake. she stopped nursing from my breast on that very day. i'll never forget it. i had put bitter wormwood on my breast as i was sitting in the sun, under the wall of the dovehouse. you and your husband were in mantua. boy, do i have some memory! but like i said, when she tasted the bitter wormwood on my nipple, the pretty little babe got irritated and started to quarrel with my breast. then the dovehouse shook with the earthquake. there was no need to tell me to get out of there. that was eleven years ago. by then she could stand up all by herself. no, i swear, by that time she could run and waddle all around. i remember because she had cut her forehead just the day before. my husband, god rest his soul, he was a happy man, picked up the child. "oh," he said, "did you fall on your face? you'll fall backward "fall backward" = have sex. fall backward when you grow smarter. won't you, jule." and i swear, the poor pretty thing stopped crying and said, "yes." oh, to watch a joke come true! i bet if i live a thousand years, i'll never forget it. "won't you, jule," he said. and the pretty fool stopped crying and said, "yes."
dear god! all is lost, all! regret and everlasting shame sit on our helmets, mocking us.
no, really, his hair is a nice color.
enough of this. please be quiet.
what stinking luck! do not run away.
a very good color, this chestnut.
yes ,madam. but i can't help laughing to think that the baby stopped crying and said, "yes." i swear, she had a bump on her forehead as big as a rooster's testicle. it was a painful bruise, and she was crying bitterly. "yes," said my husband, "did you fall on your face? you'll fall backward when you grow up, won't you, jule?" and she stopped crying and said, "yes."
our men have all broken ranks.
his kiss is as holy as bread blessed by a priest.
now you stop too, nurse, please.
o, everlasting shame! let's fall on our swords. are these the wretches that we threw dice for?
he must have bought a cast-iron pair of diana's diana was the patron goddess of virgins. diana's lips: an elderly nun isn't anymore devoted in her kissing than he is. his kiss is cold and chaste.
peace. i'm done talking. may god choose you to receive his grace. you were the prettiest baby i ever nursed. if i live to see you get married someday, all my wishes will come true.
is this the king we offered to ransom?
but why would he promise to come visit me this morning and then not come?
well, marriage is exactly what we have to discuss. tell me, my daughter juliet, what is your attitude about getting married?
shame, eternal shame, and nothing but shame! let us die honorably. back into the fray once again! he who will not follow me now, let him depart and stand in the doorway like a pimp, cap in hand, while some slave, no nobler than my dog, violates his daughter.
really, he's a total liar.
it is an honor that i do not dream of.
maybe we can benefit from the same chaos that has defeated us. let's go offer up our lives en masse.
do you think so?
"an honor?" if i weren't your only nurse, i'd say you had sucked wisdom from the breast that fed you.
there are enough of us still alive in the field to overcome the english with our numbers if we could just restore some kind of order.
yes. he's not a pickpocket or a horse thief, but when it comes to truth in love, he's as hollow as a cup or a nut hollowed out by a worm.
well, start thinking about marriage now. here in verona there are girls younger than you, girls from noble families, who have already become mothers. by my count, i was already your mother at just about your age, while you remain a virgin. well then, i'll say this quickly: the valiant paris wants you as his bride.
the hell with order! i'm going back into battle. let life be short so that shame won't last too long.
you think his feelings aren't true?
what a man, young lady. he's as great a man as any in the whole world. he's as perfect as if he were sculpted from wax.
we have done well, my valiant countrymen. but it's not over. the french are still fighting.
oh, i think they are, when he's in love. but he's not in love.
summertime in verona has no flower as fine as him.
the duke of york sends your majesty his respects.
but you heard him swear up and down that he was.
no, he's a fine flower, truly, a flower.
is he still alive, good uncle? three times in an hour i saw him down, and three times up again and fighting. he was covered with blood from his helmet to his spurs.
he "was," but that doesn't mean he is anymore. besides, the promises of a lover are as untrustworthy as a bartender handing you an inflated tab: they both swear to their lies. he's staying in the forest with your father now.
(to juliet) what do you say? can you love this gentleman? tonight you'll see him at our feast. study paris's face and find pleasure in his beauty. examine every line of his features and see how they work together to make him handsome. if you are confused, just look into his eyes. this man is single, and he lacks only a bride to make him perfect and complete. as is right, fish live in the sea, and it's wrong for a beauty like you to hide from a handsome man like him. many people think he's handsome, and whoever becomes his bride will be just as admired. you would share all that he possesses, and by having him, you would lose nothing.
the valiant soldier is still dressed like that, lying on the ground, drenching the field with his blood. by his side lies the noble earl of suffolk, york's comrade and equal in brave wounds. suffolk died first, and york, cut to pieces, came to him where he lay in his blood and took him by the face, kissing his gashes. he cried out, "wait for me, dear cousin. my soul will keep yours company on the way to heaven. wait for mine, sweet soul. we'll fly there side by side, just as we stood together as brother-knights in this glorious and well-fought battle!" at this, i went to comfort him. he smiled at me close, gave me his hand, gripping me feebly, and said, "my dear lord, commend my service to my king." with that, he turned and threw his wounded arm around suffolk's neck and kissed his lips. and so,
i met my father in the woods yesterday and had a long conversation with him. he asked me who my parents were, and i told him they were as good as he was. he laughed at that and let me go. but why are we talking about my father, when a man like orlando exists?
lose nothing? in fact, you'd get bigger. men make women bigger by getting them pregnant.
married to death, he sealed a testament of love that even ended in nobility. the fineness of the moment moved me to tears. i tried to hold them back, but wept like a mother.
oh, sure, he's a brave man! he writes brave poems, speaks brave words, makes brave promises, and then breaks them just as bravely. he's like a cowardly jouster this was considered a dishonorable move in jousting. jouster , who breaks his lance across his opponent's shield, rather than directly against it. but everything's brave that a young man does and foolishness leads.
(to juliet) give us a quick answer. can you accept paris's love?
i don't blame you. just listening, i have to school my misty eyes, or they will brim over.
who's coming here?
i'll look at him and try to like him, at least if what i see is likable. but i won't let myself fall for him any more than your permission allows.
but listen! what new battle is this? the french have reinforced their scattered men. then every soldier must kill his prisoners. spread the word.
mistress and master, you've often asked about that lovelorn shepherd you once saw me sitting with, the one who complained about the disdainful shepherdess he was in love with.
madam, the guests are here, dinner is served, people are calling for you, people have asked for juliet, and in the pantry, people are cursing the nurse. everything's out of control. i must go and serve the guests. please, follow straight after me.
to kill the boys with the luggage! it's expressly against the rules of combat. it's as complete a work of villainy as any that could be thought up. tell me, don't you think so?
yes, what about him?
we'll follow you. juliet, the count is waiting for you.
there's certainly not a boy left alive, and it was done by the cowardly rascals who were running from the battle. on top of this, they've either burned or carried away everything that was in the king's tent. so the king has quite rightly ordered that every prisoner's throat be cut. oh, he's a gallant king!
if you'd like to see a scene played out between a man growing pale with unrequited love and a woman glowing with scorn and proud disdain, come with me a short distance and you'll witness it.
go, girl, look for a man who'll give you happy nights at the end of happy days.
yes, he was born at monmouth, captain gower. what is the name of the town where alexander the pig fluellen pronounces p for b he means "big." pig was born?
(speaking so that only celia can hear) come on, let's go. the sight of lovers nourishes whoever else is in love. (to corin) bring us to this little show, and i'll take a part in their play.
what will we say is our excuse for being here? or should we enter without apologizing?
alexander the great.
sweet phoebe, do not scorn me. do not, phoebe. go ahead and say you don't love me, but not so bitterly. the executioner, who's seen death so much his heart has grown hard, still says, "forgive me" before he drops the axe on the criminal's neck. are you going to be crueler than the man who makes his living by killing?
it's out of fashion to give lengthy explanations like that. we're not going to introduce our dance by having someone dress up as cupid, blindfolded and carrying a toy bow to frighten the ladies like a scarecrow. nor are we going to recite a memorized speech to introduce ourselves. let them judge us however they please. we'll give them a dance and then hit the road.
and is "pig" not the same as "great," may i ask? the pig or the mighty or the huge or the magnanimous, they all mean the same thing, with some variation.
i don't want to be your executioner: i'm trying to avoid you so that i won't hurt you. you tell me my eyes are murderous, that's a very pretty sentiment, and oh-so-probable, that my frail, soft eyes (which are so cowardly that they close their gates against dust) are tyrants, butchers, and murderers. i'm frowning at you with all my might right now. if my eyes can injure, let them kill you now. go ahead. faint, fall down, if you don't, then you're lying about my eyes being murderers. come on, show me the wound that my eyes have caused. if you get scratched with a pin, it leaves a scar; even if you lean on a rush, it leaves an impression on your palm. but my eyes, which i've darted at you, haven't even left a mark. now i am sure that eyes can't hurt a person.
give me a torch. i don't want to dance. i feel sad, so let me be the one who carries the light.
i think alexander the great was born in macedon. his father was philip of macedon, as i remember.
oh, darling phoebe, if you ever fall in love with some fresh face, then you'll know about the invisible wounds that love's sharp arrows can make.
no, noble romeo, you've got to dance.
i think that macedon is indeed where alexander was born. i tell you, captain, if you look at a map of the world, i'll bet you will find, comparing macedon and monmouth, that the situations, see, are very similar.
well, until that time, don't come near me. and when that time comes, then you can mock me, but please don't pity me, because i won't pity you.
not me, believe me. you're wearing dancing shoes with nimble soles. my soul is made out of lead, and it's so heavy it keeps me stuck on the ground so i can't move.
there is a river in macedon, and there is likewise a river in monmouth. the river in monmouth is called wye, but the name of the other river has gone out of my head. nevertheless, it's all one, the two rivers are as alike as my fingers are to my fingers, and there are salmon in both. if you look closely at alexander's life, harry of monmouth's stands up fairly well by comparison, for there are analogies in everything. alexander, god knows and you know, in his rages and his furies and his wraths and his angers and his moods and his displeasures and his indignations, and also being a little the worse for drink, killed his best friend cleitus in a drunken rage, see.
(coming forward, speaking as ganymede) and why, please tell me? is your mother a goddess that you would insult a wretched man, and exult over the injury you've caused him, all at the same time? you're not beautiful, really, you're not so pretty that you could go to bed with the lights on, so why must you act so proud and pitiless? wait a minute, what's going on? why are you looking at me like that? i don't see anything in you but nature's usual handiwork., oh, for god's sake, i think she also wants me to fall in love with her. no, proud woman, don't hope for that. not even your black eyebrows, your silky black hair, your beady black eyeballs, or your yellowish-white complexion can make me worship you. you foolish shepherd: why are you following her, raining tears and puffing hot air like a foggy south wind? you are a thousand times better than she. it's fools like you who, marrying badly, fill the world with ugly children. it's not her mirror but you who insists she's beautiful. the image of herself that she gets from you is better than her actual features.
you're a lover. take cupid's wings and fly higher than the average man.
our king is not like him in that respect: he never killed any of his friends.
but mistress, know yourself. get down on your knees and thank heaven for sending you such a good man. i'm telling you, as a friend, that you should sell while the market's good, you're not going to have many more buyers. ask this man's forgiveness, love him, and accept his offer. you're already ugly, don't make matters worse by being scornful, too. so take her, shepherd, and god bless you.
his arrow has pierced me too deeply, so i can't fly high with his cheerful feathers. because this wound keeps me down, i can't leap any higher than my dull sadness. i sink under the heavy weight of love.
it is not courteous, you know, to assume you know my meaning before i've finished talking. i'm speaking purely in analogies and comparisons. just as alexander killed his friend cleitus when he was drinking, so harry monmouth, having come to his senses and acquired good judgment, turned away the fat knight in the oversized doublet: the man was full of jests and japes and pranks and mocks. i have forgotten his name.
sweet boy, i'd rather hear you scold me for a whole year than this man woo me for a minute.
if you sink, you're dragging love down. it's not right to drag down something as tender as love.
sir john falstaff.
he's fallen in love with your sheer ugliness. (to silvius ) and i think she's falling in love with my anger. if i'm right, as soon as she answers you with frowns, i'll rebuke her with bitter words. (to phoebe ) why are you looking at me like that?
is love really tender? i think it's too rough, too rude, too rowdy, and it pricks like a thorn.
that's the one. i tell you, there are good men born at monmouth.
i don't wish you any harm.
if love plays rough with you, play rough with love mercutio suggests that romeo cure himself of love by having sex. love . if you prick love when it pricks you, you'll beat love down. give me a mask to put my face in. a mask to put over my other mask. what do i care if some curious person sees my flaws? let this mask, with its black eyebrows, blush for me. (they put on masks)
here comes his majesty.
i'm telling you, don't fall in love with me. i'm more false than the promises a man makes while drunk. besides, i don't like you. if you'd like to know where i live, my house is in the olive grove close by. , come on, sister. , shepherd, keep working on her. , come on, sister. , shepherdess, give him another chance. and don't be proud. the whole world could look at you, and no one would be as blind as he is, thinking you're beautiful. , come on, to our sheep.
come on, let's knock and go in. the minute we get in let's all start dancing.
i was not angry since i came to france until this instant. take a trumpet, herald. ride out to the horsemen on that hill. if they seek battle with us, have them come down or else clear the field. the sight of them is offensive. if they'll do neither, we'll come to them and make them fly like stones shot from powerful slings. we'll also cut the throats of any prisoners we have. not a man of them that we shall take shall know our mercy. go and tell them this.
dead shepherd the "shepherd" is the writer christopher marlowe, a contemporary of shakespeare's who died in . shepherd , now i understand what you meant when you said, "you've never loved until you've fallen in love at first sight."
i'll take a torch. let playful people with light hearts dance. there's an old saying that applies to me: you can't lose if you don't play the game. i'll just hold a torch and watch you guys. it looks like a lot of fun, but i'll sit this one out.
here comes the herald of the french, my liege.
sweet phoebe, 
hey, you're being a stick in the mud, as cautious as a policemen on night patrol. if you're a stick in the mud, we'll pull you out of the mud, i mean out of love, if you'll excuse me for being so rude, where you're stuck up to your ears. come on, we're wasting precious daylight. let's go!
he looks humbler than he used to.
what? did you say something, silvius?
no we're not, it's night.
well? what is the meaning of this, herald? don't you know that i have offered these bones of mine for ransom? are you coming again for ransom?
sweet phoebe, have pity on me.
i mean, we're wasting the light of our torches by delaying, which is like wasting the sunshine during the day. use your common sense to figure out what i mean, instead of trying to be clever or trusting your five senses.
no, great king. i come to ask you out of charity to let us wander over this bloody field to record the numbers of our dead and bury them, separating our nobles from the common men, for many of our princes, alas!, lie drowned and soaked in the blood of mercenary soldiers. likewise, our common men lie drenched in the blood of princes, and their wounded steeds, ankle-deep in gore, struggle and, raging wildly, stamp on their dead masters with their hooves, killing them a second time. oh, give us permission, great king, to search the field in safety and dispose of our dead bodies.
well, i'm sorry for you, gentle silvius.
we mean well by going to this masquerade ball, but it's not smart of us to go.
i'll be honest with you, herald: i don't even know who won the battle. i still see many of your horsemen galloping across the field.
but if you're really sorry for me, you can cure me. if you're sorry for the grief i feel in loving you, you can love me back. then both my grief and your sorrow will be cured.
why, may i ask?
you won it.
you have my friendship. isn't that enough?
i had a dream last night.
god, not our strength, be praised! what is the name of the castle that stands over there?
i want you.
so did i.
agincourt.
well, that's just greedy. silvius, i used to hate you. i still don't love you, but since you're well-spoken when it comes to love, i'll keep you around and make use of you. but don't expect any more than that.
well, what was your dream?
then we'll call this the battle of agincourt, fought on the day of crispin crispianus.
my love for you is so pure and perfect, and i'm in such a bad way, that i'll be grateful for whatever leftover love you throw my way. every once in a while, toss me a distracted smile, and i'll live on that.
my dream told me that dreamers often lie.
if i may say so, your majesty, your famous grandfather and your great-uncle edward, the black prince of wales, or so i've read in the history books, fought a very brave battle here in france.
do you know the boy who was just speaking to me?
they lie in bed while they dream about the truth.
they did, fluellen.
not very well, but i've met him several times. he's bought the cottage and the grounds that the old peasant used to own.
oh, then i see you've been with queen "quean" is slang for whore, and mab is a stereotypical prostitute's name. queen mab.
your majesty is quite right. if your majesties recall it, the welsh fought very valiantly in a garden where there were leeks growing, wearing leeks in their monmouth caps which, your majesty knows, is to this day a badge of honorable military service. i do believe your majesty takes no shame in wearing the leek on saint davy's day.
don't think i'm in love with him just because i'm asking about him. he's an irritable boy, though he speaks well. but what do i care about words? and yet, words are a good thing when the man speaking them is pleasant to listen to. he's good-looking, but not too good-looking. he's awfully proud, but his pride suits him. he'll grow up to be a proper man. the best thing about him is his complexion: as fast as he offends me with words, his pretty face heals the wound. he's not very tall, but he's tall enough for his age. his legs aren't great, but they're alright. his lips were nice and red, a little more lively and passionate than the red that was in his cheeks, one was pure red and the other more pink. there are women out there, silvius, who would have nearly fallen in love with him after inspecting him as closely as i have. but i don't love him or hate him, though i suppose i have more reason to hate him than love him. what right did he have to scold me like that? he said my eyes and my hair were black and, now that i think of it, he scorned me. i'm surprised i didn't bite back. but no matter, i'll get back at him soon enough. i'll write him a taunting letter, and you can deliver it. will you do that for me, silvius?
who's queen mab?
i wear it with pride, for i am welsh you know, good countryman.
with all my heart, phoebe.
she's the fairies' midwife. she's no bigger than the stone on a city councilman's ring. she rides around in a wagon drawn by tiny little atoms, and she rides over men's noses as they lie sleeping. the spokes of her wagon are made of spiders' legs. the cover of her wagon is made of grasshoppers' wings. the harnesses are made of the smallest spiderwebs. the collars are made out of moonbeams. her whip is a thread attached to a cricket's bone. her wagon driver is a tiny bug in a gray coat; he's not half the size of a little round worm it was believed that worms sprung from the fingers of young girls who sat about doing nothing. worm that comes from the finger of a lazy young girl.
all the water in wye cannot wash your majesty's welsh blood out of your body. i can tell you that. god bless it and preserve it, as long as it pleases his grace, and his majesty, too!
i'll write it right now, the whole thing is pressing on my mind, and on my heart. i'll be bitter toward him, and curt. come with me, silvius.
her chariot is a hazelnut shell. it was made by a carpenter squirrel or an old grubworm; they've made wagons for the fairies as long as anyone can remember. in this royal wagon, she rides every night through the brains of lovers and makes them dream about love. she rides over courtiers' knees, and they dream about curtsying. she rides over lawyers' fingers, and right away, they dream about their fees. she rides over ladies' lips, and they immediately dream of kisses. queen mab often puts blisters on their lips because their breath smells like candy, which makes her mad. sometimes she rides over a courtier's lips, and he dreams of making money off of someone. sometimes she tickles a priest's nose with a tithe-pigs a tithe-pig was a pig given to the church to support a priest. tithe-pigs tail, and he dreams of a large donation. sometimes she rides over a soldier's neck, and he dreams of cutting the throats of foreign enemies, of breaking down walls, of ambushes, of spanish swords, and of enormous cups of liquor. and then, drums beat in his ear and he wakes up. he's frightened, so he says a couple of prayers and goes back to sleep. she is the same mab who tangles the hair in horses' manes at night and makes the tangles hard in the dirty hairs, which bring bad luck if they're untangled. mab is the old hag who gives false sex dreams to virgins and teaches them how to hold a lover and bear a child. she's the one, 
thanks, my good countryman.
please, pretty young man, i'd like to get to know you better.
enough, enough! mercutio, be quiet. you're talking nonsense.
by jesus, i am your majesty's countryman, and i don't care who knows it. i will confess it to all the world. i needn't be ashamed of your majesty, god be praised, so long as your majesty is an honest man.
they say you are a melancholy fellow.
true. i'm talking about dreams, which are the products of a brain that's doing nothing. dreams are nothing but silly imagination, as thin as air, and less predictable than the wind, which sometimes blows on the frozen north and then gets angry and blows south.
god keep me so., heralds, go with him. bring me an exact report of the number of dead on both sides. (pointing to williams) tell that fellow over there to come here.
i am. i like it better than laughing.
the wind you're talking about is blowing us off our course. dinner is over, and we're going to get there too late.
soldier, you must come to the king.
people who are either too serious or too silly are awful. they make themselves targets for ridicule even faster than drunks do.
i'm worried we'll get there too early. i have a feeling this party tonight will be the start of something bad, something that will end with my own death. but whoever's in charge of where my life's going can steer me wherever they want. onward, lover boys!
soldier, why are you wearing that glove in your cap?
well, i think it's good to be serious and keep quiet.
beat the drum.
if it pleases your majesty, it is the token of a man i must fight with, if he's still alive.
in that case it's good to be a post.
where's potpan? why isn't he helping us clear the table? he should be moving and scraping plates!
an englishman?
i'm not a scholar's kind of melancholy, which is all about impressing one's peers, or a musician's, which comes from his passion for his art. i don't have the proud melancholy of a courtier or the ambitious melancholy of a soldier or the calculated melancholy of a lawyer. my melancholy is not like a lady's, which is nothing more than an affectation, nor like a lover's, which combines all of these qualities. my melancholy is purely my own, a compound made from many ingredients. i'm serious because i've traveled so much. when i think about all the things i've seen, i sink into deep thoughts.
when only one or two men have all the good manners, and even they are dirty, things are bad.
if i may say so, your majesty, he is a rascal who quarreled with me last night, and who, if he lives and ever dares to challenge this glove, will get a box on the ear from me. or, if i see him wearing my glove in his cap, which he swore as a soldier he would wear if he lived, i will knock it off his head.
you're a traveler. well then, you have good reason to be sad. i'm afraid you've sold your own land to see other men's. to have seen much but own nothing is to have rich eyes and poor hands.
take away the stools, the sideboards, and the plates. you, good friend, save me a piece of marzipan, and if you love me, have the porter let in susan grindstone and nell. antony and potpan!
what do you say, captain fluellen? should this soldier keep his oath?
not true. i gained my experience.
yes, boy, i'm ready.
if i may say so, your majesty, as i see it he would be a coward and a villain not to.
and your experience makes you sad. i'd rather have a jester to make me happy than experience to make me sad, and to travel for all that trouble, no less!
they're looking for you in the great chamber.
it may be that his antagonist is a gentleman of very high degree, quite outside of his own sphere.
good day and happiness to you, darling rosalind.
we can't be in two places at once, both here and there! cheers, boys. be quick for a while and let the one who lives the longest take everything.
even if he were as important a man as the devil, as lucifer or beelzebub himself, he's required, see, your grace, to keep his vow. if he backs down, he'll become as notorious a villain and as saucy a jack as ever walked on god's earth, in my opinion.
no, i'll say goodbye if you're going to talk in blank verse this is a joke: most of the play is in blank (unrhymed) verse. blank verse .
welcome, gentlemen. the ladies who don't have corns on their toes will dance with you. ha, my ladies, which of you will refuse to dance now? whichever of you acts shy, i'll swear she has corns. does that hit close to home? welcome, gentlemen. there was a time when i could wear a mask over my eyes and charm a lady by whispering a story in her ear. that time is gone, gone, gone. you are welcome gentlemen. come on, musicians, play music. (music plays and they dance, romeo stands apart) make room in the hall. make room in the hall. shake a leg, girls. (to servingmen) more light, you rascals. flip over the tables and get them out of the way. and put the fire out, it's getting too hot in here. (to his cousin) ah, my man, this unexpected fun feels good. no, sit down, sit down, my good capulet cousin. you and i are too old to dance. (capulet and his cousin sit down) how long is it now since you and i last wore masks at a party like this?
then keep your vow, fellow, when you meet the man.
goodbye, mr. traveler. make sure to keep up your foreign accent, wear strange clothes, belittle all the benefits you receive from your native land and fall out of love with it, and nearly curse god for making you look like the englishman you are, or else i'll never believe you've paddled in a gondola in a venetian canal, as you say you have.
i swear, it must be thirty years.
so i will, my liege. i swear on my life.
(as ganymede pretending to be rosalind ) what's going on, orlando? where have you been all this time? and you call yourself a lover? if you ever insult me like this again, don't bother coming around here again.
what, man? it's not that long, it's not that long. it's been since lucentio's wedding. let the years fly by as fast as they like, it's only been twenty-five years since we wore masks.
whom do you serve under?
my beautiful rosalind, i'm only an hour late.
it's been longer, it's been longer. lucentio's son is older than that, sir. he's thirty years old.
under captain gower, my liege.
you'd break a date with your beloved by a whole hour? a man who will dare to meet his lover even a thousandth part of a minute late, well, it's possible he likes her, but i doubt he really loves the woman.
are you really going to tell me that? his son was a minor only two years ago.
gower is a good captain, and is well versed and well read in the wars.
forgive me, darling rosalind.
(to a servingman) who is the girl on the arm of that lucky knight over there?
have him come to me here, soldier.
no, if you're ever late like this again, i'll refuse to see you. i'd rather be wooed by a snail.
i don't know, sir.
i will, my liege.
a snail?
oh, she shows the torches how to burn bright! she stands out against the darkness like a jeweled earring hanging against the cheek of an african. her beauty is too good for this world; she's too beautiful to die and be buried. she outshines the other women like a white dove in the middle of a flock of crows. when this dance is over, i'll see where she stands, and then i'll touch her hand with my rough and ugly one. did my heart ever love anyone before this moment? my eyes were liars, then, because i never saw true beauty before tonight.
here, fluellen, stick this in your cap. (gives williams's glove to fluellen) when alenon and i went down together, i plucked this glove from his helmet. if any man challenges it, he is a friend to alenon and an enemy to me. if you encounter such a man, arrest him and prove your loyalty to me.
yes, a snail. because even though he's slow, he carries his house on his head, a better offer than you can make a woman, i think. besides, he brings his fate with him.
i can tell by his voice that this man is a montague. (to his page) get me my sword, boy., what, does this peasant dare to come here with his face covered by a mask to sneer at and scorn our celebration? now, by the honor of our family, i do not consider it a crime to kill him.
your grace does me as great an honor as could be wished by any of his subjects. i'd like to see the man with two legs who takes offense at this glove, that's all! just once i'd like to see it, if it please god to grant me that.
what fate is that?
why, what's going on here, nephew? why are you acting so angry?
do you know captain gower?
why, his cuckold's horns, of course, the kind you men are always blaming on your wives. see, the snail already has its horns, which prevents nasty rumors from spreading about his wife's infidelity.
uncle, this man is a montague, our enemy. he's a scoundrel who's come here out of spite to mock our party.
he is my dear friend, your majesty.
a virtuous woman won't give her husband horns, and my rosalind is definitely virtuous.
is it young romeo?
go find him, please, and bring him to my tent.
and i am your rosalind.
that's him, that villain romeo.
i'll fetch him.
(as aliena) he likes calling you that, but he's got another rosalind out there with a prettier face.
calm down, gentle cousin. leave him alone. he carries himself like a dignified gentleman, and, to tell you the truth, he has a reputation throughout verona as a virtuous and well-behaved young man. i wouldn't insult him in my own house for all the wealth in this town. so calm down. just ignore him. that's what i want, and if you respect my wishes, you'll look nice and stop frowning because that's not the way you should behave at a feast.
my lord of warwick and my brother gloucester, follow fluellen at a close distance. the glove which i have given him to wear may possibly win him a box on the ear. it belongs to the soldier i was just talking to. according to an agreement, i should wear it myself. follow fluellen, cousin warwick, and if the soldier strikes him, and i would think from his forthright manner that he'll keep his word, some mischief may arise as a result. i know fluellen to be very conscious of his honor and quick to anger, hot as gunpowder and
come on, woo me, woo me. i'm in a good mood now and likely to give you what you want. what would you say to me now if i really were your precious little rosalind?
it's the right way to act when a villain like him shows up. i won't tolerate him.
likely to return any injury promptly. follow and see to it that nothing serious happens between them. you come with me, uncle of exeter.
i'd kiss you before i spoke.
you will tolerate him. what, little man? i say you will. what the, am i the boss here or you? what the, you won't tolerate him! god help me! you'll start a riot among my guests! there will be chaos! it will be your fault, you'll be the rabble-rouser!
i'm sure it is to knight you, captain.
no, it would be better to speak first and kiss only after you've run out of things to say. when good orators finish talking, they spit; when lovers do (god help us if they ever do), they kiss.
but, uncle, we're being disrespected.
as it is god's will and pleasure, captain, i entreat you to come quickly to the king. there is more good fortune in store for you than you could ever imagine.
what if she won't kiss me?
go on, go on. you're an insolent little boy. is that how it is, really? this stupidity will come back to bite you. i know what i'll do. you have to contradict me, do you? i'll teach you a lesson. (to the guests) well done, my dear guests! (to tybalt) you're a punk, get away. keep your mouth shut, or else, (to servingmen) more light, more light! (to tybalt) you should be ashamed. 'll shut you up. (to the guests) keep having fun, my dear friends!
sir, do you recognize this glove?
then she's making you beg, and that gives you a whole new set of things to talk about.
the combination of forced patience and pure rage is making my body tremble. i'll leave here now, but romeo's prank, which seems so sweet to him now, will turn bitter to him later.
know the glove! i know the glove is a glove.
who could be out of things to say if he were with the girl he loves?
(taking juliet's hand) your hand is like a holy place that my hand is unworthy to visit. if you're offended by the touch of my hand, my two lips are standing here like blushing pilgrims, ready to make things better with a kiss. the first fourteen lines romeo and juliet speak together form a sonnet.
well, i recognize this one (indicates the glove fluellen wears in his cap), and i hereby challenge you. (strikes him)
indeed, you would be out if i were your mistress, if my chastity is worth as much as my wit.
good pilgrim, you don't give your hand enough credit. by holding my hand you show polite devotion. after all, pilgrims touch the hands of statues of saints. holding one palm against another is like a kiss.
good god! as absolute a traitor as any in the whole entire world, or even france or england!
would i be out of my suit "out of my suit" here means he'd have to end his courtship of rosalind (suit is used in the legal sense). rosalind takes him to mean a suit of clothes. suit ?
don't saints and pilgrims have lips too?
what is this, you villain!
no, you'd still have your clothes on, but, yes, i wouldn't think much of you. aren't i your rosalind?
yes, pilgrim, they have lips that they're supposed to pray with.
do you think i'd break my oath?
i like to pretend you are, because then it's almost like actually talking to her.
well then, saint, let lips do what hands do. i'm praying for you to kiss me. please grant my prayer so my faith doesn't turn to despair.
stand aside, captain gower. i'll reward treason with blows, i promise you.
well, on behalf of rosalind, i'll tell you i don't want you.
saints don't move, even when they grant prayers.
i'm not a traitor.
then, on behalf of myself, i'll tell you i'll die.
then don't move while i act out my prayer.
an infamous lie! i accuse you in the name of the king. arrest him: he's a friend of the duke of alenon's.
no, you won't die yourself, but only by proxy. this world is almost six thousand years old, and in all this time not one man has ever actually died from love. troilus according to ancient myth, troilus, cressida's lover, was killed by the warrior achilles. leander drowned while swimming across the hellespont to visit his lover, hero. both were described and redescribed through the ages as tragic lovers. troilus may have wanted to die from love, and he's now considered one of the great, tragic love heroes, but, in fact, a greek with a club beat his brains out. it had nothing to do with love. leander would have lived many more years if it hadn't been for a particularly hot summer night, when he went swimming in the hellespont, got a cramp, and drowned. the foolish poets of the time insisted he died for love, but they're lying. all the love stories are lies. men have died from time to time, and worms have eaten them, but not because of love.
he kisses her.
now, now! what's all this? what's going on?
i hope rosalind doesn't feel as you do. her frown alone would kill me.
now my sin has been taken from my lips by yours.
my lord of warwick, a most corrupt treason, god be praised for it!, has been discovered, as plain as any you'd hope to see on a summer's day.
no, her frown wouldn't kill a fly. but come on, now i'll play your rosalind, and in a more friendly state of mind. whatever you ask for, i'll give.
then do my lips now have the sin they took from yours?
here is his majesty.
then love me, rosalind.
sin from my lips? you encourage crime with your sweetness. give me my sin back.
well, now! what's the matter?
okay, i will, on fridays and saturdays, and the rest.
you kiss like you've studied how.
my liege, this man is a villain and a traitor, who, see, your grace, has struck the glove which your majesty took from alenon's helmet.
and will you have me?
madam, your mother wants to talk to you.
my liege, this was my glove. here is its mate, and the man i gave it to promised to wear it in his cap, and i promised to strike him if he did. i met this man with my glove in his cap, and i have been as good as my word.
sure, and twenty others just like you.
who is her mother?
your majesty, see here, if it won't offend your grace, what a complete, rascally, beggarly, lousy rat this is. i hope your majesty will, in all good conscience, bear me out and vouch for the fact that this is the glove of alenon and that your majesty gave it to me.
what's that?
indeed, young man, her mother is the lady of the house. she is a good, wise, and virtuous lady. i nursed her daughter, whom you were just talking to. let me tell you, the man who marries her will become very wealthy.
give me your glove, soldier: look, here is its mate. it was i, in fact, whom you promised to strike. and you spoke of me in the harshest terms.
well, aren't you a good man?
(to himself) is she a capulet? oh, this is a heavy price to pay! my life is in the hands of my enemy.
if it pleases your majesty, let his neck pay the price, if there is any martial law in the world.
i hope so.
(to romeo) come on, let's go. right when things are the most fun is the best time to leave.
how can you square things with me?
and can a person ever have too much of a good thing?, come on, sister, you can be the priest and marry us., give me your hand, orlando., what do you say, sister?
yes, but i'm afraid i'm in more trouble than ever.
all offenses come from the heart, my lord, and nothing intended to offend your majesty ever came from mine.
please, marry us.
no gentlemen, don't get ready to go now. we have a little dessert coming up. (they whisper in his ear) is that really true? well, then, i thank you both. i thank you, honest gentlemen. good night. bring more torches over here! come on, let's all get to bed. (to his cousin) ah, my man, i swear, it's getting late. i'm going to get some rest.
you abused me to my face.
i can't say the words as celia is not a priest, she can't actually perform the ceremony. words .
come over here, nurse. who is that gentleman?
your majesty didn't present yourself as the king. you represented yourself as just a common man. consider the time of night, what you were wearing, and how ordinary you looked. anything your highness suffered in that disguise, i beg you to see it as your own fault and not mine, because if you'd been what i took you for, there would have been no offense. therefore, i beg your highness, pardon me.
you just have to say, "do you, orlando, "
he is the son and heir of old tiberio.
here, uncle exeter, fill this glove with gold coins and give it to this fellow. keep it, my friend, and wear it as a badge of honor in your cap until i challenge it., give him the money., and you, captain, must make it up with him.
oh, stop it., do you, orlando, take rosalind to be your lawfully wedded wife?
who's the one who's going out the door right now?
by this day and this light, the fellow is certainly brave. here, twelve pence for you. i urge you to serve god and stay out of brawls and dust-ups and quarrels and disputes. i promise it will be better for you if you do.
i do.
well, that one, i think, is young petruchio.
i'll have none of your money.
okay, but when?
who's the one following over there, the one who wouldn't dance?
it's meant in good will. i tell you, you can use it to get your shoes fixed. come, why be so hesitant? your shoes are in pretty bad shape. it's a good shilling, i promise you. if not, i'll get another one for you.
right now; as fast as she can say the vows.
i don't know his name.
now, herald, have the dead been counted?
then you have to say, "i take you, rosalind, to be my lawfully wedded wife."
go ask. (the nurse leaves) if he's married, i think i'll die rather than marry anyone else.
here is the count of the slaughtered french.
i take you, rosalind, to be my lawfully wedded wife.
(returning) his name is romeo. he's a montague. he's the only son of your worst enemy.
what prisoners of rank have been taken, uncle?
maybe i should ask you what right you have to take me, but i'll take you, orlando, to be my husband. look, i've sped ahead of the priest and answered the question before he even asked. a woman's thoughts are always running ahead of her actions.
(to herself) the only man i love is the son of the only man i hate! i saw him too early without knowing who he was, and i found out who he was too late! love is a monster for making me fall in love with my worst enemy.
charles duke of orlans, nephew to the king; john duke of bourbon, and lord bouciqualt: of other lords and barons, knights and squires, a full fifteen hundred, besides common men.
so do all thoughts. they have wings.
what's this? what's this?
this paper tells me of ten thousand frenchmen who lie dead on the battlefield. among them are one hundred twenty-six princes and standard-bearing nobles. add to these eight thousand four hundred knights, squires, and brave gentlemen, five hundred of whom were given the title of knight only yesterday. among the ten thousand the french have lost only sixteen hundred are mercenaries. the rest of the dead are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires, and gentlemen of birth and rank. the names of those of their nobles that lie dead: charles delabreth, high constable of france; jaques of chatillon, admiral of france; the master of the crossbows, lord rambures; great master of france, the brave sir guichard dolphin, john duke of alenon, anthony duke of brabant, the brother of the duke of burgundy, and edward duke of bar. of brave earls, grandpr and roussi, fauconberg and foix, beaumont and marle, vaudemont and lestrale. here was a
now tell me how long you intend to keep her.
just a rhyme i learned from somebody i danced with at the party.
royal fellowship of death! where is the number of our english dead?
forever and a day.
right away, right away. come, let's go. the strangers are all gone.
edward the duke of york, the earl of suffolk, sir richard ketly, davy gam, esquire. no one else of name, and only twenty-five other men. oh, god, your power was with us. what happened here is your doing alone, not ours. when was there ever before so great a loss on one side and so little on the other, in the ordinary and equal clash of battle? take credit, god, for it is no one's doing but yours.
you might as well just say for "a day," and forget the "ever" part. no, orlando, men are like april when they're wooing a girl, young, and passionate, but like december once they're married and their passions have cooled. women are as sweet and temperate as springtime when they're single, but the climate changes once they're married. i'll be more jealous of you than a wild rooster over his hen; more noisy than a parrot chattering about the rain; more fond of new things than an ape; more giddy about getting what i want than a monkey. i'll cry at nothing, and i'll always do it when you're in a good mood. and when you want to go to sleep, i'll be up laughing like a hyena.
now romeo's old feelings of desire are dying, and a new desire is eager to take their place. romeo groaned for the beautiful rosaline and said he would die for her, but compared with tender juliet, rosaline doesn't seem beautiful now. now someone loves romeo, and he's in love again, both of them falling for each others' good looks. but he has to make his speeches of love to a woman who's supposed to be his enemy. and she's been hooked by someone she should fear. because he's an enemy, romeo has no chance to see juliet and say the things a lover normally says. and juliet's just as much in love as he, but she has even less opportunity to meet her lover. but love gives them power, and time gives them the chance to meet, sweetening the extreme danger with intense pleasure.
it's unbelievable.
but will my rosalind do this, too?
can i go away while my heart stays here? i have to go back to where my heart is.
come, let's make a solemn procession to the village. and let it be proclaimed throughout our army that it shall be a hanging offense for anyone to boast of this or take from god the credit that belongs to him alone.
indeed, she'll act just like me.
(calling) romeo, my cousin, romeo, romeo!
if it pleases your majesty, isn't it permissible to mention the number of casualties?
but she is wise.
he's a smart boy. i bet he slipped away and went home to bed.
yes, captain, but with this acknowledgement, that god fought for us.
right. if she weren't wise, she wouldn't be smart enough to behave badly. the wiser the woman, the wilder. if you close the doors on a woman's wit, it'll fly out the window. if you shut the windows, it will pour out the keyhole. if you stop up the keyhole, it will escape from the chimney along with the smoke.
he ran this way and jumped over this orchard wall. call to him, mercutio.
yes, i truly think he did great good.
a man with a wife like that might ask, "hey, wandering wit, where are you off to?"
i'll conjure him as if i were summoning a spirit. romeo! madman! passion! lover! show yourself in the form of a sigh. speak one rhyme, and i'll be satisfied. just cry out, "ah me!" just say "love" and "dove." say just one lovely word to my good friend venus venus is the roman goddess of love. venus . just say the nickname of her blind son cupid, the one who shot arrows so well in the old story., romeo doesn't hear me. he doesn't stir. he doesn't move. the silly ape is dead, but i must make him appear., i summon you by rosaline's bright eyes, by her high forehead and her red lips, by her fine feet, by her straight legs, by her trembling thighs, and by the regions right next to her thighs. in the name of all of these things, i command you to appear before us in your true form.
we'll perform all the holy rites. let non nobis and te deum be sung, and let the dead be buried properly. then on to calais and from there to england. there have never been more fortunate men than we to return from france.
nah, better save the questions for when you find her in your neighbor's bed.
if he hears you, you'll make him angry.
allow me to fill in the gaps for those of you who have not read this story. as for those who have, i beg you to excuse the gaps in time, and the many people and things that cannot be represented here in all their magnitude and proper form. let's bring the king now to calais. imagine him there and, having seen him there, haul him back across the sea on the wings of your imagination. there's the coast of england: see how the sea seems to be fenced in by the men and wives and boys who line the shore, their shouts and wild applause drowning out the deep roar of the surf. as the king's ship draws near, the very ocean is like a man running before the king, preparing his way. let's have him land and solemnly proceed to london. thoughts work so quickly that even now you can imagine him on blackheath, where his lords suggest that he should carry his battle-scarred sword and helmet on a procession through the city. he refuses, as he is free of vanity and self-serving pride and ascribes all the glory and responsibility for victory to god. now in the factory of thought, create the image of all london pouring forth into the streets. picture the mayor and all his brother citizens dressed in their best as they go forth like senators of ancient rome to welcome home their conquering caesar. imagine if our own queen's general returned from ireland, having stamped out the rebellion there, as we hope he does very soon, how many people would leave the city to come welcome him. even more people than that welcomed harry home,
and what wit could excuse that?
what i'm saying can't anger him. he would be angry if i summoned a strange spirit for her to have sex with, that's what would make him angry. the things i'm saying are fair and honest. all i'm doing is saying the name of the woman he loves to lure him out of the darkness.
and they had even more reason. let's put him now in london, since france's period of mourning requires the king of england to stay home. imagine a visit of the holy roman emperor, working on france's behalf. he wants to bring about a peace between the two countries. skip over all the particularities between then and harry's return to france. there we must place him, and i myself have covered the interim period by reminding you that it has taken place. so, keeping this omission in mind, immediately return to france, your eyes following the path of your thoughts.
she'll say she was at the neighbor's looking for you. you'll never find her without an answer unless you find her without a tongue. a woman who doesn't know how to make her own indiscretions look like her husband's fault is hardly a woman. and she's hardly fit to be a mother, her child will turn out to be a fool.
come on. he's hidden behind these trees to keep the night company. his love is blind, so it belongs in the dark.
yes, that's true, but why are you wearing your leek today? saint davy's day has passed.
rosalind, i have to leave you for two hours.
if love is blind, it can't hit the target. now he'll sit under a medlar the medlar is a tree whose fruit was considered to look like a vulva or an anus. the fruits were often called "open-arses." popperins are belgian pears; mercutio uses the name in an obscene double entrendre. medlar tree and wish his mistress were one of those fruits that look like female genitalia. oh romeo, i wish she were an open-arse, and you a popperin pear to "pop her in." good night, romeo. i'll go to my little trundle bed. this open field is too cold a place for me to sleep. (to benvolio) come on, should we go?
there are reasons and causes why and how in everything. i'll tell you as my friend, captain gower: that rascally, mean, beggarly, lousy, bragging pistol, whom you and yourself and all the world know to be no better than a peasant, see, with no good qualities at all: he came to me yesterday and brought me bread and salt and told me to eat my leek. we were somewhere where i couldn't pick a fight with him, but i've decided to wear it in my cap until i see him again, whereupon i'll give him a little piece of my mind.
oh, no! darling, i can't live without you for two hours.
let's go. there's no point in looking for him if he doesn't want to be found.
and here he comes, puffing himself up like a turkey.
i must join the duke for lunch. i'll be back here with you by two o'clock.
it's easy for someone to joke about scars if they've never been cut.
never mind his puffings and his turkeys. god bless you, ensign pistol! you lousy, rotten, villain, god bless you!
oh, go, leave me. i knew you'd turn out this way. my friends told me as much, and i knew it, too. but i was won over by your flattering words. i'm just another girl whom you've cast aside. so, take me, death! you'll be back at two o'clock?
but wait, what's that light in the window over there? it is the east, and juliet is the sun. rise up, beautiful sun, and kill the jealous moon diana is the goddess of the moon and of virginity. romeo implies that juliet is a servant of the moon as long as she's a virgin. jealous moon . the moon is already sick and pale with grief because you, juliet, her maid, are more beautiful than she. don't be her maid, because she is jealous. virginity makes her look sick and green. only fools hold on to their virginity. let it go. oh, there's my lady! oh, it is my love. oh, i wish she knew how much i love her. she's talking, but she's not saying anything. so what? her eyes are saying something. i will answer them. i am too bold. she's not talking to me. two of the brightest stars in the whole sky had to go away on business, and they're asking her eyes to twinkle in their places until they return. what if her eyes were in the sky and the stars were in her head?, the brightness of her cheeks would outshine the stars the way the sun outshines a lamp. if her eyes were in the night sky, they would shine so brightly through space that birds would start singing, thinking her light was the light of day. look how she leans her hand on her cheek. oh, i wish i was the glove on that hand so that i could touch that cheek.
are you mad? do you want me to cut your life short, you deceiving lowlife? away! the smell of leek turns my stomach.
yes, sweet rosalind.
oh, my!
i wonder if you'd be so good, you lousy, rotten villain, to grant my wish and my request and gratify me, see, by eating this leek. i'd like you to, see, because you don't like it, and because it isn't to your taste, and because it doesn't agree with you.
honestly, truly, in god's name, and by all those little girly oaths that don't actually have any power, if you break even a little bit of your promise, or if you come even a minute after two o'clock, i'll think you the most pathetic promise breaker, the most lying lover, and the most unworthy partner for rosalind that could be found anywhere. so beware of my contempt, and keep your promise.
(to himself) she speaks. oh, speak again, bright angel. you are as glorious as an angel tonight. you shine above me, like a winged messenger from heaven who makes mortal men fall on their backs to look up at the sky, watching the angel walking on the clouds and sailing on the air.
not for cadwallader and all his goats.
i'll keep my promise just as if you really were rosalind. so, goodbye.
(not knowing romeo hears her) oh, romeo, romeo, why do you have to be romeo? forget about your father and change your name. or else, if you won't change your name, just swear you love me and i'll stop being a capulet.
here's a goat for you. (strikes him with a club) will you be good enough to eat it, mangy rascal?
well, time is the old judge that tries your kind of criminal. time will tell what kind of a man you are. goodbye.
(to himself) should i listen for more, or should i speak now?
dissolute lowlife, you shall die.
you have absolutely abused our sex in this love talk of yours. we should rip off your man's clothing and show the world the woman who has represented her own kind so badly.
(still not knowing romeo hears her) it's only your name that's my enemy. you'd still be yourself even if you stopped being a montague. what's a montague anyway? it isn't a hand, a foot, an arm, a face, or any other part of a man. oh, be some other name! what does a name mean? the thing we call a rose would smell just as sweet if we called it by any other name. romeo would be just as perfect even if he wasn't called romeo. romeo, lose your name. trade in your name, which really has nothing to do with you, and take all of me in exchange.
that's very true, mangy rascal, when it pleases god. meanwhile, i'd be gratified if you'd live and eat your food. come, here's some sauce to go with it. (strikes him with his club) yesterday you called me "mountain squire." today i'll make you squire of the low ground. go on, eat up. if you can mock a leek, you can eat a leek.
oh cousin, cousin, cousin, my sweet little cousin, i wish you knew how deep in love i am. the bottom of my love is so deep it can't be reached. it's as deep as the bay of portugal.
(to juliet) i trust your words. just call me your love, and i will take a new name. from now on i will never be romeo again.
enough, captain. you've stunned him.
or it's bottomless, at least: pour affection in one end, and it runs out the other.
who are you? why do you hide in the darkness and listen to my private thoughts?
i tell you, i'll either make him eat some part of this leek or give him a four-day head-bashing., go on, bite. it's good for your fresh wound and your bloody noggin.
cupid, that blind bastard son of venus, conceived from a thought and anger, born from insanity, that blind, naughty boy who makes everyone else go blind just because he can't see himself, let cupid judge how deep my love runs. i'm telling you, aliena, i can't stand being apart from orlando. i'm going to find some shade and sigh until he returns.
i don't know how to tell you who i am by telling you a name. i hate my name, dear saint, because my name is your enemy. if i had it written down, i would tear up the paper.
must i bite?
and i'm going to sleep.
i haven't heard you say a hundred words yet, but i recognize the sound of your voice. aren't you romeo? and aren't you a montague?
yes, absolutely, no question or ambiguity about it.
which one of you killed the deer?
i am neither of those things if you dislike them.
by this leek, i swear i'll make you pay for this. (fluellen threatens to strike him) okay, okay, i'm eating it, 
it was me, sir.
tell me, how did you get in here? and why did you come? the orchard walls are high, and it's hard to climb over them. if any of my relatives find you here they'll kill you because of who you are.
please do. would you like some more sauce to go with it? there isn't enough leek left for you to swear on.
let's bring this man to the duke, like a triumphant roman conqueror. put the deer's horns on his head, like a victory branch. do you have a song, forester, for this occasion?
i flew over these walls with the light wings of love. stone walls can't keep love out. whatever a man in love can possibly do, his love will make him try to do it. therefore your relatives are no obstacle.
lay off, already! can't you see i'm eating?
yes, sir.
if they see you, they'll murder you.
i sincerely hope it does you good, mangy rascal. no, don't throw any of it away. the skin is good for your cracked head. when you see leeks in the future, i hope you keep mocking them. that's all.
then sing it. it doesn't matter if it's in tune so long as it's loud enough.
alas, one angry look from you would be worse than twenty of your relatives with swords. just look at me kindly, and i'm invincible against their hatred.
good.
(sings) what should we give to the man who killed this deer? give him the hide and the horns to wear. then sing this song to send him home (the other lords pick up the deer) don't be ashamed to wear the horns. they've been worn since before you were born. your father's father wore it, and your father endured it. the horn, the horn, the lustful horn is not to be laughed at or scorned.
i'd give anything to keep them from seeing you here.
yes, leeks are good. wait, here's a penny to heal your head.
what do you say now? isn't it past two o'clock? and i see a lot of orlando here.
the darkness will hide me from them. and if you don't love me, let them find me here. i'd rather they killed me than have to live without your love.
me, a penny?
i'm telling you, he's taken his bow and arrows and, with a pure love and a worried brain, has gone to take a nap.
who told you how to get here below my bedroom?
yes, and you'll take it. if not, i have another leek in my pocket that you can eat.
look who's coming.
love showed me the way, the same thing that made me look for you in the first place. love told me what to do, and i let love borrow my eyes. i'm not a sailor, but if you were across the farthest sea, i would risk everything to gain you.
i'll take this penny as a token that you'll pay for this.
(to rosalind) i've been sent to find you, young man. my lovely phoebe told me to give you this letter. i don't know what's in it, but guessing from her stern expression and her wasp-like demeanor as she was writing it, i bet she's angry. you'll have to excuse me, as i'm just the messenger.
you can't see my face because it's dark out. otherwise, you'd see me blushing about the things you've heard me say tonight. i would be happy to keep up good manners and deny the things i said. but forget about good manners. do you love me? i know you'll say "yes," and i'll believe you. but if you swear you love me, you might turn out to be lying. they say jove jove, also called jupiter, was the king of the roman gods. jove laughs when lovers lie to each other. oh romeo, if you really love me, say it truly. or if you think it's too easy and quick to win my heart, i'll frown and play hard-to-get, as long as that will make you try to win me, but otherwise i wouldn't act that way for anything. in truth, handsome montague, i like you too much, so you may think my behavior is loose. but trust me, gentleman, i'll prove myself more faithful than girls who act coy and play hard-to-get. i should have been more standoffish, i confess, but you overheard me talking about the love in my heart when i didn't know you were there. so excuse me, and do not assume that because you made me love you so easily my love isn't serious.
if i owe you anything, i'll pay you in clubbings. you'll become a wood salesman and buy nothing but clubs from me. god be with you and keep you, and may he heal your head.
(reading the letter as ganymede) patience herself would be shocked by this letter and become feisty. if i can take this, i can take anything. she says i'm not handsome and have no manners. she says i'm arrogant and that she couldn't love me even if men were as rare as the mythical phoenix. honestly! i'm not hunting after her love. why would she write this way to me? tell the truth, shepherd: you wrote this letter.
lady, i swear by the sacred moon above, the moon that paints the tops of fruit trees with silver, 
there'll be hell to pay for this.
no, i swear, i don't even know what's in it. phoebe wrote it.
don't swear by the moon. the moon is always changing. every month its position in the sky shifts. i don't want you to turn out to be that inconsistent too.
go on, get out of here. you're a lying, cowardly wretch. you mock an ancient tradition, born of reverence and worn in honor of brave men who have died, and then have the gall not to stand by your words. i've seen you bait and mock this man more than once. you thought because he didn't speak english like a native he couldn't handle an english club. you've learned otherwise. let this be a welsh lesson to you to behave with english manners in the future. farewell.
come on, you're a fool, and driven to extreme measures by love. i saw her hands: they were as rough as leather and just as brown; i thought she was wearing old gloves, but they were, in fact, her hands. these are the hands of a hard-working housewife, but that's not the point. the point is that she didn't write this letter. these are a man's words, and his handwriting.
what should i swear by?
has fortune turned on me, like the whore she is? i've had news that my nell died of the pox in a hospice. there went my last refuge. i grow old, and all dignity has been thrashed out of me. well, i'll turn pimp and do some occasional pickpocketing. i'll steal away to england, and i'll steal some more when i get there. i'll bandage up these wounds and swear i got them in the french wars.
i'm telling you, it's hers.
don't swear at all. but if you have to swear, swear by your wonderful self, which is the god i worship like an idol, and then i'll believe you.
peace to this occasion that's brought us all together. health and good day to our brother the king of france and to our sister the queen. joy and good wishes to our lovely royal cousin, katherine. and you, duke of burgundy, who brought this great assembly together, we salute you as descendent and member of this royal family. and a health to all you lords and princes of france.
well, it's written in a boisterous and rude style, someone is up for a fight. why, she challenges me like a muslim would challenge a christian. no, a woman's gentle brain could never have come up with such crude expressions and even harsher meanings. do you want to hear what she says?
if my heart's dear love, 
we rejoice to see you, most worthy brother of england. you are welcome here, as are all of you english princes.
if you want to read it, as i haven't heard it yet, though i've heard too much of phoebe's cruelty.
well, don't swear. although you bring me joy, i can't take joy in this exchange of promises tonight. it's too crazy. we haven't done enough thinking. it's too sudden. it's too much like lightning, which flashes and then disappears before you can say, "it's lightning." my sweet, good night. our love, which right now is like a flower bud in the summer air, may turn out to be a beautiful flower by the next time we meet. i hope you enjoy the same sweet peace and rest i feel in my heart.
brother of england, may this meeting prove as fruitful as it is joyous. we are glad to look upon your face, a face whose eyes have until now carried in them a glance as deadly, for any frenchman they alighted on, as the poisonous eyes of those mythical lizards, the basilisks. we hope your poison has worn off and this day shall transform all grievances and quarrels into friendship.
she's phoebe-ing me. listen to what the tyrant says. (reading) "are you a god disguised as a shepherd, that you know so expertly how to burn my heart?" now, honestly, would a woman rant like this?
oh, are you going to leave me so unsatisfied?
we're here to say "amen" to that.
you call that ranting?
what satisfaction could you possibly have tonight?
all you english princes, i salute you.
(reading) "why have you set aside your divine nature just to battle with a woman's affections?" did you ever hear such ranting? (reading) "when other men have wooed me, they didn't hurt me." in other words, she thinks i'm not a man, but an animal.
i would be satisfied if we made each other true promises of love.
great kings of france and england, i owe you both equal service and loyalty. your highnesses can both attest to the fact that i've strived mightily, with all my wits and energy, to bring about this royal meeting between you two imperial majesties. since i have succeeded to the point of bringing you face to face and eye to eye, don't take it ill if i formally demand to know, before this royal congregation, what obstacle or impediment prevents the poor fragile, mangled peace, the mother of arts and joyous births, from showing her lovely face in this most fertile garden of the world, our fair france? alas, she has been too long exiled from france, whose crops all lie in heaps, rotting with ripeness. her grapes, which make the wine that cheers our hearts, die unpruned on the vines. her once-trimmed hedges, like prisoners with wild, untended hair, put forth unruly twigs. her fallow fields are overgrown with weeds, while the blade that should uproot such wilderness lies rusting. the level meadow, where the freckled cowslip, burnet, and green clover once grew, has become useless: unmowed, it grows to seed, so that nothing springs up but weeds, rough thistles, barren plants, and burs. and just as our vineyards, fallow fields, meadows, and hedges, which grow improperly if left to themselves, run riot, so our families and ourselves and our
(reading) "if the scorn in your bright eyes can make me fall so deeply in love, can you imagine what power they might have if they looked at me more kindly? while you sneered at me, i loved you. consider what effect kind prayers might have. the man that brings you this letter doesn't know how i feel about you. send me your answer via him. tell me via him whether you will accept my faithful offer of myself and all that i can do. or tell him you will deny my love, in which case i'll figure out how to die."
i pledged my love to you before you asked me to. yet i wish i could take that promise back, so i had it to give again.
children have lost, or no longer have time to learn, skills that should be a credit to our country. they grow like savages, like soldiers who meditate on nothing but blood, surrounded by swearing and stern looks, ragged clothing and everything unnatural. it's to reverse all this, so we can once again become as we were, that you have all been brought together; therefore i demand to know why gentle peace should not banish these troubles and bless us with her former qualities.
you call this sneering?
you would take it back? why would you do that, my love?
duke of burgundy, if you want peace, the lack of which creates these misfortunes you describe, you must purchase it buy agreeing across-the-board to all our very just demands. you hold the details and particulars of our terms, briefly enumerated, before you in your hands.
(as aliena) oh, you poor shepherd!
only to be generous and give it to you once more. but i'm wishing for something i already have. my generosity to you is as limitless as the sea, and my love is as deep. the more love i give you, the more i have. both loves are infinite.
the king has heard them, but as yet has made no answer.
why do you pity him? he doesn't deserve any pity. (to silvius) why would you love such a woman? so she can turn you into an instrument and play lousy tunes on you? it's unbearable. well, go back to her, i can tell she's turned you into a perfectly tame snake, and tell her this: if she loves me, i command her to love you. and if she won't love you, tell her i'll never take her unless you beg me to. if you're a true lover, get out of here. no, don't say another word, because here comes more company.
i hear a noise inside. dear love, goodbye, just a minute, good nurse. sweet montague, be true. stay here for a moment. i'll come back.
well, the peace you pleaded for so eloquently just now lies in his answer.
good morning, pretty ones. tell me, if you know: where in this forest is there a shepherd's cottage surrounded by olive trees?
oh, blessed, blessed night! because it's dark out, i'm afraid all this is just a dream, too sweet to be real.
i've only given the articles a cursory glance. if your grace would kindly appoint some members of your council to sit with me once more and go over them more carefully, i will give my answer and acceptance right away.
west of here, in the valley next to us. passing by on your right, there is a row of willows. follow them straight to the cottage. but right now, the house is keeping to itself, there's no one home.
three words, dear romeo, and then it's good night for real. if your intentions as a lover are truly honorable and you want to marry me, send me word tomorrow. i'll send a messenger to you, and you can pass on a message telling me where and when we'll be married. i'll lay all my fortunes at your feet and follow you, my lord, all over the world.
brother, i shall. go, uncle exeter, and brother clarence, and you, brother gloucester, warwick and huntingdon, go with the king. you have full power to confirm, change, or add to any of my demands in any
i think i recognize you from a description i was given of your clothing and age: "the boy is pretty and feminine, and carries himself like a blooming young woman. the woman is short, with a darker complexion than her brother." aren't you the owners of the house i was just asking about?
(offstage) madam!
way that you judge advantageous to my rule, and i'll undertake to agree to it. fair sister, will you go with the princes or stay here with me?
since you asked, i suppose it's not bragging to say that we are.
(to the nurse) i'll be right there! (to romeo) but if you don't have honorable intentions, i beg you, 
gracious brother, i will go with them. perhaps a woman's voice may do some good when some small detail proves to be holding things up.
orlando sends his regards to you both, and he sends this bloody handkerchief to the boy he calls "his rosalind." is that you?
(offstage) madam!
in that case, leave our cousin katherine here with us. she is our principal demand, one of the first points of the treaty.
it is. what does this mean?
alright, i'm coming!, i beg you to stop trying for me and leave me to my sadness. tomorrow i'll send the messenger.
she is welcome to stay.
it's a story that involves some shame on my part. it's about who i am, and how, why, and where this handkerchief was stained.
my soul depends on it, 
lovely, most lovely katherine, will you agree to teach a soldier the words that would recommend his love-suit to a gentle heart like yours?
please, tell us.
a thousand times good night.
your majesty shall mock at me. i cannot speak your england.
when young orlando left you last, he promised to return within an hour. he was pacing through the forest, thinking bittersweet thoughts of love, and listen what happened! he looked to the side, and pay attention to what he saw then: under an oak tree, whose lower branches were mossy with age and top branches ancient and brittle, he saw a wretched beggar, with overgrown hair and beard, asleep on his back. a green and gold snake had wound itself around this man's neck and was slowly making its way toward the man's mouth. however, when it saw orlando, it unwound itself and slunk away into a bush. but there happened to be a lioness crouching under that bush. her cubs had nursed from her until she was dry, so she was ravenously hungry, and she was lying with her head on the ground, watching the man as cats do and waiting to see if he would wake up, a lion won't prey on anything that seems dead. seeing the lioness, orlando approached the sleeping man. he discovered that the man was his older brother.
leaving you is a thousand times worse than being near you. a lover goes toward his beloved as enthusiastically as a schoolboy leaving his books, but when he leaves his girlfriend, he feels as miserable as the schoolboy on his way to school.
lovely katherine, if you will love me well with your french heart, i'm happy to hear you confess it in broken english. do you like me, kate?
oh, i've heard him talk about that brother, and he described him as the most inhumane man alive.
hist, romeo! hist! oh, i wish i could make a falconer's juliet is trying to call to romeo as if he was a falcon. falconer's call, so i could bring my little falcon back again. i'm trapped in my family's house, so i must be quiet. otherwise i would rip open the cave where echo echo, a mythical woman who was scorned by narcissus, withered with sadness repeating his name, and after her death, her voice still reverberated in caves, which is why we have the word "echo." echo sleeps. i would make her repeat his name until her voice grew more hoarse than mine by repeating, "my romeo!"
pardon me but i do not know what is "like me."
and he was right. i know exactly how inhumane he was.
my soul is calling out my name. the sound of lovers calling each others names through the night is silver-sweet. it's the sweetest sound a lover ever hears.
an angel is like you, kate, and you are like an angel.
but, back to orlando, did he leave his brother there, to be food for the hungry mother-lioness?
romeo!
(to alice, in french) what does he say? that i am like an angel?
he turned away twice and almost left him there. but his kindness was nobler than even his desire for revenge, his natural goodness was stronger than his need to give his brother what he deserved. he fought the lioness and quickly defeated her. i woke from my miserable sleep when i heard the noise of their struggle.
my baby hawk?
(in french) yes, your grace, that's what he says.
are you his brother?
what time tomorrow should i send a messenger to you?
i said so, dear katherine, and i'm not ashamed to repeat it.
was it you that he rescued?
by nine o'clock.
(in french) oh, lord! the tongues of men are full of deceit.
was it you that was always plotting to kill him?
i won't fail. from now until then seems like twenty years. i have forgotten why i called you back.
(to alice) what does she say, pretty one? that the tongues of men are full of deceits?
that was me, but it's not me, i'm not ashamed to tell you what i once was, since i'm so happy to have since converted.
let me stand here until you remember your reason.
oui, dat de tongues of de mans is be full of deceits: dere's de princess for you.
but what about the bloody handkerchief?
i'll forget it, and you'll have to stand there forever. i'll only remember how much i love your company.
how very english of her. kate, my wooing is fit for your understanding: i am glad your english isn't better. if it were, you would find me such an ordinary king that you would think i'd sold my farm to buy my crown. i don't know any fancy ways of talking about love, only to say right out, "i love you." if you press me any further than with the question, "do you really?" my love scene is over. so give me your answer, and we'll shake on it. deal?
i'll get there. when we had told each other our entire stories and cried, and i'd told him how i'd ended up in in the forest, well, he brought me to the duke, who gave me fresh clothing and hospitality, and put me in my brother's care. my brother immediately took me to his cave, where he took off his clothing and there on his arm was a wound where the lioness had attacked him, ripping off some of his flesh. the wound had been bleeding the entire time. so, now he fainted, and as he fainted, he called out, "rosalind!" quickly, i resuscitated him and bound up his wound. after a brief time, as he is a strong, brave man, 
i'll keep standing here, even if you keep forgetting. i'll forget that i have any home besides this spot right here.
with all due respect, me understand well.
he sent me out to find you, even though i'm a stranger to you. he wanted me to tell you this story and beg your forgiveness for his having broken his promise. he wanted me to give this handkerchief, soaked in his blood, to the boy that he jokingly calls his rosalind.
it's almost morning. i want to make you go, but i'd only let you go as far as a spoiled child lets his pet bird go. he lets the bird hop a little from his hand and then yanks him back by a string.
really, if you were thinking of having me write poetry or dance for you, kate, you've defeated me already. i have no gift for the one and no strength for the other, though i have the gift of strength. if i could win a lady by playing leapfrog or vaulting into my saddle with my armor on my back, though you may accuse me of boasting, i could easily get myself a wife. i can fight with my fists and rear my horse up without falling off him, if either of those things could win me love. but,
oh no! ganymede! ganymede, sweetheart?
i wish i was your bird.
before god, kate, i cannot turn pale on purpose or gasp out fancy phrases, and i have no gift for clever declarations, only blunt oaths, which i never use till i'm asked and never break no matter who asks me. if you can love a man of this temperament, kate, whose face a sunburn wouldn't make any worse and who never looks in the mirror to admire himself, let your eye improve me. i speak to you as a plain soldier. if you can love me for this, take me. if not, to tell you i will die is true, but not for love, by god. and yet i do love you. so take for life a fellow of pure and plain faithfulness. he's bound to be true to you as he won't be up to flirting with other women. these chatty fellows who can rhyme their way into a lady's good graces always reason themselves out again. look, a talker is just a gabber; a poem is just a rhyme. a good leg will shrink, a straight back stoop, a black beard turn white, a curly head grow bald, an attractive face grow wrinkled and a pretty eye hollow. but a good heart, kate, is the sun and the moon, or, rather, the sun, and not the moon, for it goes on shining brightly forever. if you would have such a man, take me. take me and get a soldier; take a soldier and get a king. so what do you say to my suit? speak, my fair one, and speak fairly, i beg you.
many people faint when they see blood.
my sweet, so do i. but i would kill you by petting you too much. good night, good night. parting is such sweet sorrow that i'll say good night until tonight becomes tomorrow.
is it possible dat i sould love de enemy of france?
there's more to it than that., ganymede!
i hope you sleep peacefully. i wish i were sleep and peace, so i could spend the night with you. now i'll go see my priest, to ask for his help and tell him about my good luck.
no, it is not possible you should love the enemy of france, kate. but in loving me, you would love the friend of france, for i love france so much that i will not part with a single village of it. i will have it all mine. and, kate, when france is mine and i am yours, then france is yours and you are mine.
look, he's recovering.
the smiling morning is replacing the frowning night. darkness is stumbling out of the sun's path like a drunk man. now, before the sun comes up and burns away the dew, i have to fill this basket of mine with poisonous weeds and medicinal flowers. the earth is nature's mother and also nature's tomb. plants are born out of the earth, and they are buried in the earth when they die. from the earth's womb, many different sorts of plants and animals come forth, and the earth provides her children with many excellent forms of nourishment. everything nature creates has some special property, and each one is different. herbs, plants, and stones possess great power. there is nothing on earth that is so evil that it does not provide the earth with some special quality. and there is nothing that does not turn bad if it's put to the wrong use and abused. virtue turns to vice if it's misused. vice sometimes becomes virtue through the right activity.
i don't understand all dat.
i want to go home.
inside the little rind of this weak flower, there is both poison and powerful medicine. if you smell it, you feel good all over your body. but if you taste it, you die. there are two opposite elements in everything, in men as well as in herbs, good and evil.
no, kate? i will tell you in french, which i am sure will hang as heavily on my tongue as a newly married wife around her husband's neck, impossible to shake off. (in stilted french) i, when, on the possession of france, and when you have the possession of me, (in english) let me see, what then? help me, saint denis!, (french again) then yours is france and you are mine. (in english) it would be as easy for me to reconquer the kingdom, kate, as it would be for me to speak that much french again. i'll never move you in french, except to laugh at me.
we'll take you there. please, will you take his arm?
when evil is dominant, death soon kills the body like cancer.
your french, sir, is better than my english.
buck up, boy! you're a man? you don't have a man's courage.
good morning, father.
no, really, it's not, kate. but your speaking my language, and i yours truly-falsely sincerely but incorrectly. truly-falsely comes to pretty much the same thing. can you understand this much english though, kate? could you love me?
it's true, i confess. oh, sir, someone would think i was a good fake. please tell your brother what a convincing show i put on. whoo-hoo!
god bless you. who greets me so early in the morning? young man, something's wrong if you're getting out of bed this early. every old man has worries, and worried men never get any sleep, but young men shouldn't have a care in the world. they should get to bed early and get plenty of sleep. therefore, the fact that you're awake this early tells me you've been upset with some anxiety. if that's not the case, then this must be the answer: you, romeo, have not been to bed tonight.
i cannot tell.
that was no show. your cheeks are too flushed for me to believe that was a fake faint.
your last guess is right. i enjoyed a sweeter rest than sleep.
can any of your neighbors tell, kate? i'll ask them. come, i know you love me. and at night, when you go to your bedroom, you'll question this gentlewoman about me and, i know, kate, you'll criticize those qualities of mine that you secretly love. but mock me gently, dear kate, because i love you terribly. if i ever win you, kate, as i have an inkling i will, it won't be without a skirmish, and that suggests you'd make a good mother of soldiers. shall not you and i together, then, between saint denis and saint george, make a boy, half french, half english, who will go to constantinople
fake, i'm telling you.
may god forgive you if you've sinned!, were you with rosaline?
and grab the turk by the beard? shall we not? what do you say, my fair fleur-de-lys?
well, then, be brave and pretend to be a man.
with rosaline, father? no, i have forgotten that girl and all the sadness she brought me.
i do not know dat.
that's what i'm doing. but honestly, i should have been a woman.
that's good, my boy. but where have you been?
no, of course you don't. it lies in the future, along with certainty. now there can only be the promise. do promise, kate, that you'll do your french part to bring forth such a boy; and for my english half, take the word of a king and a bachelor. what's your answer, (speaking in french) oh loveliest of katherines, my most precious and divine goddess?
come on, you keep getting paler. please, let's go home. sir, please come with us.
i'll tell you before you have to ask me again. i have been feasting with my enemy. suddenly someone wounded me with love and was wounded with love by me. you have the sacred power to cure both of us. i carry no hatred, holy man, because my request will benefit my enemy.
your majesty has false french enough to deceive de wisest lady in france.
i'll do that, because i have to tell my brother how you forgave him, rosalind.
speak plainly, make your meaning clear, my son. a jumbled confession can only receive a jumbled absolution.
damn my false french. i tell you truly, in true english: i love you, kate. and though i wouldn't dare to swear that you love me, still my blood begins to flatter me that you do, despite the ill effects of my face. curse my father's ambition! he was thinking of civil wars when he conceived me, and consequently my outward appearance is harsh and steely. i intimidate ladies when i come to woo them. but i promise you, kate: the older i grow the better i'll look. my comfort is that old age, that poor preserver of beauty, can't make my face any worse than it already is. if you have me, you have me now at my worst; and if you have me, you'll appreciate me better and better. therefore tell me, fairest katherine, will you have me? put aside your maiden blushes and speak your true feelings with the bearing of an empress. take me by the hand and say, "harry of england, i am yours." no sooner shall i hear that word than i will tell you straight out, "england is yours, ireland is yours, france is yours, and harry plantagenet
i'll think of something. but please, tell him how well i faked a faint. will you come with us?
i love rich capulet's daughter. i love her, and she loves me. we're bound to each other in every possible way, except we need you to marry us. i'll tell you more later about when and where we met, how we fell in love, and how we exchanged promises, but now i'm begging you: please, agree to marry us today.
is yours." and, though i say so in his presence, if he's not a friend of the best kings, you'll find him king of the best friends. come on, tell me in broken music, for your voice is music and your english broken. come, katherine queen of all, reveal your heart to me in broken english. will you have me?
we'll get married at some point, audrey. be patient.
holy saint francis, this is a drastic change! have you given up so quickly on rosaline, whom you loved so much? then young men love with their eyes, not with their hearts. jesus and mary, how many tears did you cry for rosaline? how many salty tear-drops did you waste salting a love you never tasted? the sun hasn't yet melted away the fog you made with all your sighs. the groans you used to make are still ringing in my old ears. there's still a stain on your cheek from an old tear that hasn't been washed off yet. if you were ever yourself, and this sadness was yours, you and your sadness were all for rosaline. and now you've changed? then repeat this after me: you can't expect women to be faithful when men are so unreliable.
dat is as it shall please de king my father.
really, the priest was good enough, no matter what that old guy said.
you scolded me often for loving rosaline.
oh, it will please him, kate. it will please him very well.
no, he was wicked and vile. but audrey, there's a boy in the forest who claims you're his girl.
i scolded you for obsessing about her, not for loving her, my student.
den it shall also content me.
yes, i know who you're talking about, but he has no claim on me.
and you told me to bury my love.
with that i kiss your hand and call you my queen.
here comes the man himself.
i didn't tell you to get rid of one love and replace her with another.
(in french) no, sir! stop, stop! heavens, i can't allow you to lower yourself by kissing the hand of one of your humble servants. i hope you'll pardon me, mighty king.
it warms my heart to encounter such a country bumpkin. truly, we witty men can't hold our tongues. we have to mess with the likes of him, we just can't help it.
please, i beg you, don't scold me. the girl i love now returns my love. the other girl did not love me.
then i will kiss your lips, kate.
good evening, audrey.
oh, she knew very well that you were acting like you were in love without really knowing what love means. but come on, inconsistent young man, come with me. i'll help you with your secret wedding. this marriage may be lucky enough to turn the hatred between your families into pure love.
(in french) it is not the custom for french maidens to kiss before they are married.
good evening, william.
let's get out of here. i'm in a rush.
what does she say, madam interpreter?
and good evening to you, sir.
go wisely and slowly. those who rush stumble and fall.
dat it not be de custom pour les ladies of france, i cannot tell vat is baiser en anglish.
good evening to you, good friend. no, no, put your hat back on, put it back on. no, please, keep your head covered. how old are you, friend?
where the devil can romeo be? didn't he come home last night?
to kiss.
twenty-five, sir.
not to his father's house. i asked a servant.
your majesty understand bettre den me.
a mature age. is your name william?
that fair-skinned, hard-hearted hussy, rosaline is going to torment him until he goes insane.
it is not the custom for the maids in france to kiss before they are married, is that what she says?
yes, it's william, sir.
tybalt, old capulet's nephew, has sent a letter to romeo's father's house.
yes, exactly.
a good name. were you born here in the forest?
i bet it's a challenge.
oh, kate, prudish customs bow before great kings. you and i cannot be held within the confines of a country's arbitrary customs, dear kate. you and i, kate, we are the makers of custom, and the freedom that goes with our position silences all who would criticize, as i will silence you for upholding the prudish custom of your country in refusing me a kiss. therefore, willingly and yielding. (kisses her) you have witchcraft in your lips, kate. there is more eloquence in a sweet touch of them than in the tongues of the whole french council. they would persuade harry of england sooner than a whole assembly of monarchs. here comes your father.
yes sir, thank god.
romeo will answer the challenge.
god save your majesty. my royal kinsman, are you teaching our princess english?
"thank god", that's a good answer. are you rich?
any man who knows how to write can answer a letter.
i wanted to teach her how perfectly i love her, kinsman, and that's good english.
well, so-so.
no, romeo will respond to the letter's writer, telling him whether he accepts the challenge.
she picks it up quick, doesn't she?
"so-so" is good, very good, an excellent answer. and then again, it's not so good, but only so-so. are you wise?
oh, poor romeo! he's already dead. he's been stabbed by a white girl's black eye. he's been cut through the ear with a love song. the center of his heart has been split by blind cupid's arrow. is he man enough at this point to face off with tybalt?
our language is rough, friend, and it's not in my nature to speak smoothly. so, possessing neither a voice nor a heart for flattery, i can't awaken the spirit of love in her so as to make him appear in his true likeness.
yes sir, i'm fairly witty.
why, what's tybalt's story?
forgive my boldness if i take you up on your words about making magic. for love to appear in his true likeness, he would have to be as cupid is: naked and blind. how can you blame her, a tender young maiden still given to virgin blushes, for objecting to having a blind, naked boy appear before her? it's a lot to ask of a maiden.
well, that's a fine answer. i seem to remember a saying: "only a fool thinks he's wise; the wise man this line may be in response to william's open-mouthed gape, but it's also cruelly taunting the bumpkin for his narrow experience and how his "philosophy" derives only from that experience. wise man knows that he is, in fact, a fool." when one self-described philosopher wanted to eat grapes, he opened his lips when they entered his mouth, thereby making the theoretical point that grapes were made to be eaten, and lips to open. do you love this girl?
he's tougher than the prince of cats the prince of cats is a figure from medieval lore whose first name was also tybalt. prince of cats . he does everything by the book. he fights like you sing at a recital, paying attention to time, distance, and proportion. he takes the proper breaks: one, two, and the third in your heart. he's the butcher who can hit any silk button. a master of duels. he's a gentleman from the finest school of fencing. he knows how to turn any argument into a swordfight. he knows mercutio lists italian terms for fencing moves. he knows passado, the forward thrust, the punto reverso, the backhand thrust, and the hai, the thrust that goes straight through.
but virgins close their eyes and submit all the time, and blind love has his way.
i do, sir.
he knows what?
they're forgiven, then, if they don't see what they're doing.
give me your hand. are you educated?
i hate these crazy, affected guys who use foreign phrases and newfangled expressions. i hate their strange manners and their weird accents! i hate it when they say, "by jesus, this is a very good blade, a very brave man, a very good whore." isn't this a sad thing, my good man? why should we put up with these foreign buzzards, these fashionmongers, these guys who say "pardon me," these guys who care so much about manners that they can't kick back on a bench without whining? "oh, my aching bones!"
then teach your cousin to also be willing to close her eyes, my lord.
no, sir.
here comes romeo, here comes romeo!
i will signal her with a wink to consent, my lord, if you will teach her what that means. maidens who are well fed and well taken care of are like august flies, blind though they can see. they'll let you handle them then, though they'd scarcely let you look at them before.
then learn this from me: if you have something, you have it. everyone knows that when you pour a drink out of a cup and into a glass, the cup becomes empty. and all the authorities know that ipse is latin for "he." you are no longer ipse, because i am he.
he looks skinny, like a dried herring without its eggs, and he hasn't got his girl. o flesh, flesh, you've turned pale and weak like a fish. now he's ready for petrarch's mercutio teases romeo by alluding to the poet petrarch and six mythical and historical women who inspired love poetry. petrarch's poetry. compared to romeo's girl, laura was a kitchen slave. surely she has a better love to make rhymes for her. dido was shabbily dressed. cleopatra was a gypsy girl. helen and hero were sluts and harlots. thisbe might have had a blue eye or two, but that doesn't matter. signor romeo, bonjour. there's a french greeting that matches your drooping french-style pants. you faked us out pretty good last night.
so you're telling me to give it time and wait for summer. and even then, in order for me to catch the fly your cousin, she must be blind?
which he, sir?
good morning to you both. what do you mean i faked you out?
like love, my lord, before it learns to love.
why, the he that will marry this woman. therefore, idiot, abandon (or, in common language, "leave") the society (which in the boorish tongue is "company") of this female, maybe you'll get it if i say "woman," instead. say it all at once, now: abandon the society of this female, or, simpleton, you'll perish. let me put it in a way you'll understand: you'll die. or, rather, i'll kill you, or i'll do away with you, or i'll turn your life into death and your freedom into captivity. i'll poison you, or beat you with a club, or stab you with a sword. i'll bandy you about and overwhelm you with my cleverness. i will, in other words, kill you in three hundred and fifty ways. therefore, tremble with fear and leave.
you gave us the slip, sir, the slip. can't you understand what i'm saying?
fair enough. some of you may, thank love for my blindness. there's many a french town that i can't see because one pretty french maid stands in front of me.
do what he says, william.
excuse me, good mercutio. i had very important business to take care of. it was so important that i had to forget about courtesy and good manners.
oh yes, my lord, you see them, but you see them metaphorically. the cities appear to you like a maiden because virgin walls, which war has never invaded, surround them.
farewell, sir.
in other words "important business" made you flex your buttocks mercutio implies romeo's business was sexual. flex your buttocks .
shall kate be my wife?
our master and mistress are looking for you. let's go.
you mean do a curtsy?
if you wish.
hurry up, audrey, hurry., i'm coming, i'm coming.
you've hit the target this is sexual double entedre. target , sir.
i am satisfied, as long as the maiden cities you talk of come with her. that way, the maiden that stood between me and them shall be the means of my achieving my desire.
is it really possible that you could like her right after meeting her? and fall in love with her after merely seeing her? and as soon as you fall in love, with her, woo her? and as soon as you woo her, have her accept? and do you really mean to marry her?
that's a very polite and courteous explanation.
we have consented to all reasonable terms.
don't question the foolish haste of it all, or her poverty or our short time together or the abruptness of my courtship or the abruptness of her consent, but say with me, "i love aliena." and say with me that she loves me. agree to this match, so we can enjoy each other. it will be to your advantage, because i'll leave our father's house and all his property to you, while i live and die a shepherd here in the forest.
yes, i am the pink flower, the master, of courtesy and manners.
is that true, my lords of england?
you have my consent. you can be married tomorrow if you want. i'll invite the duke and all of his followers. go get aliena ready, because, look, here comes my rosalind.
the pink flower "pink flower" suggests the female genitalia. pink flower .
the king has agreed to every point: first his daughter, then everything else, as you strictly proposed.
hello, brother.
right.
except that he has not yet agreed to address you in this form and with this title, in french, notre tres cher fils henri, roi d'angleterre, heritier de france; and in latin, praeclarissimus filius noster henricus "our thrice-glorious son, henry, king of england and heir of france" henricus , rex angliae, et haeres franciae.
and hello to you, fair sister.
well, then my pump romeo plays along: pump= shoe and penis. pump is well decorated with flowers.
and even this i'm willing to grant if you request it.
oh, darling orlando, it's so hard to see you wearing your heart in a sling.
alright my witty friend, this joke has worn out your pump. its thin skin is all worn out. the joke is all you have left.
in that case, i ask that for the sake of friendship and alliance you let that one item stand with the rest, and bestow your daughter on me.
actually, it's my arm.
this is a bad joke. it's all silliness.
take her, my son, and give me children by her, so that the warring kingdoms of france and england, whose very shores have paled in envy at each other's happiness, may finally end their mutual hostility. may this
i thought your heart had been wounded by a lion's claws.
come break this up, benvolio. i'm losing this duel of wits.
precious marriage cause friendship and alliance between them and war never again threaten england or fair france with his bloody sword.
my heart has been wounded, but by a lady, not a lion.
keep going, keep going, or i'll declare myself the winner.
amen.
did your brother tell you how well i pretended to faint when he showed me the handkerchief?
now, if our jokes go on a wild-goose chase, i'm finished. you have more wild goose in one of your jokes than i have in five of mine. was i even close to you in the chase for the goose?
now, welcome, kate., and let everyone bear witness that here i kiss her as my sovereign queen.
yes, and he told me some things that were even more amazing.
you were never with me for anything if you weren't there for the goose. romeo implies that mercutio is only good for jokes.
may god, who is the best matchmaker, join your hearts and realms in one. as man and wife, though two, are one in love, so let there be between your kingdoms such a marriage that neither wrongdoing nor fierce jealousy, which often trouble the sacred state of marriage, ever sever them. and let englishmen be french and frenchmen english. god say, "amen"!
oh, i know what you're talking about. it's true: it was as sudden as two rams rushing at each other, and as quick as julius caesar's "i came, i saw, i conquered." your brother and my sister had no sooner met than they gave each other a good once over; they had no sooner looked at each other than they fell in love; no sooner fell in love than they sighed; no sooner sighed than they asked each other why they had sighed; no sooner answered than they sought a solution. and in this way, degree by degree, they've built a staircase toward marriage. and they had better climb those stairs immediately, or else they'll end up in bed before they ought to. they're in the heat of passion; they simply have to be together. you couldn't beat the two of them apart.
i'll bite you on the ear for that joke.
amen!
they'll be married tomorrow, and i'll invite the duke to the ceremony. but, oh, it makes me bitter to look at happiness through another man's eyes. tomorrow i'll be at the depths of my misery thinking about the happiness my brother has achieved, in having what he wished for.
no, good goose, don't bite me.
let us prepare for our wedding., on that day, i'll take your oath of loyalty, my lord of burgundy and all my peers, to guarantee my treaty. then i will swear to kate and you to me, and may our oaths be faithfully kept and prove fortunate.
well then, can't i act as rosalind for you tomorrow?
your joke is a very bitter apple. your humor is a spicy sauce.
thus far has our straining author pursued the story with his crude, inadequate writing, keeping important people penned up in this little room while he mangled history's full glory with his uneven telling. the lifespan of our english hero was brief, but in that brief time he achieved greatness. he had good luck as a warrior, and with it he created the world's greatest garden, france, leaving his son as its imperial ruler. henry the sixth, crowned king of france and england while still in his infancy, succeeded him. but so many people had a hand in managing the child's kingdom that france was lost and civil war came to england, a story we've acted out many times on this stage. with those plays in mind, we hope you'll receive this one kindly.
i can't live by pretending anymore.
then isn't it just the right dish for a sweet goose?
i won't exhaust you anymore with idle chitchat. you should know that i think you're a smart man. i really mean it. i'm not telling you this so you'll think well of me (who wouldn't think well of someone who thought well of him, after all?) and i'm not trying to enhance my own reputation, but only to do you good. believe me, then, that i have special powers. since i was three years old, i've been in contact with a powerful but virtuous magician, no black magic here. if you love rosalind as much as you say you do, you will marry her when your brother marries aliena. i know where she is and, if you don't mind, i will set her before you tomorrow, whole and unharmed.
oh, that's a joke made out of leather that spreads itself thin, from the width of an inch to as fat as a yard.
(holding a letter) according to this letter, don "don" is the italian equivalent of "sir" or "lord." don pedro of aragon and his army are coming to messina tonight.
are you serious?
i stretch my joke for that word "fat." if you add that word to the word "goose," it shows that you are a fat goose.
he must be very near by now. when i left him, he was less than nine miles from here.
i swear on my life, which i take pretty seriously, even if i am a magician. so put on your best clothes and tell your friends to come. because if you want to be married tomorrow, you will, and if you want to be married to rosalind, you will.
why, isn't all this joking better than groaning about love? now you're sociable. now you're romeo. now you are what you've learned to be and what you are naturally. this love of yours was like a blithering idiot who runs up and down looking for a hole to hide his toy toy = a double entendre for penis toy in.
how many noblemen were killed in the battle you just fought?
look, here comes someone who loves me, along with someone who loves her.
stop there, stop there.
not many, and no one important.
young man, it was very rude of you to show him the letter i wrote you.
you want me to stop my tale tale = a double entendre for penis tale before i'm done.
a victory in battle is twice as victorious when all the soldiers return home safely. this letter also says that don pedro has given honors to a young man from florence named claudio.
i don't care. i'm being contemptuous and cruel toward you on purpose. a faithful shepherd worships you. why don't you pay attention to him? why don't you love him? he adores you.
otherwise your tale would have gotten too long.
claudio deserves to be honored, and don pedro has rewarded him accordingly. claudio has done more than anyone would expect of a man his age. he looks like a lamb but fights like a lion. he has so greatly exceeded all expectations that i can't even describe all he's done.
silvius, tell this youth what it means to be in love.
oh, you're wrong. i would have made it short. i had come to the deepest part of my tale, and i planned to say nothing more on the topic.
he has an uncle here in messina who will be glad to hear this news.
it means being full of sighs and tears, like i am for phoebe.
here's something good.
i have delivered some letters to his uncle, and he seemed very happy. he got so emotional that he actually looked like he was in pain.
and like i am for ganymede.
a sail, a sail! benvolio makes the cry of a sailor who spots another ship on the horizon because the nurse is fat and sily-looking. a sail, a sail!
did he start weeping?
and like i am for rosalind.
there's two, a man and a woman.
yes, heavily.
and like i am for no woman.
peter!
that's a very natural display of affection. there's no face more sincere than one washed in tears. and it's definitely better to cry because you're happy than laugh because you're sad!
it means being faithful and ready to serve, just like i am for phoebe.
i'm at your service.
please tell me, has signior montanto "montanto" is a fencing term for an upward thrust. montanto returned from battle?
and like i am for ganymede.
give me my fan, peter.
i don't know anyone with that name, ma'am. there was no signior montanto in our army.
and like i am for rosalind.
good peter, give her her fan to hide her face. her fan is prettier than her face.
who are you talking about, niece?
and like i am for no woman.
good morning, gentlemen.
my cousin means signior benedick of padua.
it means being filled with fantasy; with passion and wishes; with adoration, loyalty, and devotion. it means being humble, being patient, being impatient, being pure, being put-upon, being obedient. just as i am for phoebe.
good afternoon, fair lady.
oh, yes, benedick has returned and is as cheerful as ever.
and i for ganymede.
is it now afternoon?
benedick the exact meaning of this story is unclear, but it depicts benedick as a braggart and a fool. benedick once put up a public notice in messina challenging cupid to an archery match. my uncle's jester accepted the contest on cupid's behalf but used toy arrows at the shooting match. but tell me, how many men did he kill and eat in this battle? i promised him i would eat anyone he killed.
and i for rosalind.
it's not earlier than that, i tell you. the lusty hand again, mercutio's language is full of offensive sexual innuendo. lusty hand of the clock is now pricking noon.
for god's sake, beatrice, you're criticizing signior benedick too heavily. but i'm sure he'll get even with you.
and i for no woman.
get out of here! what kind of man are you?
signior benedick served well in the war, my lady.
since you know all this is true, why do you blame me for loving you?
i'm a man, my lady, that god has made for himself to ruin.
you had rotten food, and he helped you eat it. he's a very brave eater, he has a strong stomach.
and why do you blame me for loving you?
i swear, you speak the truth. "for himself to ruin," he says. gentlemen, can any of you tell me where i can find young romeo?
he's a good soldier too, lady.
and why do you blame me for loving you?
i can tell you, but young romeo will be older when you find him than he was when you started looking for him. i am the youngest man by that name, because there is no one younger, or worse.
he's a good soldier to a lady? well then, what is he to a lord?
who are you talking to?
you speak well.
he's a lord to a lord and a man to a man. he is positively stuffed with honorable virtues.
i'm saying it to the girl who isn't here and doesn't hear me.
is the worst well? very well taken, i believe, very wise.
absolutely, he is stuffed, like a dummy. as for what he's stuffed with, well, nobody's perfect.
all right, stop this. you sound like a pack of wolves howling at the moon. (to silvius) i'll help you, if i can. (to phoebe) if i could love you, i would. all of you, meet me here tomorrow. (to phoebe) if i'm ever going to marry a woman, i'll marry you. and i am getting married tomorrow. (to orlando) if i will ever satisfy a man, i'll satisfy you. and you will get married tomorrow. (to silvius) if the thing you desire will make you happy, i'll make you happy. and you'll get married tomorrow. (to orlando) by the love you have for rosalind, come back tomorrow. (to silvius) by the love you have for phoebe, come here tomorrow., and by my love for no woman, i'll also be here tomorrow. so, goodbye for now. you all know what to do.
(to romeo) if you're the romeo i'm looking for, sir, i would like to have a confidence the nurse means "conference," not confidence. this is a joke called a malapropism, where the right word is replaced by a similar-sounding word with a completely different meaning. confidence with you.
please don't take my niece the wrong way, sir. benedick and beatrice have been waging a war of wits between themselves. whenever they meet, there's a little battle.
as long as i'm alive, i'll be here.
she will indite bevolio makes fun of the nurse by saying "indite" instead of "invite." indite him to some dinner party.
and i always win. the last time we fought, he was so dazed by the end that he wasn't much smarter than his horse. so tell me, who is he hanging around with these days? every month he has a new best friend.
me too.
a pimp! a pimp! a pimp! i've found it out.
is that possible?
me too.
what have you found out?
it's entirely possible. he's incredibly fickle, his affection changes faster than the latest fashions.
tomorrow is the happy day, audrey. we'll be married tomorrow.
she's not a prostitute unless she's using her ugliness to hide her promiscuity.
i can see you don't like this gentleman.
i can't wait. i hope it doesn't make me unchaste that i really want to be a married woman.
(he walks by them and sings) old rabbit meat is good to eat, if you can't get anything else. but if it's so old, that it goes bad before you eat it, then it was a waste of money. (speaking)
no, absolutely not. but please tell me, who's his best friend? isn't there some new swaggering young ruffian who will happily go to hell with benedick?
here come two of duke senior's pages.
romeo, are you going to your father's for lunch? let's go there.
he spends most of his time with the good, noble claudio.
good afternoon, good gentleman.
i'll follow after you.
oh god, benedick will plague him like a disease! benedick is an infection that's easy to catch but hard to get rid of, and he'll drive you crazy once you've been infected. god help claudio! if he's caught the benedick, he'll lose all his money before he's cured.
it really is good to see you. come, sit, sit, and sing me a song.
goodbye, old lady. goodbye, lady, lady, lady. mercutio mockingly sings a romantic song to the nurse. goodbye, old lady. goodbye, lady, lady, lady.
i'm going to make sure i stay on your good side, lady.
sounds good to us. sit between us.
please tell me, sir, who was that foulmouthed punk who was so full of crude jokes?
do that, my friend.
should we just get down to it? should we skip all that hacking and spitting and saying that we're hoarse, which only makes clear what lousy singers we are?
nurse, he's a man who likes to hear the sound of his own voice. he says more in one minute than he does in a whole month.
you will never fall victim to benedick's charms, my niece.
yes, yes, and let's sing in unison, like two gypsies riding on a single horse.
if he says anything against me, i'll humble him, even if he were stronger than he is, and twenty punks like him. if i can't do it myself, i'll find someone who can. that dirty rat! i'm not one of his sluts. i'm not one of his punk friends who carries a knife. (to peter) and you just stand there letting every jerk make fun of me for kicks.
no, not until we see a hot january.
(singing) there was a lover and his girl, with a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no, who walked through the cornfield in the springtime, the only proper wedding time, the time when birds sing, hey ding-a-ding-ding. sweet lovers love the spring. between the acres of rye,
i didn't see anybody use you for kicks. if i had seen something like that, i would have quickly pulled out my weapon. believe me, i'll draw my sword as quick as any other man if i see a fight starting and the law is on my side.
don pedro is here.
with a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no the pretty country folk would lie in the springtime, the only proper wedding-time, the time when birds sing, hey ding-a-ding-ding. sweet lovers love the spring. they wrote this song at that time, with a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no, about how life was as short-lived as a flower in the springtime, the only proper wedding time, the time when birds sing, hey ding-a-ding-ding. sweet lovers love the spring. so seize the present time, with a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no, for love is all perfection in the springtime, the only proper wedding time, the time when birds sing, hey ding-a-ding-ding. sweet lovers love the spring.
now, i swear, i'm so angry that i'm shaking all over. that rotten scoundrel! (to romeo) now, please, may i have a word with you, sir? my young mistress asked me to find you. what she asked me to say i'll keep to myself. but let me tell you this first. if you lead her into a fool's paradise, as the saying goes, it would be an outrageous crime because the girl is so young. and if you try to trick her, it would be an evil thing to do to any woman and very poor behavior.
my dear signior leonato, hosting my whole army is such a huge burden, but you accept it, and me, with open arms. most people choose to avoid trouble, but you run to it.
really, young men, though it wasn't a very hard song to get right, the music was still all out of tune.
nurse, give my regards to to your lady. i swear to you, 
you are never trouble to this house, your grace. it's comforting when trouble departs. but when you leave, you take happiness with you and leave sorrow in its place.
no, sir, you're wrong; we kept the song's in other words, they kept the rhythm and didn't speed up. however, touchstone was complaining not about the rhythm but about the melody. song's time, we didn't lose any.
you have a good heart, and believe me, i'll tell her that. lord, lord, she'll be a happy woman.
you take up your duties too cheerfully. (turning to hero) this must be your daughter.
oh, yes you did, i lost time listening to your foolish song. god be with you, and i hope he fixes your voices! come on, audrey.
what are you going to tell her, nurse? you're not paying attention to me.
that's what her mother always tells me.
orlando, do you really believe that this boy can do everything he's promised?
sir, i'll tell her that you protest here the nurse makes another malapropism, saying "protest" when she means "propose.". protest to her, which i think is the gentlemanly thing to do..
did you doubt that she was your daughter, since you had to ask her mother?
sometimes i do and sometimes i don't. i'm afraid of hoping, but i hope anyway.
tell her to devise a plan to get out of her house and come to confession at the abbey this afternoon. at friar lawrence's cell she can make confession and be married. (giving her coins) here is a reward for your efforts.
(teasing) of course not, signior benedick. you were only a child when my daughter was born, and not yet old enough to seduce my wife.
(as ganymede) be patient for a bit longer while i go over the terms of our agreement. (to duke senior ) you say that if i bring rosalind here, you will give her to orlando in marriage?
no, really, i won't take a penny.
ah, he got you back, benedick! leonato clearly knows your reputation with women. seriously, though, the lady resembles leonato so much that there can be no doubt about who her father is. congratulations, lady: you resemble a most honorable man.
yes, even if i had whole kingdoms to give along with her.
go on, i insist you take it.
well, even if he is her father, i'm sure she wouldn't want to have the head of the old man on her shoulders!
(to orlando ) and you promise to marry her, when i bring her here?
(taking the money) this afternoon, sir? she'll be there.
i'm amazed you're still talking, signior benedick. no one's listening to you.
i will, even if i were king of all kingdoms.
wait good nurse. within an hour, one of my men will come to you behind the abbey wall and give you a rope ladder. i'll use the rope ladder to climb over the walls at night. then i'll meet juliet joyfully and in secret. goodbye. be honest and helpful, and i'll repay you for your efforts. goodbye. sing my praises to your mistress.
look, it's my dear lady disdain! aren't you dead yet?
(to phoebe ) and you say you'll marry me, if i'm willing to marry you?
may god in heaven bless you. now please listen, sir.
how could disdain die when you're here? when you're around, even lady courtesy becomes lady disdain.
yes, even if i die an hour later.
what do you have to say, my dear nurse?
that makes lady courtesy a traitor. all ladies love me, except you. it's too bad i'm so hard-hearted, because i really don't love anyone.
but if you decide not to marry me, you'll marry this faithful shepherd instead?
can your man keep a secret? haven't you ever heard the saying, "two can conspire to put one away"?
women are lucky, then. you would make a nasty suitor. thankfully, i feel the same way you do. i have no need for romance. i would rather listen to my dog bark at a crow than hear a man swear that he loves me.
that's the deal.
i assure you, my man is as true as steel.
well, i hope you stay in that frame of mind or some poor man will end up with his face all scratched up.
(to silvius ) and you agree to marry phoebe, if she is willing?
well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. lord, lord, when she was a little baby, oh, there is one nobleman in the city, a guy named paris, who would be happy to claim her as his own. juliet would rather look at a toad than at him. i make her angry sometimes by saying that paris is more handsome than you are. but when i say so, i swear she turns white as a sheet. don't " rosemary rosemary was a token of remembrance between lovers and for the dead. rosemary " and "romeo" begin with the same letter?
if he has a face like yours, a good scratching couldn't make him look any worse.
even if marrying her meant i died.
yes, nurse, what about that? they both begin with the letter "r."
listen to you, instructing me like a parrot would.
i've promised to make everything right. duke senior, keep your promise to give away your daughter. orlando, keep your promise to marry his daughter. phoebe, keep your promise to marry me, and to marry this shepherd if you choose to refuse me. silvius, keep your promise to marry phoebe if she refuses me. i'll leave now, to set all these things right.
ah, you jokester, that's the dog's name. "r" is for the, no, i know it begins with another letter. she says the most beautiful things about you and rosemary. it would be good for you to hear the things she says.
i'd rather be a squawking bird than an animal like you.
this shepherd boy reminds me quite vividly of my daughter.
give my compliments to your lady.
i wish my horse moved as fast as your mouth and was as tireless. that's it, i'm done.
my lord, when i first saw him i thought he was your daughter's brother. but, my lord, this boy was born in the forest and has been schooled not in the usual subjects but only in magic. his uncle, who the boy says is a great magician and lives concealed within the boundaries of this forest, taught him.
yes, a thousand times. peter!
you always slip out of the argument like this. i know you from before.
well, look: there must be another flood in the biblical story of noah, god sends a flood to wash away mankind and tells noah to take two of every animal on a ship, so that the world can be repopulated later. touchstone and audrey are the latest twosome in "noah's ark" of marriages. flood coming, with these couples also on their way to noah's ark. here comes a pair of those strange creatures called "fools" in any language.
i'm ready.
and that's everything, leonato., claudio, benedick, my dear friend leonato has invited you all to stay here at messina. i told him we'll stay for at least a month, and he says that he hopes we'll stay longer. i think he's actually serious, and not just being polite.
hello, and greetings to you all.
(giving peter her fan) go ahead. go quickly.
i am being serious, my lord. (to don john) i welcome you here as well. now that you and your brother have made friends again, i owe you the same allegiance i owe don pedro.
my lord, welcome this man. this is the jester i have met so many times in the forest. he swears he used to be a courtier.
i sent the nurse at nine o'clock. maybe she can't find him. that can't be. oh, she's slow! love's messengers should be thoughts, which fly ten times faster than sunbeams. they should be strong enough to push shadows over the dark hills. that's the way doves carry venus so fast, and that's why cupid has wings that let him fly as fast as the wind. now it's noon. that's three hours since nine o'clock, but she hasn't come back. if she was young and passionate, she'd move as fast as a ball. my words would bounce her to my sweet love, and his words would bounce her back to me. but a lot of old people act like they're already dead, sluggish, slow, fat, and colorless, like lead.
thank you. i'm not a man who talks a lot, but i thank you.
if anyone doubts this, let him put me on trial. i have danced a round, i have flattered a lady, i have been polite with my friends, smooth and cunning with my enemies. i have bankrupted three tailors. i have quarreled four times, and almost got in a fight.
oh my god, here she comes! oh sweet nurse, what news do you bring? have you spoken to him? send your man away.
if it pleases you, your highness, will you lead us all inside?
and how was that one settled?
peter, wait for me at the gate.
give me your hand, leonato. we will go in together.
well, we almost fought and then realized that we had reached the seventh cause.
now, good sweet nurse, oh lord, why do you look so sad? even if the news is sad, tell me with a smile on your face. if the news is good, you're ruining the sweet news by playing a trick with a sour face like that.
benedick, did you notice signior leonato's daughter?
what do you mean, the seventh cause? (to duke senior ) my good lord, i hope you like this fellow.
i am tired. leave me alone for a minute. oh my, my bones ache so much. i've been running all over the place.
i saw her, but i didn't notice her.
i like him very well.
i wish you had my bones, and i had your news. come on now, i beg you, speak, good nurse, speak.
isn't she a well-mannered young lady?
god bless you, sir. i want the same thing as all these other people. i've come here to be married, like all these other would-be couples. this poor virgin isn't much to look at, sir, but she's mine. it's a strange habit of mine to take the thing that no one else wants: virginity in an ugly girl is like a rich man living in a broken-down house or a pearl in the hideous oyster.
sweet jesus, you're in such a hurry! can't you wait for a moment? don't you see that i'm out of breath?
do you want my true opinion? or do you want me to criticize her like i do all women?
really, he's very witty, and full of wise sayings.
how can you be out of breath when you have enough breath to tell me that you're out of breath? the excuse you make to delay the news is longer than the news itself. is the news good or bad? answer that question. tell me if it's good or bad, and i'll wait for the details. tell me so i can be satisfied. is it good or bad?
no, please, speak seriously.
his wittiness, a sweet disease, is here one minute and gone the next, sir, as with most fools.
well, you have made a foolish choice. you don't know how to pick a man. romeo? no, not him, though his face is more handsome than any man's, and his legs are prettier, and as for his hands and feet and body, they're not much to speak of, and yet they're beyond compare. he's not the most polite man in the world, but, believe me, he's gentle as a lamb. well, do what you want. be good. have you had lunch yet?
well, it seems to me that she is too short to be praised highly, too dark to be praised fairly, and too small to be praised greatly. i can only say this about her: if she looked different than she does, she would be ugly, and since she can't be anything but herself, i don't like her.
but back to that argument you mentioned. what's the "seventh cause"?
no, i haven't had lunch. everything you told me i already knew. what does he say about our marriage? what about that?
you think i'm kidding. please tell me seriously what you think of her.
our argument went through seven stages, watch your posture, audrey., it went like this. i didn't like the way a particular courtier had cut his beard. he sent me word that, whether i liked it or not, he liked it fine. they call this "the courteous retort." if i repeat that it isn't cut well, and he responds that he isn't trying to please me, just himself, with his beard. they call this " the modest quip." if i say again it is poorly cut, and he responds that my judgment is no good, they call this "the sullen reply." if i say yet again that his beard is poorly cut, and he says that i'm not speaking the truth, they call this "the brave retort." one more time i say it's not well cut, and he says i'm lying. they call this "the argumentative countercheck." and so on through "the circumstantial lie" and "the direct lie."
lord, what a headache i've got! my head is pounding. it feels like it'll break into twenty pieces. my back aches too, (juliet rubs her back) ooh, on the other side, ah, my poor aching back! curse your heart for sending me running all over town. i could get sick and die.
are you thinking of buying her? is that why you're asking?
and how many times did you say his beard wasn't cut well?
believe me, i'm sorry you're in pain. sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what did my love romeo say?
would it even be possible to buy a jewel as rare and precious as hero?
i didn't dare take it past "the circumstantial lie," and he didn't dare go to the " direct lie before a duel, opponents usually compared the length of their swords. direct lie ," so we compared the lengths of our swords and then ended the fight.
your love says, like an honorable gentleman, who is courteous, kind, handsome, and, i believe, virtuous, where is your mother?
yes, and you could buy a case to put it in, too. but tell me, are you speaking seriously? or are you just teasing? if i'm going to sing along with you, i need to know what key you're singing in.
can you name the steps of that argument again?
where is my mother? why, she's inside. where else would she be? your answer is so strange! "your love says, like an honorable gentleman, 'where is your mother?'"
i think she's the most wonderful woman i've ever laid eyes on.
of course, sir. there are rulebooks for arguing just as there are rulebooks for manners. here are the steps. first is "the courteous retort"; second, "the modest quip"; third, "the sullen reply"; fourth, "the valiant retort"; fifth, "the argumentative countercheck"; sixth, "the circumstantial lie"; seventh, "the direct lie." you can avoid getting to that final stage if you can properly use an "if." i once heard of an argument that seven judges couldn't settle. the two parties met up on their own, and one said, "well, if you said this-and-that, then i must have said such-and-such," and they shook hands and parted on good terms. "if" is the only peacemaker. "if" is a very valuable word.
oh holy mary, mother of god! are you this impatient? come on, you're being ridiculous! is this the cure for my aching bones? from now on, take care of your messages yourself.
i'm still young enough to see without glasses, and i don't see what you're talking about. if her cousin beatrice didn't have such a nasty temper, she'd be so much more beautiful than hero that it would be like comparing may to december. but, hey, this doesn't mean you're looking to get married, does it?
isn't he a remarkable fellow, my lord? he's as smart as they come, but just a jester.
you're making such a fuss. come on, what did romeo say?
even if i had sworn never to marry, i wouldn't trust myself to keep that promise if hero would marry me.
he uses his clownishness to disguise his deadly wit.
do you have permission to go out and take confession today?
what's going on these days? isn't there one man left in the world who knows not to take a wife? she's just going to cheat on him. will i never see a sixty-year old bachelor again or will all men be swindled into marriage while they're young? go ahead, then, if you have to yoke yourself to marriage, like an ox carrying his load, and throw away your free time. look, don pedro has come back for you.
there is laughter in heaven when earthly affairs are put right and people unite.
i do.
what secrets between you have kept you from following us to leonato's?
good duke, come receive your daughter. hymen brought her from heaven yes, brought her here.
then hurry up and rush over to friar lawrence's cell. there's a husband there who's waiting to make you his wife. now i see the blood rushing to your cheeks. you blush bright red as soon as you hear any news. go to the church. i must go by a different path to get a rope ladder. your love will use it to climb up to your window while it's dark. i do the drudge work for your pleasure. but soon you'll be doing a wife's work all night long. go. i'll go to lunch. you go to friar lawrence's cell.
your highness will have to force me to tell.
(to duke senior ) i give myself to you, for i am yours.(to orlando ) i give myself to you, for i am yours.
wish me luck. thank you, dear nurse.
your loyalty to me requires you to tell me what you've been talking about.
if my eyes don't deceive me, you are my daughter.
may the heavens be happy with this holy act of marriage, so nothing unfortunate happens later to make us regret it.
look, claudio, i can keep secrets like a mute; i want you to know that. but i owe don pedro my allegiance, look, i have to tell him, (to don pedro) claudio is in love. with whom? that's what you're supposed to ask me next, your grace. look how short the answer is, with hero, leonato's short daughter.
if my eyes don't deceive me, you are my rosalind.
amen, amen. but whatever misfortunes occur, they can't ruin the joy i feel with one look at her. all you have to do is join our hands with holy words, then love-destroying death can do whatever it pleases. it's enough for me if i can call her mine.
if you say so.
if my eyes aren't deceiving me, goodbye, love.
these sudden joys have sudden endings. they burn up in victory like fire and gunpowder. when they meet, as in a kiss, they explode. too much honey is delicious, but it makes you sick to your stomach. therefore, love each other in moderation. that is the key to long-lasting love. too fast is as bad as too slow.
listen to him deny it, like that man in the old tale "mr. fox": "it isn't true and wasn't true and god forbid it should be so."
(to duke senior ) if you won't be my father, i won't have any. (to orlando ) if you won't be my husband, i won't have any. (to phoebe ) if you won't be my wife, i won't have any.
here comes the lady. oh,a footstep as light as hers will never endure the rocky road of life. lovers are so light they can walk on a spiderweb floating on a summer breeze, and yet not fall. that's how flimsy and unreal pleasure is.
unless my feelings change very soon, i have to admit it's true.
quiet! stop chattering until i've made everything clear. there are eight people here that i will join in marriage, if the truth you see before you pleases you. (to orlando and rosalind ) no hardship can part you. (to oliver and celia ) your hearts are together. (to phoebe ) you must consent to having silvius as your husband, unless you'd rather be married to a woman. (to touchstone and audrey ) you are bound to each other as closely as winter is to bad weather. (to all the married couples) while we sing a wedding hymn, satisfy your curiosity with questioning. your surprise will fade, and you'll learn how all this came to be.
good evening, my spiritual confessor.
it's good if you love hero, because she's worthy of your love.
(singing) marriage is the crown juno juno was the roman goddess of marriage. juno wears, it's a holy bond of domesticity. it's marriage that populates each town, so marriage should be honored. honor, honor, and fame is due to hymen, the god of every town.
romeo will thank you, my girl, for both of us.
you're trying to trick me, my lord.
my niece, you are welcome here as if you were my own daughter.
i'll give him equal thanks, so we're even.
i swear, i'm telling you what i honestly think.
(to silvius ) i won't go back on my promise; i'll marry you. you've won me over with your faith.
ah, juliet if you're as happy as i am, and you're better with words, tell me about the happiness you imagine we'll have in our marriage.
and i swear i spoke honestly to benedick, i am in love with hero.
let me have your attention for a moment. i'm sir rowland's middle son, and i bring you news. when duke frederick heard that great, worthy men were coming to this forest every day, he raised a large army to invade this land and fight his brother. but just at the edge of the forest, he met an old religious man. he spoke with him for a while and decided not only to abandon his pursuit of his brother but even to retreat from the world. he's giving the throne to his banished brother and restoring all the men he'd exiled to their rightful lands. i swear on my life that i'm speaking the truth.
i can imagine more than i can say, i have more on my mind than words. anyone who can count how much he has is poor. my true love has made me so rich that i can't count even half of my wealth.
and i swear all up and down i spoke honestly when i said that this was a horrible idea.
welcome, young man: you bring a great present to your brothers' wedding. to oliver, you return his lands; to orlando, you give a whole dukedom, since he will inherit my land. but first, let's finish the things we started out here. then i'll share the abundance of my returned fortune with all those that have stayed out here with me, according to the rank and status each of you enjoy. but until then, let's forget our nobility and enjoy some fun. music, please. brides and bridegrooms, dance your happiness away.
come, come with me, and we'll do the job quickly. because if you don't mind, i'm not leaving you two alone until you're united in marriage.
i feel that i love her.
wait a minute, sir. do you mean to say that the duke has abandoned the glamorous court to live as a monk?
i'm begging you, good mercutio, let's call it a day. it's hot outside, and the capulets are wandering around. if we bump into them, we'll certainly get into a fight. when it's hot outside, people become angry and hot-blooded.
i know that she is worthy of that love.
yes, he has.
you're like one of those guys who walks into a bar, slams his sword on the table, and then says, "i pray i never have to use you." by the time he orders his second drink, he pulls his sword on the bartender for no reason at all.
i, on the other hand, don't feel how she could be loved and don't know how she could be worthy. even fire can't melt that opinion out of me. you could burn me at the stake, and i'd still think this.
i will go find him. there is much to be learned from these converts. (to duke senior ) i bestow on you your former honor, for your patience and virtue. (to orlando ) i give you the love that your faithfulness deserves (to oliver ) and you your land, your love, and your great allies. (to silvius ) you get a long and well-deserved stay in bed, with your new wife.
am i really like one of those guys?
you never did believe in the power of beauty.
(to touchstone) and you i expect to be up fighting soon. the honeymoon will last two months, tops., and with that, you may all return to your dancing. i'm bound for another fate.
come on, you can be as angry as any guy in italy when you're in the mood. when someone does the smallest thing to make you angry, you get angry. and when you're in the mood to get angry, you find something to get angry about.
or in the power of reason.
stay, jaques, stay here for a bit.
and what about that?
i was conceived by a woman, and i thank her very much for all her effort. and then she brought me up, and i thank her for that, too. but all the other women will have to forgive me for not being willing to be made a fool of, cheated on by a wife. i don't want to insult any particular woman by doubting and mistrusting her, so i'll just avoid them all. and the conclusion of this is that i'll live as a bachelor, and, with the money i save, dress better.
no, this fun is not for me. i'll wait for you in your cave, where you can tell me what you need from me.
if there were two men like you, pretty soon there'd be none because the two of you would kill each other. you would fight with a man if he had one more whisker or one less whisker in his beard than you have in your beard. you'll fight with a man who's cracking nuts just because you have hazelnut-colored eyes. only you would look for a fight like that. your head is as full of fights as an egg is full of yolk, but your head has been beaten like scrambled eggs from so much fighting. you started a fight with a man who coughed in the street because he woke up a dog that was sleeping in the sun. didn't you argue it out with your tailor for wearing one of his new suits before the right season? and with another for tying the new shoes he made with old laces? and yet you're the one who wants to teach me about restraint!
i swear, before i die i'm going to see you sick with love.
let's proceed. we'll begin the ceremony the way we hope it will end, with delight.
if i were in the habit of fighting the way you are, my life insurance rates would be sky high.
with anger, with fever, or with hunger, sure, my friend, but never sick with love. if you can prove that i'll ever be so in love that i can't be brought to my senses with a good round of beers, you can pluck out my eyes with a love-poet's pen and hang me on a brothel's door where the picture of blind cupid usually goes.
you don't usually see a woman deliver an epilogue, but it's no worse than seeing a man deliver the prologue. if it's true that you don't need ivy branches of ivy were hung in tavern windows to advertise the wine. ivy to sell good wine, then it should also be true that a good play doesn't need an epilogue. but they use good-quality ivy to sell good wine, and a good play is improved by a good epilogue. but then i'm in a strange position, as i not only do not have a good epilogue, i'm not sure this was a good play. i'm not dressed like a beggar, so it wouldn't be becoming for me to beg. no, instead i'll bewitch you, and i'll start with the women. women, in the name of the love you have for men, i demand that you like as much of this play as you feel like. men, in the name of the women you love, and i can guess by your goofy smiles that none of you exactly hates them, the play will act as a nice toy for you and the ladies in shakespeare's day, boys played all the women's parts. ladies to share. if i actually were a woman, i'd kiss all of you that have beards that pleased me, complexions that i liked, and breath that wasn't foul. and i'm sure that all of you with nice beards, good faces, and sweet breath will, when i curtsy good night, give me a nice round of applause.
your life insurance? that's foolish.
i'll be sure to remember this fuss you've made, in case you ever do fall in love. that'll be news.
oh great, here come the capulets.
if i ever change my mind, you can use me for target practice. and whoever hits the bull's eye gets to be a hero.
i'll fix you, i swear.
well, well, i don't care.
well, time will tell. even the most savage bull is eventually domesticated.
you thug! i'll call for a pair of stocks the "stocks" consisted of a wooden frame in which you could lock a criminal's ankles so that he or she couldn't move. stocks !
(to petruccio and others) follow me closely, i'll talk to them. (to the montagues) good afternoon, gentlemen. i'd like to have a word with one of you.
maybe the bull is, but if i am ever domesticated, you can take that bull's horns and put them right on my forehead, as my wife is sure to cuckold me soon enough. you might as well hang a big sign with enormous lettering around my neck. but instead of it saying "horse for hire," it will say "take a look at benedick, the married man."
there are no thugs in my family, whore! read your history! we slys sly means william the conqueror; he is saying he can trace his family back to the time of england's first king, but gets the name wrong. slys came over with richard the conqueror. oh, the hell with it. i can't be bothered. shut up!
you just want one word with one of us? put it together with something else. make it a word and a blow.
if that ever happened, you'd go absolutely mad.
you won't pay for the glasses you smashed?
you'll find me ready enough to do that, sir, if you give me a reason.
well, if cupid hasn't used up all his arrows in venice, where the courtesans are famous for making men lovesick, he'll get you to quiver and shake. just you wait.
no, not a penny. get out of my face. go play with yourself.
can't you find a reason without my giving you one?
that's about as likely as an earthquake.
i know my rights. i'll call a policeman.
mercutio, you hang out with romeo.
oh, you'll soften as time passes. while you're waiting for that to happen, though, hurry to leonato's. give him my respects, and tell him i'll definitely be there for dinner, since i know he has gone to great lengths for this meal.
call them all! i have a legal right to be here. i'm not moving an inch, pal. let them come, i don't care.
"hang out?" who do you think we are, musicians in a band? if we look like musicians to you, you can expect to hear nothing but noise. (touching the blade of his sword) this is my fiddlestick. i'll use it to make you dance. goddammit, "hang out!"
i think i can handle this mission. and so i commit you, 
huntsman, look after my hounds. let merriman catch his breath, the poor dog's foaming at the mouth. and tie up clowder together with the long-mouthed bitch. (to his page) did you see, boy, how silver picked up the scent at the hedge corner, where it was weakest? i wouldn't part with that dog for twenty pounds.
we're talking here in a public place. either go someplace private, or talk it over rationally, or else just go away. out here everybody can see us.
"into god's hands. from my house, if i had a house, "
i think belman is just as good, my lord. he set up a howl when the scent was lost completely and twice picked it up where it was weakest. i swear he's the better dog.
men's eyes were made to see things, so let them watch. i won't move to please anybody.
"the sixth of july. sincerely, your loving friend, benedick."
you're a fool. if echo were as fast, he would be worth a dozen like belman. but give them all a good dinner and look after them well. i'll go hunting again tomorrow, i think.
well, may peace be with you. here comes my man, the man i'm looking for.
oh, stop joking around. you know, sometimes you two dress up your conversation with flimsy little bits of wit that don't hold together too well. before you make fun benedick and claudio are making fun of the fact that "i commit you" is, in shakespeare's time, a common way to end a formal letter. fun of everyone else, look at yourselves in the mirror! and with that, i'm leaving.
i will, my lord.
he's not your man. alright, walk out into a field, and he'll chase you. in that sense you can call him your "man."
my lord, you could really help me out now.
what's this? a drunkard or a corpse? check and see if he's breathing.
romeo, there's only one thing i can call you. you're a villain.
i am at your service. just tell me what you want me to do, and however hard it is, you'll see that i'm eager to do it.
he is, my lord. but this would be too cold a place to sleep if he hadn't warmed himself with ale.
tybalt, i have a reason to love you that lets me put aside the rage i should feel and excuse that insult. i am no villain. so, goodbye. i can tell that you don't know who i am.
does leonato have a son, my lord?
it's disgusting, sleeping that way, like a pig in the gutter! alas, grim death, how vile and ugly your near-twin, sleep, is! gentlemen, i think i'll play a trick on this lout. what do you think? say we were to carry him to one of the bedrooms, put fresh clothes on him and rings on his fingers, lay out a wonderful feast by his bed, and have servants in fancy dress near him when he wakes up, wouldn't the poor tramp be confused?
boy, your words can't excuse the harm you've done to me. so now turn and draw your sword.
hero is his only child, and his only heir. do you like her, claudio?
i don't think he'd have any choice, my lord.
i disagree. i've never done you harm. i love you more than you can understand until you know the reason why i love you. and so, good capulet, which is a name i love like my own name, you should be satisfied with what i say.
oh, my lord, when we left messina to fight the war, i looked at hero with the eyes of a soldier. i liked what i saw, but my mind was so occupied with the rough, violent task ahead of me that there was no chance that like would turn intolove. but now that i'm back, the room in my head that i used to fill with war plans has become crowded with soft and delicate feelings. they all lead me to the same thought, how beautiful young hero is and how i must have liked her even before i left to fight.
when he woke, he wouldn't know where he was.
this calm submission is dishonorable and vile. the thrust of a sword will end this surrender. (draws his sword)tybalt, you rat-catcher, will you go fight me?
you will become a true lover soon, and exhaust your friends with your endless chatter about your feelings. look, if you really love the beautiful hero, enjoy it. i will speak to her and her father about the matter, and i'll convince leonato to promise hero to you. isn't that the reason you told me all this?
it would be just like a nice daydream or fantasy. well, take him on up and we'll try to pull it off. carry him to my best room, gently, so he doesn't wake, and hang all my erotic paintings around him. bathe his filthy head with warm, scented water. burn fragrant wood to give the room a pleasant smell, and have musicians at hand, ready to produce sweet, soothing sounds when he awakes. you want to be ready in case he speaks. if he does, bow low and say deferentially, "what would your honor have us do?" have one servant wait on him with a basin of rosewater (throw in some petals), have another servant carry a pitcher, and a third a cloth. say, "would your lordship care to freshen up?" have someone standing by with expensive clothes, and ask him what he'd care to wear. have another servant tell him about the dogs and horses that he owns and that his wife is grief-stricken over his illness. convince him that he has been out of his mind, and when he says he's out of his mind now, tell him he's mistaken and that he is in fact a mighty lord. do this, make it convincing, and we'll have fun. it could work if it's done subtly.
what do you want from me?
you can see that i'm sick with love, and you're taking care of me in just the right way! but i didn't want you to think that i'm hasty in my emotions. i was going to explain my feelings with a longer story.
my lord, i promise we will play our parts so skillfully that he will believe everything we tell him.
good king of cats, i want to take one of your nine lives. i'll take one, and, depending on how you treat me after that, i might beat the other eight out of you too. will you pull your sword out of its sheath? hurry up, or i'll smack you on the ears with my sword before you have yours drawn.
why speak longer than you have to? that's like building a bridge wider than the river it crosses. whatever gets the job done is best. you love hero; that's all i need to know to want to find a remedy. they're going to have a costume party with dancing tonight. i'll disguise myself as you and pour out "my" feelings to hero, taking her prisoner with the force of my love story. then i'll talk to her father. and in the end, she's yours! let's get started right away.
carry him gently to bed, and every man be ready at his post when he awakes.
i'll fight you. (he draws his sword)
hey, brother. tell me, where is my nephew, your son? has he taken care of the music?
go, lad, and find out what the trumpet's sounding for.
noble mercutio, put your sword away.
he is taking care of it as we speak. but brother, i have some strange news for you.
it's probably some noble gentleman stopping off in mid-journey, thinking to spend the night here.
(to tybalt) come on, sir, perform your forward thrust, your passado.
is it good news?
well, who is it?
(drawing his sword) draw your sword, benvolio. let's beat down their weapons. gentlemen, stop this disgraceful fight. tybalt, mercutio, the prince has banned fighting in the streets of verona. stop, tybalt. stop, good mercutio.
well, it seems like good news. a servant of mine overheard the prince and claudio talking as they walked through my orchard. the prince said that he is in love with hero, your daughter, and that he is going to tell her so at the dance tonight. if he she wants to marry him, too, he's going to find you and ask for her hand immediately.
sir, it's a troupe of actors who want to perform for your lordship.
let's get away, tybalt.
is this servant of yours a smart man?
have them come in.
i've been hurt. may a plague curse both your families. i'm finished. did he get away clean?
he's very bright. i'll get him to come here, and you can ask him yourself.
you are welcome here, my friends.
what, are you hurt?
no, no, until it comes true we'll pretend it was just a dream we had. but my daughter should know about this, so she can be prepared with an answer just in case. go to her and tell her for me.
we thank your honor.
yes, yes. it's a scratch, just a scratch. but it's enough. where is my page? go, boy. get me a doctor.
cousins, you all have work to do., oh, i beg your pardon. come with me now, and help me out. , dear cousin, please be careful during this busy time.
were you thinking of spending the night here?
have courage, man. the wound can't be that bad.
really, my lord, why are you so excessively sad?
yes, if that would be all right with your lordship.
no, it's not as deep as a well, or as wide as a church door, but it's enough. it'll do the job. ask for me tomorrow, and you'll find me in a grave. i'm done for in this world, i believe. may a plague strike both your houses. goddammit! i can't believe that dog, that rat, that mouse, that cat could scratch me to death! that braggart, punk villain who fights like he learned swordsmanship from a manual! why the hell did you come in between us? he struck me from under your arm.
the things that cause my sadness are without limit. therefore my sadness is without limit.
by all means. i remember this fellow, he once played the eldest son of a farmer. it was the play in which you wooed the gentlewoman so successfully. i have forgotten your name, but you were well cast in the role and played it convincingly.
i thought it was the right thing to do.
you should listen to reason. then you'd stop being so gloomy.
i believe your honor is thinking of a character called soto.
take me inside some house, benvolio, or i'll pass out. may a plague strike both your families! they've turned me into food for worms. i'm done for. curse your families!
and after i have sat and listened to reason, what's my prize?
yes, that was it. you gave an excellent performance. well, this is very fortunate, your arriving just at this moment. i happen to be planning a little entertainment and could really use your services. there is a particular lord who will watch you perform tonight. i'm a little worried, though, because his honor has never seen a play before, that his odd behavior may strike you as funny. you might not be able to control your laughter and you might offend him. i warn you, he's sensitive. the slightest smile provokes him.
this gentleman mercutio, a close relative of the prince and my dear friend, was killed while defending me from tybalt's slander, tybalt, who had been my cousin for a whole hour! oh, sweet juliet, your beauty has made me weak like a woman, and you have softened my bravery, which before was as hard as steel.
if not an end to your suffering, then at least you'll have the means to endure it patiently.
don't worry. we'll restrain ourselves, no matter how bizarrely he behaves.
oh romeo, romeo, brave mercutio is dead! his brave spirit has floated up to heaven, but it was too early for him to leave life on earth.
i'm amazed that you, being such a moody man yourself, are moralizing about my deadly condition. i can't hide what i am. i'll be sad when i have reason to be sad and won't smile at anybody's jokes. i'll eat when i'm hungry and won't wait until it's convenient. i'll sleep when i'm tired and won't rouse myself for anything. i'll laugh when i'm happy and won't flatter and fawn over anyone.
go, lad, and take them to the pantry. make them feel welcome and see to it that they have everything they require.
the future will be affected by today's terrible events. today is the start of a terror that will end in the days ahead.
sure, but don't do it at full volume until there's no danger in it. not long ago you challenged and opposed your brother, and it is only very recently that he has forgiven you. you need to act carefully if you're going to stay in his good graces. you have to wait for the appropriate time to let loose.
you, fellow, go fetch my page, bartholomew, and dress him up like a noble lady. when you've finished, bring him to the drunkard's room, address him as "madam," bow to him and treat him with all-round respect and deference, as though he were the lady of the house. give him this message: if he wants to please me, he will conduct himself like a member of the aristocracy, mimicking the kind of behavior he's seen noble ladies use toward their husbands.
here comes the furious tybalt back again.
i'd rather be a weed in a hedge than a rose in my brother's garden. it suits me more to be hated by everyone than to put on a fancy show and trick people into loving me. though i am not a flattering, righteous man, at least you can say that i am honest about being a villain. my brother trusts me now? yeah, as much as a master trusts the dog he muzzles or the peasant he "frees" by chaining a big block around the man's foot. if my mouth were unrestrained, i'd bite. if i were free, i'd do what i pleased. until that happens, let me be who i am and don't try to change me.
that's just how i want him to behave toward the drunkard, speaking in a low, soft voice and in humble, courteous tones and saying fancy stuff like, "what does your honor wish to command your lady, your humble wife, to do to show her devotion and demonstrate her love?" tell him to give the drunkard fond embraces and alluring kisses, and lay his head on the other man's breast, weeping like a woman overjoyed to see a husband restored to health who for the last seven years has imagined he was no better than a poor, pathetic beggar. the boy may lack a woman's gift for weeping at will, so it might be good to have an onion handy, hidden in a handkerchief. that'll make his eyes stream. get this done as quickly as you can. i'll give you more instructions later.
he's alive and victorious, and mercutio's dead? enough with mercy and consideration. it's time for rage to guide my actions. now, tybalt, you can call me "villain" the way you did before. mercutio's soul is floating right above our heads. he's waiting for you to keep him company on the way up to heaven. either you, or i, or both of us have to go with him.
can't you somehow use your dissatisfaction to your own advantage?
i know the boy will be a convincing gentlewoman, taking up her exact walk and talk and gentle gestures. i can't wait to hear him call the drunkard "husband," and to watch my men smother their laughter as they pay their respects to this simple peasant. i'll go and coach them. my presence may put a damper on their high spirits, which might otherwise get out of control.
wretched boy, you hung out with him here, and you're going to go to heaven with him.
i use it all the time, since it's all that i have. who's that?
for god's sake, would someone bring me a mug of beer!
this fight will decide who dies.
what's going on, borachio?
wouldn't your lordship prefer some imported wine?
romeo, get out of here. the citizens are around, and tybalt is dead. don't stand there shocked. the prince will give you the death penalty if you get caught. so get out of here!
i just came from a great feast where leonato is entertaining the prince, your brother. i can give you information about an intended marriage.
would your honor like to try this dried fruit?
oh, i have awful luck.
will this give me an opportunity to make some mischief? who is this fool who wants all the fuss of marriage?
what garment would your honor like to wear today?
why are you waiting?
your brother's right-hand man.
i'm christopher sly. don't call me "your honor" and "your lordship." i've never had imported wine in my life, and if you want to bring me something "dried," try beef jerky. why ask me what "garment" i'll wear? i have no more jackets than i have backs, no more leggings than i have legs, and no more shoes than i have feet, in fact, sometimes i have fewer shoes than feet, as i'm not sure the ones where my toes stick out can be called "shoes."
the man who killed mercutio, which way did he go? tybalt, that murderer, which way did he run?
who? that pretty boy, claudio?
may heaven put an end to this foolish fantasy of your honor's! how terrible that a man of your influence and noble family, with so much wealth and an excellent reputation, should be infected with such a horrible illness!
tybalt is lying over there.
that's the one.
what, are you trying to make me crazy? i'm christopher sly, son of old sly of barton-on-heath, a peddler by birth, a cardmaker a cardmaker made tools for working with wool. cardmaker by trade, a keeper of trained bears by bad luck, and now, by present profession, a tinker. go ask marian hacket, the fat innkeeper of wincot. she knows me! she'll tell you about the tab i've run up, fourteen pence just for ale. if she doesn't, call me the biggest liar in christendom. i'm not crazy! just look at how, 
(to tybalt) get up, sir, and come with me. i command you, by the authority of the prince, to obey me.
he's a very fancy gentleman. and who's the girl who has caught his eye?
oh, this is why your poor wife is mourning!
where are the evil men who started this fight?
hero, the daughter and heir of leonato.
and this is why your servants hang their heads in sorrow!
oh, noble prince, i can tell you everything about the unfortunate circumstances of this deadly fight. over there tybalt is lying dead. he killed your relative, brave mercutio, and then young romeo killed him.
a lively young one! how did you learn about this?
and this is why your relatives never visit, frightened away by this unnatural insanity of yours. oh noble lord, consider your lineage. try to recall your former state of mental health and forget these crass, lowly desires. look how your servants wait on you, each one ready to do whatever you command. would you care to hear some music? listen! that's apollo apollo was the greek god of music and song. apollo playing.
tybalt was my nephew! he was my brother's son! oh prince, oh nephew, oh husband! oh, my nephew is dead! oh prince, as you are a man of honor, take revenge for this murder by killing someone from the montague family. oh cousin, cousin!
i was hired to perfume all the rooms in leonato's house. as i was working on one musty room, the prince and claudio entered. they were in the middle of a serious conversation. i quickly hid behind a tapestry and heard them agree that the prince would court hero tonight at the dance and, once he won her consent to marry, would give her to claudio.
and those birds you hear, twenty caged nightingales. do you want to sleep? we'll have a couch made up that's softer and more fragrant even than the bed of lustful semiramis semiramis was an assyrian queen famous for her active sex life. semiramis . say you want to take a walk, and we'll sprinkle the ground with flowers. or do you want to go horseback riding? your horses will be adorned with harnesses decorated in gold and pearls. do you like hawking? you have hawks that can soar higher than the morning lark. or do you want to hunt? your hounds will make the sky echo with their high-pitched voices.
benvolio, who started this fight?
come, let's go to the dance. this just may cheer me up. claudio, the young upstart, was responsible for keeping me from gaining power over my brother. if there's any way i can spoil his life, i'll be overjoyed. you'll both help me, right?
if you care to hunt rabbits, your greyhounds are as swift as healthy stags and faster than young deer.
tybalt started the fight before he was killed by romeo. romeo spoke to tybalt politely and told him how silly this argument was. he mentioned that you would not approve of the fight. he said all of this gently and calmly, kneeling down out of respect. but he could not make peace with tybalt, who was in an angry mood and wouldn't listen to talk about peace. tybalt and mercutio began to fight each other fiercely, lunging at one another and dodging each other's blows. romeo cried out, "stop, my friends. break it up." then he jumped in between them and forced them to put their swords down. but tybalt reached under romeo's arm and thrust his sword into brave mercutio. then tybalt fled the scene.
until the day we die, my lord.
do you like pictures? we'll be right back with one of adonis adonis was a handsome mortal youth loved by venus, the goddess of love. cytherea is another name for venus (in greek, aphrodite). adonis stretched out beside a rushing brook, with venus spying on him, hidden in rushes that seem to move and undulate with her lustful sighs, like grass waving in the wind.
but pretty soon he came back to meet romeo, who was overcome with the desire for revenge. as quick as lightning, they started fighting. before i could break up the fight, tybalt was killed. romeo ran away when tybalt fell dead. i'm telling you the truth, i swear on my life.
let's go to this great feast. they'll be even happier now that my mood has lightened. it's too bad the cook doesn't think like me; she would have poisoned them all if she did. should we go check out the scene?
there's one that shows io as a maid, before she was turned into a cow, in which jupiter io was a mortal girl whom the goal zeus (called jupiter by romans) raped. out of jealousy, zeus wife transformed her into a cow. jupiter tricks and takes her. it's so realistic, it seems to be happening right before your eyes. 
benvolio is part of the montague family. his loyalties to the montagues make him tell lies. he's not telling the truth. there were twenty montagues fighting in this awful riot, and together those twenty could only kill one man. i demand justice. you, prince, are the man who can give me justice. romeo killed tybalt. romeo must die.
lead the way, sir.
there's one of daphne daphne was a nymph whom apollo loved and changed into a tree as she was trying to escape from him. daphne running through the woods, her legs so scratched by thorns that apollo himself would weep at the sight. you'll swear the blood and tears are real.
romeo killed tybalt. tybalt killed mercutio. who should now pay the price for mercutio's life?
wasn't don john at dinner tonight?
you are nothing less than a lord. you have a noble wife who is much more beautiful than any other woman in this declining age.
not romeo, prince. he was mercutio's friend. his crime did justice's job by taking tybalt's life.
i didn't see him.
before she began shedding tears all over her lovely face, she was the fairest creature in the world, and even now she has no equal.
and for that crime, romeo is hereby exiled from verona. i'm involved in your rivalry. mercutio was my relative, and he lies dead because of your bloody feud. i'll punish you so harshly that you'll regret causing me this loss. i won't listen to your pleas or excuses. you can't get out of trouble by praying or crying, so don't bother. tell romeo to leave the city immediately, or else, if he is found, he will be killed. take away this body, and do what i say. showing mercy by pardoning killers only causes more murders.
that man always looks so sour! just looking at him gives me heartburn.
i'm really a lord? and do i really have a wife like that? is this a dream? or has everything up till now been a dream? i don't seem to be asleep: i can see and hear and speak. i can smell sweet smells and feel things that are soft to the touch. i'll be damned! i guess i really am a lord and not a tinker, and not christopher sly, either. well, bring my wife to me. oh, and don't forget the beer.
i wish the sun would hurry up and set and night would come immediately. when the night comes and everyone goes to sleep, romeo will leap into my arms, and no one will know. beauty makes it possible for lovers to see how to make love in the dark. or else love is blind, and its best time is the night. i wish night would come, like a widow dressed in black, so i can learn how to submit to my husband and lose my virginity. let the blood rushing to my cheeks be calmed. in the darkness, let me, a shy virgin, learn the strange act of sex so that it seems innocent, modest, and true. come, night. come, romeo. you're like a day that comes during the night. you're whiter than snow on the black wings of a raven. come, gentle night. come, loving, dark night. give me my romeo. and when i die, turn him into stars and form a constellation in his image. his face will make the heavens so beautiful that the world will fall in love with the night and forget about the garish sun. oh, i have bought love's mansion, but i haven't moved in yet.i belong to romeo now, but he hasn't taken possession of me yet. this day is so boring that i feel like a child on the night before a holiday, waiting to put on my fancy new clothes.
he has a very gloomy attitude.
would your mightiness care to wash his hands? we're overjoyed to see you sane again. if only you had a clearer memory of who you are! these past fifteen years you have been living in a dream, and even when you were awake, it was as though you slept.
oh, here comes my nurse, and she brings news. every voice that mentions romeo's name sounds beautiful. now, nurse, what's the news? is that the rope ladder romeo told you to pick up?
it would be excellent if they could make a man halfway between don john and benedick. one of them is too much like a painting of a man, he never speaks, and the other is too much like a spoiled little boy, always chattering.
fifteen years! that's some nap. but i never spoke the whole time?
yes, yes, this is the rope ladder.
so, the man would talk half as much as benedick and be half as serious as don john, 
oh yes, you spoke, my lord, but total nonsense. for instance, you'd be lying here in this comfortable room, but you'd say that you were being thrown out of some tavern and would shout at a landlady about how you were going to take her to court for cheating you. sometimes you would call out for one cicely hacket.
oh my, what's the news? why do you look so upset?
and if he were handsome, agile, and rich, too, he could have any woman in the world, all he'd need was her good will.
yes, the landlady's maid.
oh, it's a sad day! he's dead. he's dead. he's dead! we're ruined, lady, we're ruined! what an awful day! he's gone. he's been killed. he's dead!
really, niece, you'll never get a husband if you keep saying such harsh things about people.
but sir, there is no such house, no such maid, and no such men as you have dreamed up, like a certain stephen sly and one old john naps of greece, a peter turph, one "henry pimpernell," and twenty more men of this sort, who never actually existed.
can god be so jealous and hateful?
honestly, she is too ill-tempered.
well, thank god i'm cured!
romeo is hateful, even though god isn't. oh, romeo, romeo, who ever would have thought it would be romeo?
being "too ill-tempered" is different from being simply "ill-tempered," right? so i suppose that means i can escape god's punishment, for in the old proverb, it is said that "god gives an ill-tempered cow short horns" so that she can't inflict damage on anyone. but it doesn't say anything about a cow that is too ill-tempered.
amen.
what kind of devil are you to torture me like this? this is as bad as the tortures of hell. has romeo killed himself? just say "yes" and i will turn more poisonous than the snake with the evil eye. i will no longer be myself if you tell me romeo killed himself. if he's been killed, say "yes." if not, say "no." these short words will determine my joy or my pain.
so then, for being too argumentative, god won't send you any horns?
i thank you all. you won't regret this.
i saw the wound. i saw it with my own eyes. god bless that wound, here on his manly chest. a pitiful corpse, a bloody, pitiful corpse. pale as ashes and drenched in blood. all the dried blood was so gory. i fainted when i saw it.
exactly by saying god won't give horns, beatrice jokes that she won't have a husband. exactly . i pray every morning and night that the lord won't send me a husband. really, i couldn't stand a husband with a beard. i'd rather be wrapped in scratchy blankets all night.
how is my noble lord?
oh, my heart is breaking. oh, my bankrupt heart is breaking. i'll send my eyes to prison, and they'll never be free to look at anything again. i'll give my vile body back to the earth. i'll never move again. my body and romeo's will lie together in one sad coffin.
maybe you will find a husband without a beard.
not bad, actually. this is all quite pleasant. where is my wife?
oh, tybalt, tybalt, he was the best friend i had. oh, polite tybalt, he was an honorable gentleman. i wish i had not lived long enough to see him die.
and then what would i do with him? dress him up in my clothes and pretend he's my lady servant? if he has a beard, he's more than a boy; if he doesn't have a beard, he's less than a man. if he's more than a boy, he's not the one for me, and if he's less than a man, i'm not the one for him. they say that women who die unmarried are destined to lead the apes to hell, and i suppose that'll be my fate as well.
here, noble lord. what is your wish with regard to her?
what disaster is this? has romeo been killed, and is tybalt dead too? tybalt was my dearest cousin. romeo was even dearer to me as my husband. let the trumpets play the song of doom, because who can be alive if those two are gone?
so you'll go to hell?
you call yourself my wife, yet you don't call me "husband"? it's my men who should call me "lord." i'm your man, your fellow.
tybalt is dead, and romeo has been banished. romeo killed tybalt, and his punishment was banishment.
no, just to the gates of hell, where the devil will meet me, with the horns on his head like a cuckold, and say, "go up to heaven, beatrice. hell is no place for you virgins." so i'll fly up to heaven (leaving the apes behind) where i'll be met by saint peter guarding heaven's gates. he will show me the part of heaven where the bachelors sit, and i'll have fun there forever.
my husband is my lord and my lord is my husband. for i am your all-obedient wife.
oh god, did romeo's hand shed tybalt's blood?
(to hero) well, niece, i trust that you will defer to your father on these important decisions.
yes, i see., (to the lord) what should i call her?
it did, it did. curse the day this happened, but it did.
surely, my cousin has a duty to please her father. but if the husband her father chooses isn't handsome, she should sweetly tell her father that she will please herself, with another one.
"madam."
oh, he's like a snake disguised as a flower. did a dragon ever hide in such a beautiful cave? he's a beautiful tyrant and a fiendish angel! he's a raven with the feathers of the dove. he's a lamb who hunts like a wolf! i hate him, yet he seemed the most wonderful man. he's turned out to be the exact opposite of what he seemed. he's a saint who should be damned. he's a villain who seemed honorable. oh nature, what were you doing in hell? why did you put the soul of a criminal in the perfect body of a man? was there ever such an evil book with such a beautiful cover? oh, i can't believe the deepest evil lurked inside something so beautiful!
well, niece, i hope that i will see you married one day.
" madam sly is asking what her name is. he doesn't understand that "madam" is like "sir," or "my lord." madam alice?" or "madam joan?"
there is no trust, no faith, no honesty in men. all of them lie. all of them cheat. they're all wicked. ah, where's my servant?, give me some brandy., these griefs, these pains, these sorrows make me old. shame on romeo!
no, i won't take a husband until they make men out of something other than dirt. what woman wouldn't be distressed, being lorded over by a handful of dust? can you imagine being hitched to a lump of clay? no, uncle, i won't be married. and anyhow, if adam adam, the biblical father of mankind, is said to be made from "the dust of the ground" (genesis : ). adam is the father of all mankind, then his sons are my brothers, and really i believe that incest is a sin.
just "madam." that's how noblemen address their wives.
i hope sores cover your tongue for a wish like that! he was not born to be shameful. shame does not belong with romeo. he deserves only honor, complete honor. oh, i was such a beast to be angry at him.
(to hero) daughter, remember what i told you. if the prince asks for your hand in marriage, you know what to tell him.
madam wife, they say i've been dreaming or asleep for more than fifteen years.
are you going to say good things about the man who killed your cousin?
but cousin, make sure he woos you properly and appropriately. if he is too insistent, tell him that romance is like a dance: it has its own rhythm and timing. look, the three stages of romance are like three different dances. the wooing is like a scottish jig: hot and fast and full of whimsy and illusion. the wedding is a like a dance you would do before the king: proper and decorous. finally, you get to the part where you regret having gotten married in the first place. it is like the lively cinquepace cinquepace is an energetic five-step dance. cinquepace : it goes faster and faster until you eventually topple over and die.
yes, and it seemed twice as long to me, having been kept from your bed that whole time.
am i supposed to say bad things about my own husband? ah, my poor husband, who will sing your praises when i, your wife of three hours, have been saying awful things about you? but why, you villain, did you kill my cousin? probably because my cousin the villain would have killed my husband. i'm not going to cry any tears. i would cry with joy that romeo is alive, but i should cry tears of grief because tybalt is dead. my husband, whom tybalt wanted to kill, is alive. tybalt, who wanted to kill my husband, is dead. all this is comforting news. why, then, should i cry? there is news worse than the news that tybalt is dead, news that makes me want to die. i would be glad to forget about it, but it weighs on my memory like sins linger in guilty minds. "tybalt is dead, and romeo has been banished."
niece, you are exceptionally perceptive.
that's too long., servants, leave her and me alone. now, madam, undress and come to bed.
that banishment is worse than the murder of ten thousand tybalts. tybalt's death would be bad enough if that was all. maybe pain likes to have company and can't come without bringing more pain. it would have been better if, after she said, "tybalt's dead," she told me my mother or my father, or both, were gone. that would have made me make the normal cries of sadness. but to say that tybalt's dead and then say, "romeo has been banished." to say that is like saying that my father, my mother, tybalt, romeo, and juliet have all been killed, they're all dead. "romeo has been banished." that news brings infinite death. no words can express the pain. where are my father and my mother, nurse?
i have a good eye, uncle. i can see what's in broad daylight.
thrice noble lord, i beg you to excuse me for another night or two, or at least until nightfall. your doctors have expressly forbidden me to sleep with you, as there's a risk that you might have a relapse. i hope this explanation will stand as my excuse.
they are crying and moaning over tybalt's corpse. are you going to join them? i'll bring you there.
the partygoers have arrived. let's give them room.
well, something's standing up. i'm not sure i can wait that long. still, i'd hate to see my former dreams return. so i will wait, however flesh and blood sly means that he is sexually aroused. flesh and blood may feel about it.
are they washing out his wounds with their tears? i'll cry my tears for romeo's banishment when their tears are dry. pick up this rope ladder. this poor rope ladder, it's useless now, just like me, because romeo has been exiled. he made this rope ladder to be a highway to my bed, but i am a virgin, and i will die a virgin and a widow. let's go, rope ladder. nurse, i'm going to lie in my wedding bed. and death, not romeo, can take my virginity!
my lady, will you have a dance with me?
your honor's actors, hearing of your recovery, have come to perform a pleasing comedy for you, and your doctors approve wholeheartedly. they say that too much suffering has made your blood coagulate, and that sadness leads to madness. so they think it's a good idea for you to watch a play and direct your thoughts toward laughter and merriment, two strong preventive medicines that foster long life.
go to your bedroom. i'll find romeo to comfort you. i know where he is. listen, your romeo will be here tonight. i'll go to him. he's hiding out in friar lawrence's cell.
as long as you move gracefully, look handsome, and say nothing, i'm yours for the dance. and i'll even linger after i've gone.
okay, bring on the play. but what's a " comonty with "comonty," sly is trying to say "comedy" but gets the word wrong, never having heard it before. comonty ?" some sort of christmas skit or display of acrobatics?
(giving her a ring) oh, find him! give this ring to my true knight! and tell him to come here to say his last goodbye.
will i be with you then?
no, my good lord, this is nicer stuff.
romeo, come out. come out, you frightened man. trouble likes you, and you're married to disaster.
perhaps, if i decide to let you.
what, like stuff from a house?
father, what's the news? what punishment did the prince announce? what suffering lies in store for me that i don't know about yet?
and when will that be?
no, it's a story.
you know too much about suffering. i have news for you about the prince's punishment.
when i like the way you look, for god forbid your face be as ugly as your mask!
well, let's watch it. come, madam wife, sit here beside me. let's forget our cares. we're not getting any younger.
is the prince's punishment any less awful than doomsday?
my mask is like the roof of the poor philemon's philemon was a peasant who entertained the disguised jove in the disguised jove in his humble cottage. philemon's humble cottage; underneath the mask, i am as magnificent as the glorious god jove.
well, tranio, here we are in fertile lombardy, garden of italy, about to fulfill my lifelong dream. you know how i've always longed to see the fair city of padua, famous for its arts and letters, and now, thanks to my father's generosity, here i am, with his blessing and your good company. so, my trusty servant, and you've never let me down, why don't we settle here for a time to institute a course of study, a really rigorous curriculum. i was born in pisa, famous for its serious citizens, like my father before me; my father, vincentio, a successful, world-traveled merchant, was one of the bentivolii the bentivolis were one of the leading families of bologna, wielding great political power and influence. bentivolii . it's only fitting that i, his son, reared in florence, should concentrate on adding more virtuous deeds to my father's own, stacking them on top of his wealth. for this reason, tranio, i'll study ethics and, for the time being, anyway, pursue those areas of philosophy lucentio is referring to the philosophy of aristotle. philosophy that teach a man how to achieve happiness through virtue. what do you think of all this? leaving pisa for padua, i feel lucentio means he is overwhelmed. i feel a little like a thirsty man who turns from a puddle to a vast lake he can drink from.
he made a gentler decision. you won't die, but you'll be banished from the city.
well, then, since philemon's roof was thatched with straw, your mask should have a beard.
pardon me, gentle master. as usual, i'm in complete agreement with you about everything, and glad that you still relish the idea of studying philosophy, and let me add that i admire your virtue and your moral discipline. that said, let's not become total stoics stoics were ancient greek philosophers who advocated indifference to pain or pleasure. stoics or unfeeling blocks of wood and give up all thought of pleasure. we don't want to become so focused on aristotle aristotle's writings would have beencentral to the university curriculum. in contrast, the poet ovid wrote frequently about erotic love, and much of his work was considered scandalous. aristotle that we forget to read ovid. here's my thought: practice your logic as you chat with your friends, and your rhetoric in ordinary conversation. use music and poetry to excite your senses. math and metaphysics, well, i'd play them by ear, spending only as much time on them as you can stand. there's nothing to be gained from things we take no pleasure in. what i'm saying, sir, is this: study what you most enjoy.
ha, banishment? be merciful and say "death." exile is much worse than death. don't say "banishment."
if you wish to speak of love, speak more softly.
thanks, tranio. that's good advice. now if only biondello would get here, we could find a nice place to stay where the friends we'll make here in padua could visit us. wait! who are all these people?
from now on, you are banished from verona. you should be able to endure this because the world is broad and wide.
well, i wish you liked me.
maybe it's a parade to welcome us to town, master.
there is no world for me outside the walls of verona, except purgatory, torture, and hell itself. so to be banished from verona is like being banished from the world, and being banished from the world is death.
i'm glad i don't, for your sake. i have many awful qualities.
enough, gentlemen! you can't influence me on this point. you know how i feel. i'm determined not to permit my younger daughter to marry until i have a husband for the elder one. i've long regarded you both as good friends. therefore, if either of you is partial to katherina, he shall have my permission to court her freely.
banishment is death by the wrong name. calling death banishment is like cutting off my head with a golden ax and smiling while i'm being murdered.
tell me one.
cart gremio refers to an elizabethan practice in which prostitutes and women who "scolds" were tied behind a cart and whipped as it moved through town. cart her, you mean. she's too much for me. how about you, hortensio? are you still interested in marrying?
oh, deadly sin! oh, rude and unthankful boy! you committed a crime that is punishable by death, but our kind prince took sympathy on you and ignored the law when he substituted banishment for death. this is kind mercy, and you don't realize it.
i say my prayers out loud.
(to baptista) may i ask, sir, if it's your intention to publicly humiliate me, showing me off like a whore in front of these suitors?
it's torture, not mercy. heaven is here because juliet lives here. every cat and dog and little mouse, every unworthy animal that lives here can see her, but romeo can't. flies are healthier and more honorable and better suited for romance than romeo. they can take hold of juliet's wonderful white hand and they can kiss her sweet lips. even while she remains a pure virgin, she blushes when her lips touch each other because she thinks it's a sin. but romeo can't kiss her or hold her hand because he's been banished. flies can kiss her, but i must flee the city. flies are like free men, but i have been banished. and yet you say that exile is not death? did you have no poison, no sharp knife, no weapon you could use to kill me quickly, nothing so disgraceful, except banishment? oh friar, damned souls use the word banishment to describe hell. they howl about banishment. if you're a member of a divine spiritual order of men who forgive sins, and you say you're my friend, how do you have the heart to mangle me with the word banishment?
that makes me love you even more. everyone who hears you can shout, "amen."
we're not your suitors, that's for sure! not until you improve your temper, girl!
you foolish madman, listen to me for a moment.
god give me a good dance partner!
don't worry, i couldn't care less. the only possible interest i could take in you would be to hit you on the head with a stool, paint your face with blood, and make a fool out of you.
oh, you're just going to talk about banishment again.
amen. that would be me.
may the good lord keep me safe from all women like her!
i'll give you protection from that word. i'll give you the antidote for trouble: philosophy. philosophy will comfort you even though you've been banished.
and god take him away from me when we're finished dancing! go ahead, say "amen."
me too, lord!
you're still talking about "banished?" forget about philosophy! unless philosophy can create a juliet, or pick up a town and put it somewhere else, or reverse a prince's punishment, it doesn't do me any good. don't say anything else.
no more talking. i've got my answer.
(speaking so that only lucentio can hear) wow! this'll be fun to watch! this girl is either completely crazy or incredibly willful.
oh, so madmen like you are also deaf.
i know who you are; you are signior antonio.
(speaking so that only tranio can hear) but her sister seems quiet and well behaved, as a young girl should be. shhh, tranio.
how should madmen hear, if wise men can't even see?
no, really, i'm not.
(speaking so that only lucentio can hear) indeed, master. let's keep quiet and watch.
let me talk to you about your situation.
i can tell by the way you waggle your head.
(to gremio and hortensio) gentlemen, since i'd like to make good on what i've said, bianca, go inside. and don't be unhappy, my dear. whatever happens, you know i'll never love you less.
you can't talk about something that you don't feel. if you were as young as i am, if you were in love with juliet, if you had just married her an hour ago, if then you murdered tybalt, if you were lovesick like me, and if you were banished, then you might talk about it. you might also tear your hair out of your head and collapse to the ground the way i do right now. (romeo falls on the ground) you might kneel down and measure the grave that hasn't yet been dug.
really, i'm only pretending to be him.
what a spoiled little brat. she'd make herself cry now, if she could think of a reason.
get up. somebody's knocking. hide yourself, good romeo.
you could only imitate his imperfections so well if you were the man himself. look, you've got his wrinkled hands. you are antonio, you are he.
sister, be happy in my unhappiness., sir, i will humbly obey you. i'll take comfort in my books and music, reading and practicing my instruments.
i won't hide unless all the mist from my heartsick groans envelopes me like fog and conceals me from people's searching eyes.
in short, i'm not.
listen tranio! that's minerva's minerva was the roman goddess of wisdom. (in greek mythology, she is called athena.) minerva's voice you hear. 
listen, they're still knocking!, (to the person at the door) who's there?, (to romeo) romeo, get up. they'll arrest you., (to the person at the door) hold on a moment., (to romeo) get up.
come on, do you think i can't recognize you by your excellent wit? can a good thing hide itself? be quiet, you are antonio. a man's virtues will always show themselves, and that's the end of that.
signior baptista, will you really be this cruel? i regret that our goodwill should cause bianca unhappiness.
run and hide in my study., just a minute, for the love of god, why are you being so stupid? i'm coming. i'm coming.
won't you tell me who told you that?
why are you locking her away because of this fiend from hell, signor baptista? why does the one daughter have to be punished for the other's mouth?
why are you knocking so hard? where do you come from? what do you want?
no, you'll have to excuse me.
gentlemen, i've made my decision. that's all there is to it. go inside, bianca.
(from offstage) let me come in, and i'll tell you why i came. i come from lady juliet.
and you won't tell me who you are?
and because i know how fond she is of music, playing her instruments, and poetry, i plan to hire live-in tutors for her. if either of you gentlemen knows anyone who would be suitable for the job, send him to me. i'll pay well for good teachers. i don't stint when it comes to educating my children. goodbye, gentlemen. katherina, you may stay. i have things to discuss with bianca.
(opening the door) welcome, then.
not now.
stay out here? i don't think so! am i to be dictated to, like a child? told when to come and where to go? no.
oh, holy friar, oh, tell me, holy friar, where is my lady's husband? where's romeo?
who said that i was disdainful, and that i got all my best lines out of a bad joke book?! well, it must have been signior benedick.
you can go straight to hell! what you have to offer is nothing anyone wants. hortensio, our desire to be married isn't so great that we can't wait this out patiently. it's tough on both of us, but i guess we'll live. so long. but to prove my love for bianca, i'm going to see if i can find a good tutor to give her lessons in the things she enjoys. if i do, i'll send him to her father.
he's there on the ground. he's been getting drunk on his own tears.
who's that?
i'll do the same. but wait, don't go just yet, signior gremio. i know we've never exactly been allies, but it might be in both our interests, if you think about it, to put our heads together about one particular thing. that is, if we ever want to return to being rivals for bianca's love.
oh, he's acting just like juliet, just like her. oh painful sympathy! what a pitiful problem! she's lying on the ground just like him, blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering. stand up. stand up. stand up if you're really a man. for juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand up. why should you fall into so deep a moan?
i'm sure you know him.
and that would be, ?
nurse!
no i don't, believe me.
to find a husband for her sister.
ah sir, ah sir. well, death is the end for everybody.
what, he never made you laugh?
a husband? you mean a devil!
were you talking about juliet? how is she? does she think that i'm a practiced murderer because i tainted our newfound joy by killing one of her close relatives? where is she? how is she doing? what does my hidden wife say about our ruined love?
please tell me, who is this man?
i mean a husband.
oh, she doesn't say anything, sir. she just weeps and weeps. she falls on her bed and then starts to get up. then she calls out tybalt's name and cries "romeo," and then she falls down again.
why, he's the prince's fool, and a very dull fool at that. his only talent is his capacity to come up with unbelievable slanders. only the most immoral people enjoy his company, and they like him not for his wit but his outrageousness. he manages to both please and anger people; they laugh at him and then beat him up. i'm sure he's out there dancing. i could have sworn he trampled on me.
i say a devil. do you really think there's a man fool enough to marry into hell, however rich the father is?
she's calling out my name as if i were a bullet murdering her, just like i murdered her relative. tell me, friar, in what part of my body is my name embedded? tell me, so i can cut it out of myself. (he draws his dagger)
when i meet this gentleman, i'll tell him what you've said.
oh, i don't know. just because we wouldn't want to put up with her tantrums, that doesn't mean there aren't guys who would, if we could find them. guys who'd take her with all her faults, provided there were enough money involved.
hold on, and don't act out of desperation. are you a man? you look like a man, but your tears make you look like a woman. your wild actions resemble the irrational fury of a beast. you're a shameful woman who looks like a man or else an ugly creature who's half-man, half-beast. you have amazed me. i swear by my holy order, i thought you were smarter and more rational than this. have you killed tybalt? will you kill yourself? and would you also kill your wife, who shares your life, by committing the sin of killing yourself? why do you complain about your birth, the heavens, and the earth? life is the union of soul in body through the miracle of birth, but you would throw all that away. you bring shame to your body, your love, and your mind. you have so much natural talent, but like someone who hoards money, you use none of your talent for the right purpose, not your body, not your love, not your mind. your body is just a wax figure, without the honor of a man. the love that you promised was a hollow lie. you're killing the love that you vowed to cherish. your mind, which aids both your body and your love, has mishandled both of them. you're like a stupid soldier whose gunpowder explodes because he's careless. the things you were supposed to use to defend yourself end up killing you. get up, man! your juliet is alive. it was for her that you were almost killed earlier. be happy that she's alive. tybalt wanted to kill you, but you killed tybalt. be happy that you're alive. the law that threatened your life was softened into exile. be happy about that. your life is full of blessings. you have the best sorts of happiness to enjoy.
oh, please do. he'll say a few nasty things about me, and if nobody listens to him or laughs, he'll be thrown into a funk. and that will save a partridge wing from being eaten, because he'll be too miserable for dinner.
i don't know. all i know is i'd rather endure a public whipping every morning than put up with her, even with a big dowry.
but like a misbehaved, sullen girl, you're whining about your bad luck and your love. listen, listen, people who act like that die miserable. go be with your love, as it was decided at your wedding. climb up to her bedroom and comfort her. but get out of there before the night watchmen take their positions. then you will escape to the city of mantua, where you'll live until we can make your marriage public and make peace between your families. we'll ask the prince to pardon you. then we'll welcome you back with twenty thousand times more joy than you'll have when you leave this town crying. go ahead, nurse. give my regards to your lady, and tell her to hurry everybody in the house to bed. i'm sure they're all so sad that they'll be ready to sleep. romeo is coming.
come on, we have to follow the leaders of the dance.
the two choices are about equal, it's true. but come, since we must be friends in the face of this new obstacle, let's work together to find a husband for baptista's elder daughter, and thus free his younger daughter to have a husband, too. then we can go back to fighting with each other. happy the man that claims you, sweet bianca! and may the best man win. what do you say, signior gremio?
o lord, i could stay here all night listening to such good advice. educated men are so impressive! (speaking to romeo) my lord, i'll tell my lady you will come.
in every good thing they do.
agreed. this imaginary suitor for katherina, i'd buy him the best horse in padua if he'd get here quickly, woo her, marry her, take her to bed, and rid the house of her. let's go.
do so, and tell my sweet to be ready to scold me.
no, if they try to lead us to harm, i will leave the dance floor at the next song.
sir, is it possible that a person could fall in love so suddenly?
here, sir, this is a ring she asked me to give you. hurry up, it's getting late. (she gives romeo juliet's ring)
(to borachio) my brother just wooed hero and now has taken her father inside to tell him his feelings. the ladies have followed hero, but one masked man remains.
oh, tranio, until it happened to me, i never would have thought it possible. but now i confess it openly to you, tranio. you are to me what anna, dido's in virgil's aeneid, dido queen of carthage, confessed her secret passion for aeneas to her sister, anna. dido's sister, was to the queen of carthage. i confide in you. i tell you, tranio, i'm on fire, in agony. i'll die if i can't have this modest young girl for my wife. advise me, tranio, i know you can. help me, tranio, i know you will. 
this makes me feel so much better!
that's claudio. i can tell by the way he carries himself.
master, this is no moment to lecture you. the heart won't be reasoned with. if love has touched you, love has touched you, end of story. but, as the roman terence advises, now that you're a captive, it's time to buy back your freedom at the lowest possible cost.
now get out of here. good night. everything depends on this: either be out of here before the night watchmen take their positions, or leave in disguise after daybreak. take a little vacation in mantua. i'll find your servant, and he'll update you now and then on your case as it stands here. give me your hand. it's late. farewell. good night.
(to claudio) aren't you signior benedick?
yes, you're right. please go on. i feel better already, and i know there's more good advice where that came from.
i'm off to experience the greatest joy of all, but still it's sad to leave you in such a rush. farewell.
you know me too well. i am benedick.
master, you were so focused on the girl herself, i wonder if you missed the main point here.
things have turned out so unluckily, sir, that we haven't had time to convince our daughter to marry you. listen, she loved her cousin tybalt dearly, and so did i. well, we were all born to die. it's very late, she won't be coming downstairs tonight. believe me, if you weren't here visiting me, i myself would have gone to bed an hour ago.
sir, my brother is very fond of you. he is in love with hero. please make him change his mind. she doesn't have the proper rank to marry the prince. you would be doing a good service.
oh no! i saw sweetness and beauty in her face of the kind that humbled great jove jove, or zeus, king of the gods, fell in love with europa, a mortal maiden, and changed himself into a bull, carrying a europa across the sea to crete, where he raped her. jove . he saw it in europa that time she brought him to his knees in crete.
these times of pain are bad times for romance. madam, good night. give my regards to your daughter.
how do you know he loves her?
that's all you noticed? you missed the part where her sister began to scold her and made such a ruckus that human ears could hardly stand it? 
i will. and i'll find out what she thinks about marriage early tomorrow. tonight she is shut up in her room, alone with her sadness.
i heard him swear he did.
tranio, i saw her coral-pink lips move and perfume the air with her breath. i saw nothing in her except what is virtuous and lovely.
sir paris, i'll make a desperate argument for my child's love. i think she'll do whatever i say. no, i think she'll do all that and more. i have no doubt about it. wife, visit her in her room before you go to bed. tell her about my son paris's love for her. and tell her, listen to me, on wednesday, wait, what day is today?
i did too, and he also swore he would marry her tonight.
(to the audience) i think it's time to rouse him from his trance., wake up, sir! if you love the girl, it's time to figure out how to win her. the way things stand, her older sister is so bitchy and difficult that the father can't wait to get rid of her. but until he does, your sweetheart is grounded, locked up at home and not allowed any suitors.
monday, my lord.
come on, let's get to the banquet.
oh, tranio, what a cruel father he is. still, did you notice how ready he was to hire good tutors for her?
monday! ha, ha! well, wednesday is too soon. let it be on thursday. on thursday, tell her, she'll be married to this noble earl. will you be ready? do you think it's a good idea to rush? we shouldn't have too big a celebration, we can invite a friend or two. listen, because tybalt was just killed, people might think that we don't care about his memory as our relative if we have too grand a party. therefore we'll have about half a dozen friends to the wedding, and that's it. what do you think about thursday?
(taking off his mask) though i said my name was benedick, i heard this news with claudio's ears. of course the prince wants hero for himself. friendship is enduring except when love is involved. therefore, all lovers should speak for themselves. they should look for themselves, without asking someone else to get involved in their affairs. beauty is a witch whose spells can turn loyalty into passion. this happens a lot, but it didn't occur to me that it would happen to me. goodbye then, hero.
i did, and now i've got it!
my lord, i wish thursday were tomorrow.
claudio?
tranio, i think i've got it!
well go on home. thursday it is, then. (to lady capulet) visit juliet before you go to bed. get her ready, my wife, for this wedding day. (to paris) farewell, my lord. now i'm off to bed. oh my! it's so late that we might as well call it early. good night.
yes, that's me.
i'll bet we're both thinking the same thing, master.
are you going? it's still a long time until daybreak. don't be afraid. that sound you heard was the nightingale the lark sings in the morning, the nightingale sings at night. nightingale , not the lark. every night the nightingale chirps on that pomegranate-tree. believe me, my love, it was the nightingale.
will you come with me?
tell me your idea first.
it was the lark, the bird that sings at dawn, not the nightingale. look, my love, what are those streaks of light in the clouds parting in the east? night is over, and day is coming. if i want to live, i must go. if i stay, i'll die.
where?
you will pretend to be a schoolmaster and offer to teach the girl. is that your plan?
that light is not daylight, i know it. it's some meteor coming out of the sun to light your way to mantua. so stay for a while. you don't have to go yet.
right over to that willow tree the willow tree is a symbol of unrequited love. willow tree to see about your business. how do you want to wear your garland of willow leaves? around your neck, like a moneylender's gold chain, or under your arm, like a lieutenant's sash? you have to wear it somehow, because the prince has gotten your hero.
it is. do you think it would work?
let me be captured. let me be put to death. i am content, if that's the way you want it. i'll say the light over there isn't morning. i'll say it's the reflection of the moon. i'll say that sound isn't the lark ringing in the sky. i want to stay more than i want to go. come, death, and welcome! juliet wants it this way. how are you, my love? let's talk. it's not daylight.
i hope he enjoys her.
no, not a chance. you're supposed to be here in padua studying. so who would fill in for you, pretend to be vincentio's son, live in his house, pore over his books, welcome his friends, and wine and dine his fellow expatriates from pisa?
it is, it is. get out of here, be gone, go away! it's the lark that sings so out of tune, making such harsh noise. some say the lark makes a sweet division between day and night. it's not true because she separates us. some say the lark traded its eyes with the toad a folktale said that the lark had gotten its ugly eyes from the toad, who had taken its pretty eyes from the lark. some say the lark traded its eyes with the toad . oh, now i wish they had traded voices too! because the lark's voice tears us out of each other's arms, and now there will be men hunting for you. oh, go away now. i see more and more light.
you sound like a cattle dealer: that's the way they sell bulls. but do you really think the prince would treat you that way?
enough! don't worry, i have it all figured out. no one has seen us yet, and no one knows what we look like, which of us is master and which servant. it's obvious: you will be me, tranio, live in my house, instruct the servants and do everything in my place just as i would. i, meanwhile, will impersonate some other made-up fellow, some guy from florence or naples, or some poor guy from pisa. there! that's a plan. take off what you're wearing and put on my hat and cloak.
more and more light. more and more pain for us.
please, leave me alone.
here comes biondello. where have you been, boy?
madam.
look at you, thrashing about like a blind man. a boy robbed you, but you'll beat up the post instead.
where have i been? where are you? has tranio stolen your clothes, master? or have you stolen his? have you both stolen each other's? please, what's going on?
nurse?
if you won't leave, then i'll leave.
come here, boy. it's no time for jokes: sober up. tranio and i have traded clothes to save my life. i killed a man in a fight since we came ashore, and i'm worried someone saw me. while i make my escape, i need you to wait on tranio as though he were me. understand?
your mother is coming to your bedroom. day has broken. be careful. watch out.
oh, the poor bird. now he'll hide himself in the bushes. but how strange that beatrice should seem to know who i was and yet not know at the same time. "the prince's fool"! maybe they call me that because i am cheerful. yes, but i am insulting myself by thinking this way. i don't have that kind of reputation! beatrice's mean, sarcastic nature makes her believe that the entire world shares her opinions; that's why she describes me this way. well, i'll get my revenge.
of course, sir. (to the audience) not a word.
then the window lets day in, and life goes out the window.
now, sir, where is claudio? did you see him?
and you're not to utter a syllable of tranio's name. "tranio" is now "lucentio."
farewell, farewell! give me one kiss, and i'll go down.
yes, my lord, i played the part of a gossip and brought him the news. i found him here, as sad as a rabbit in a burrow many disagree about what the original line means. another translation may be: "as sad as a solitary house in an open field." as sad as a rabbit in a burrow . i told him, and i think i was telling the truth, that you had won the lady's heart. i offered to accompany him to the willow tree, where he could either make a garland, fit to be worn by an abandoned lover, or gather sticks into a bundle, ready for his beating.
lucky for him. wish i could say the same.
are you gone like that, my love, my lord? yes, my husband, my friend! i must hear from you every day in the hour. in a minute there are many days. oh, by this count i'll be many years older before i see my romeo again.
beating? why, what did he do?
i'd second your wish if it automatically meant that lucentio could have baptista's youngest daughter. this is for your master's sake, not mine. so watch your step when there are other people around. when we're by ourselves you can call me "tranio." everywhere else, address me as your master lucentio.
farewell! i won't miss any chance to send my love to you.
he was like a schoolboy who finds a bird's nest and happily shows it to his friend, who then steals it from him.
tranio, let's go. one last thing, and this is up to you. you'll have to woo bianca like the rest. don't ask why. just trust me, i know what i'm doing.
oh, do you think we'll ever meet again?
what, is trusting a friend such a crime? the criminal is the one who stole the nest.
(to sly) my lord, you're falling asleep. you're not paying attention to the play.
i have no doubts. all these troubles will give us stories to tell each other later in life.
it might have been appropriate to make both the rod and the garland. he could have worn the garland himself and beaten you with the rod, since you, as i understand it, have stolen his bird's nest.
no, no. i am. really. very impressive. is there any more, or is that it?
oh god, i have a soul that predicts evil things! now that you are down there, you look like someone dead in the bottom of a tomb. either my eyesight is failing me, or you look pale.
i only want to teach the baby birds to sing; then i will return the nest to its rightful owner.
(speaking as sly's wife) my lord, we've only just got started.
and trust me, love, you look pale to me too. sadness takes away our color. goodbye, goodbye!
we'll wait and see; if the chicks follow your lead, if hero is ready to love claudio, then we'll know you're telling the truth.
and what an excellent piece of work it is, too, madam lady! i wish it were over.
oh luck, luck. everyone says you can't make up your mind. if you change your mind so much, what are you going to do to romeo, who's so faithful? change your mind, luck. i hope maybe then you'll send him back home soon.
lady beatrice is angry with you. the gentleman she danced with told her you insulted her.
farewell, verona! i'm off to visit my friends in padua, particularly my best friend hortensio. and i think this is his house. here, you there, grumio. knock.
(offstage) hey, daughter! are you awake?
not even a block of wood could handle her abuses! an oak tree barely clinging to life would have revived itself to fight her. even my mask seemed to come to life in order to argue with her. she told me, not realizing it was me, that i was the prince's jester and as dull as mud. she hurled mocking insults at me with such incredible speed that all i could do was stand there, paralyzed. she speaks daggers, and every word stabs. if her breath were as terrible as her words, she would kill every living thing from here to the furthest star. i wouldn't marry her, even if she were as blessed as paradise. if she were married to the great hero hercules, she would have humiliated him with chores around the house and ordered him to chop up his famous club for firewood. please, don't mention her. she's as wicked as ate ate was the goddess of conflict. ate , just disguised in pretty clothes. i wish to god that some wise man would conjure her away, because as long as she lives on earth, our lives are filled with turmoil. it's quieter in hell, where people, sinning on purpose, are eager to be sent just to get away from her. so chaos, horror, and sorrow follow her wherever she goes.
knock, sir? whom should i knock? has anyone offended your worship?
who's that calling? is it my mother? isn't she up very late? or is she up very early? what strange reason could she have for coming here?
look, here she comes.
moron! i'm telling you to make a fist and pound.
what's going on, juliet?
your highness, could you send me on a mission to the ends of the earth? i'll go to the antipodes for any little errand you can think of. i'll fetch you a toothpick from the farthest reaches of asia fantastical items located in distant lands. farthest reaches of asia , or find out prester john's shoe size, or snatch a hair from kublai khan's beard, or deliver any message you wish to relay to the pygmies, anything rather than exchange three words with this awful, screeching woman. isn't there something you want from me?
really, sir, i hardly think it would be appropriate for me to pound grumio acts as if petruchio asked grumio to hit him. pound you.
madam, i am not well.
nothing but your good company.
moron, here we are at the gate. now put your fists to work, or i'll put mine to work on your head!
will you cry about your cousin's death forever? are you trying to wash him out of his grave with tears? if you could, you couldn't bring him back to life. so stop crying. a little bit of grief shows a lot of love. but too much grief makes you look stupid.
oh, god, sir, here comes a dish i hate. i can't stand tongue.
my master is being difficult. if i do as he asks i think i know which one of us will be sorrier, and it's not going to be him!
let me keep weeping for such a great loss.
(to beatrice) lady, you have lost signior benedick's heart.
what are you standing there for! if you won't knock, i'll ring, and you'll be singing along in falsetto!
you will feel the loss, but the man you weep for will feel nothing.
it's true, my lord. he lent it to me once, and i paid him back with interest: a double heart for his single one. really, he won it from me once before in a dishonest game of dice. so i suppose your grace can truly say that i have lost it.
(to the unseen mistress or master of the house) help, mistress, help! my master has gone mad.
feeling the loss like this, i can't help but weep for him forever.
you've humiliated him, lady: you've put him down.
next time maybe you'll knock when i tell you, punk kid!
well, girl, you're weeping not for his death as much as for the fact that the villain who killed him is still alive.
and i hope that he won't put me down beatrice means "put down" in the sense of to "take to bed." put me down or i'm sure to have fools for children.i've brought claudio, who you sent me to find.
say, what's the trouble? if it isn't my old friend grumio, and my dear friend petruchio! how's everyone in verona?
what villain, madam?
why, what's wrong, count? why are you so sad?
hortensio, have you come to break up the fight? con tutto il cuore ben trovato the italian means, "with all my heart, i'm glad to see you." con tutto il cuore ben trovato , if i may say so.
that villain, romeo.
i'm not sad, my lord.
alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor mio petruchio! the italian means, "you are welcome here, my most honerd signior petruchio!" alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor mio petruchio! get up, grumio. we'll settle this quarrel.
(speaking so that lady capulet can't hear) he's far from being a villain. (to lady capulet) may god pardon him! i do, with all my heart. and yet no man could make my heart grieve like he does.
what then, sick?
i don't care what he told you in latin. if this isn't legal justification for me to leave his service, i don't know what is. he tells me to knock him, pound him, and put my fists to work on him. well, i ask you, was that any way for a servant to behave toward his master, especially when he's clearly a bit crazy. i wish i had hit him. i think i'd feel a lot better.
that's because the murderer is alive.
i'm neither, my lord.
he's a worthless dog, hortensio. i told him to knock at your gate and for the life of me could not get him to do it.
yes, madam, he lies beyond my reach. i wish that no one could avenge my cousin's death except me!
the count is neither sad nor sick nor cheerful nor well, he's just civil, as seville as an orange, with the same jealous-yellow complexion. beatrice puns with the name of a town in spain famous for its oranges.
knock at the gate? oh, for pete's sake! didn't you clearly say "knock," "pound," and "put your fists to work"? now you say it was "knock at the gate"?
we'll have revenge for it. don't worry about that. stop crying. i'll send a man to mantua, where that exiled rogue is living. our man will poison romeo's drink, and romeo will join tybalt in death. and then, i hope, you'll be satisfied.
truly, lady, i think your description is correct, though i swear he has no reason to look like that. here, claudio, i've wooed hero for you, and she's agreed to marry you. i've told her father, and he's given his permission. tell us when you wish to get married, and may god give you joy.
grumio, either leave or shut up. i'm warning you.
i'll never be satisfied with romeo until i see him . . . dead, dead is how my poor heart feels when i think about my poor cousin. madam, if you can find a man to deliver the poison, i'll mix it myself so that romeo will sleep quietly soon after he drinks it. oh, how i hate to hear people say his name and not be able to go after him. i want to take the love i had for my cousin and take it out on the body of the man who killed him.
claudio, take my daughter, and, with her, take my fortunes. the prince has made the match, and may god bless it.
easy, petruchio. i'll vouch for grumio. it's terrible, you two fighting! faithful, funny old grumio! you guys go way back! now, my dear friend, what lucky wind blows you in from verona?
find out the way, and i'll find the right man. but now i have joyful news for you, girl.
speak, claudio, that's your cue.
the wind that scatters young men throughout the world, encouraging them to seek their fortunes some place other than home, where there's little to be found in the way of experience. but to be brief, hortensio, the situation is that my father, antonio, is dead, and i have set off into this crazy world to see if i can marry well and make a good life for myself. i have money in my purse and property at home, so i'm off to see the world.
and it's good to have joy in such a joyless time. what's the news? please tell me.
complete joy makes one speechless; if i were only a little happy, then i could say exactly how much. lady, you are mine and i am yours. for you, i give myself away and i'm ecstatic about the exchange.
petruchio, shall i be frank? i know where you can find a shrewish and unpleasant wife. i doubt you'd thank me in the end, but she's rich, all right, very rich. but you're too good a friend for me to wish her on you.
well, well, you have a careful father, child. he has arranged a sudden day of joy to end your sadness. a day that you did not expect and that i did not seek out.
say something, cousin. or, if you can't say anything, stop his mouth with a kiss and don't let him speak, either.
hortensio, good friends like us can get by on a few words. if you can find a woman rich enough for me, because money is all i look for in a wife, let her be as ugly as flotentius's flotentius was a knight in a medieval poem by join gower; he was forced to marry an extremely ugly woman. the cumaean sibyl was a mythical prophetess who lived forever. xanthippe was socrates notoriously bad-tempered wife. flotentius's love, as old as the sibyl, and as bad-tempered as xanthippe. it wouldn't matter one way or the other. i've come here in search of a rich wife. if i find a rich wife in padua, i'll have found a good wife in padua. 
madam, tell me quickly, what day is that?
truly, lady, you have a merry heart.
(to hortensio) he's certainly frank, isn't he, sir? give him enough money and he'll be happy with a puppet, a paper doll, or a diseased old hag without a tooth in her head. if she's got money, what does it matter?
indeed, my child, at saint peter's church early thursday morning, the gallant, young, and noble gentleman count paris will happily make you a joyful bride.
yes, my lord. i thank my heart, the poor fool, for it keeps away from seriousness. look, my cousin is whispering to claudio that she loves him.
petruchio, since the conversation's gone this far, i may as well carry on with what i mentioned purely as a joke. i can help you find a wife who's rich, young, beautiful, and reared in a manner fit for a gentlewoman. her only flaw, and it's a big one, is that she's unbearable, a total witch, so much so that i wouldn't think of marrying her myself, not even if i were in a worse fix than i am, not for a whole goldmine.
now, i swear by saint peter's church and peter too, he will not make me a joyful bride there. this is a strange rush. how can i marry him, this husband, before he comes to court me? please, tell my father, madam, i won't marry yet. and, when i do marry, i swear, it will be romeo, whom you know i hate, rather than paris. that's really news!
why, you're absolutely right, cousin.
hush, hortensio. you don't know what money can buy. tell me her father's name, that's all i need. i will go after her even if her scolding is as deafening as thunder in an autumn rainstorm.
here comes your father. tell him so yourself, and see how he takes the news.
thank the lord for alliances! so everyone goes off into the world except me, who stays in because i'm sunburned. i should sit in the corner and sing that song, "heigh-ho for a husband!"
her father is baptista minola, a pleasant and courteous gentleman. her name is katherina minola, famous throughout padua for her scolding tongue.
when the sun sets, the air drizzles dew. but at the death of my brother's son, it rains a downpour. what are you, girl? some kind of fountain? why are you still crying? will you cry forever? in one little body you seem like a ship, the sea, and the winds. your eyes, which i call the sea, flow with tears. the ship is your body which is sailing on the salt flood of your tears. the winds are your sighs. your sighs and your tears are raging. unless you calm down, tears and sighs will overwhelm your body and sink your ship. so where do things stand, wife? have you told her our decision?
lady beatrice, i'll get you a husband.
i don't know her, but i know her father and he knew mine well. i won't sleep until i see her, hortensio. so i hope you'll forgive my cutting short this first conversation of ours, unless you want to come with me.
yes, sir, i told her. but she won't agree. she says thank you but refuses. i wish the fool were dead and married to her grave!
i'd rather get a husband from your father. don't you have any brothers like you? your father's sons would make excellent husbands, if only a girl could catch one for herself.
(to hortensio) please, sir, let him go while he's in this mood. lord! if she knew him as well as i do, she'd realize how little effect a scolding has on him. at best she may come up with nine or ten abusive things to call him. that's nothing. once he starts on her, he'll rant and rave on an epic scale. in fact, if she even tries to face him down, he'll throw out a figure of speech that so disfigures her she'll have no more eyes to see with than a cat. you don't know him, sir.
wait! hold on, wife. i don't understand. how can this be? she refuses? isn't she grateful? isn't she proud of such a match? doesn't she realize what a blessing this is? doesn't she realize how unworthy she is of the gentleman we have found to be her bridegroom?
will you take me, my lady?
wait, petruchio, i should go with you. my own "wealth" is in baptista's keeping. his youngest daughter, the beautiful bianca, is the jewel of my life, and he keeps her hidden away from me and other rivals for her hand. because he finds it so incredible, owing to those character deficiencies i mentioned before, that any man will ever come courting katherina, baptista has therefore issued this edict: that none shall be permitted to court bianca until that katherine the shrew finds a husband.
i am not proud of what you have found for me. but i am thankful that you have found it. i can never be proud of what i hate. but i can be thankful for something i hate, if it was meant with love.
no, my lord, unless i could have another husband for the work week. you are too expensive to wear every day. but please, forgive me, your highness. i was born to speak cleverly, not seriously.
"katherine the shrew!" that's the worst thing you can call a young woman.
what is this? what is this fuzzy logic? what is this? i hear you say "proud" and "i thank you," and then "no thank you" and "not proud," you spoiled little girl. you're not really giving me any thanks or showing me any pride. but get yourself ready for thursday. you're going to saint peter's church to marry paris. and if you don't go on your own, i'll drag you there. you disgust me, you little bug! you worthless girl! you pale face!
i'd be more offended if you were silent, for being lively and cheerful suits you best. surely, you must have been born at a happy time.
now my friend petruchio will help me out, presenting me to old baptista as a schoolmaster for bianca well-versed in music. i'll disguise myself in somber robes. in this costume, i'll be able to spend time with her alone, which will give me plenty of opportunity to court her.
shame on you! what, are you crazy?
actually, my lord, my mother cried when she was giving birth to me. but then a star danced in the sky, and that's the moment i was born., kinsmen, i'm off.
oh, very nice! see how the young folks conspire to fool the old folks!
good father, i'm begging you on my knees, be patient and listen to me say just one thing.
niece, will you take care of those things i mentioned?
master, master, look! who are these people?
forget about you, you worthless girl! you disobedient wretch! i'll tell you what. go to church on thursday or never look me in the face again. don't say anything. don't reply. don't talk back to me. (juliet rises) i feel like slapping you. wife, we never thought ourselves blessed that god only gave us this one child. but now i see that this one is one too many. we were cursed when we had her. she disgusts me, the little hussy!
oh, yes, i'm sorry, uncle., if you'll excuse me, your grace.
hush, grumio. it is my rival for bianca. petruchio, let's stand over here awhile.
god in heaven bless her! my lord, you're wrong to berate her like that.
i swear, she's a very good-natured lady.
(to the audience, indicating old gremio) check out this stud! what a heartthrob!
and why, wise lady? you shut up, old woman. go blabber with your gossiping friends.
there's very little about her that's gloomy, my lord. she's only sad when she sleeps, and not even then. hero told me that beatrice has often had dreams about being unhappy, and managed to wake herself from them by laughing.
(to lucentio) oh, all right, i've reviewed the list of books. but listen: i want them very handsomely bound, only books of love, make sure of that in any case. and see that you give her no other lessons. do i make myself clear? over and above what signior baptista pays you, i'll tack on a bonus. take these notes, too. and make sure they're pleasantly perfumed. the lady they are meant for is sweeter than perfume itself. what are you planning to read her?
i've said nothing wrong.
she can't stand to hear about getting a husband.
(speaking as cambio) whatever i read her, you can be sure that i'll plead the case for your love as strongly as if you yourself stood there before her, and perhaps even a bit more successfully than you would do, sir, seeing as you're not a scholar.
oh, for god's sake.
no, not at all. she mocks all her suitors so severely that they drop the suit.
oh, what an excellent thing this learning is!
can't i say something?
she would make a good wife for benedick.
(speaking to the audience) oh, what an asinine thing this moron is!
be quiet, you mumbling fool! say your serious things at lunch with your gossiping friends. we don't need to hear it.
oh, lord, if they were married, they'd drive themselves crazy within a week.
(speaking so that only grumio can hear) silence, boy!
you're getting too angry.
count claudio, when do you plan to go to church and be married?
(speaking so that only grumio can hear) grumio, hush! (to gremio, who can't hear him) god save you, signior gremio.
goddammit! it makes me mad. day and night, hour after hour, all the time, at work, at play, alone, in company, my top priority has always been to find her a husband. now i've provided a husband from a noble family, who is good-looking, young, well-educated. he's full of good qualities. he's the man of any girl's dreams. but this wretched, whimpering fool, like a whining puppet, she looks at this good fortune and answers, "i won't get married. i can't fall in love. i'm too young. please, excuse me." well, if you won't get married, i'll excuse you. eat wherever you want, but you can no longer live under my roof. consider that. think about it. i'm not in the habit of joking. thursday is coming. put your hand on your heart and listen to my advice. if you act like my daughter, i'll marry you to my friend. if you don't act like my daughter, you can beg, starve, and die in the streets. i swear on my soul, i will never take you back or do anything for you. believe me. think about it. i won't break this promise.
tomorrow, my lord. time will move as slowly as an old man until our love receives its proper ceremony.
good to see you, signior hortensio. do you know where i'm going? to baptista minola's house. i promised to look into schoolmasters for miss bianca, and luck has led me to this young man, perfectly suited in learning and fine manners, well read in poetry and other books, all of them good, i assure you.
is there no pity in the sky that can see my sadness? oh, my sweet mother, don't throw me out! delay this marriage for a month, or a week. or, if you don't delay, make my wedding bed in the tomb where tybalt lies.
wait till monday, my dear son, which is only a week away. even that is too short a time to plan things the way i would like.
that's great. and i have met a gentleman who promises to help me find a good music tutor to instruct our lady love. i wouldn't want to fall behind in my devotion to my beloved bianca.
don't talk to me, because i won't say a word. do as you please, because i'm done worrying about you.
(to claudio) oh, don't look so frustrated at having to wait so long. i promise you, claudio, the time will go by quickly. while we're waiting for the wedding, i'm going to take on an impossible task: to make signior benedick and the lady beatrice fall in love with each other. i aim to see them matched, and with all of your help, i'm sure we can make it happen.
my beloved, as my actions will prove.
oh god!, oh nurse, how can this be stopped? my husband is alive on earth, my vows of marriage are in heaven. how can i bring those promises back down to earth, unless my husband sends them back down to me by dying and going to heaven? give me comfort. give me advice. oh no! oh no! why does heaven play tricks on someone as weak as me? what do you say? don't you have one word of joy? give me some comfort, nurse.
my lord, i will help you, even if it means i have to stay awake for ten nights straight.
(speaking to the audience) as his moneybags will prove.
this is what i have to say: romeo has been banished. and it's a sure thing that he will never come back to challenge you. if he does come back, he'll have to sneak back undercover. then, since things are the way they are, i think the best thing to do is to marry the count. oh, he's a lovely gentleman! romeo's a dishcloth compared to him. madam, an eagle does not have eyes as green, as quick, and as fair as the eyes of paris. curse my very heart, but i think you should be happy in this second marriage, because it's better than your first. even if it's not better, your first marriage is over. or if romeo is as good as paris, romeo doesn't live here, so you don't get to enjoy him.
me too, my lord.
gremio, this is no time to compete over how deeply we love bianca. be nice and listen to me a moment, and i'll give you a piece of news that's equally good for both of us.
are you speaking from your heart?
and you, sweet hero?
(presenting petruchio) here is a gentleman i happened to meet who, if we can come to an arrangement that would be to his liking, is willing to undertake to woo fierce katherine, yes, even willing to marry her, if the price is right.
i speak from my heart and from my soul too. if not, curse them both.
i'll do any decent thing, my lord, to help my cousin get a good husband.
that's good, if he'll really do it. have you told him all her faults, hortensio?
amen!
and benedick is not the worst husband i can think of. this much i can say about him: he is well-born, has proven his bravery in battle, and has established his good character. hero, i'll show you how to influence your cousin so she falls in love with benedick. we men will trick benedick so that, despite his quick wit and his queasiness about marriage, he will fall in love with her. if we can do this, then we will steal cupid's glory. we will be the supreme love gods! come inside with me, and i will tell you my plan.
i know she is a hateful, brawling scold. if that's all, gentlemen, i see no problem.
what?
it's arranged. the count claudio will marry leonato's daughter.
no? tell me, friend. where are you from?
well, you have given me great comfort. go inside and tell my mother that i'm gone. i made my father angry, so i went to friar lawrence's cell to confess and be forgiven.
yes, my lord, but i can spoil it.
born in verona. i'm old antonio's son. my father's dead, and his fortune is mine now. i hope to see good days, and many of them.
alright, i will. this is a good idea.
any obstacle or barrier to claudio's happiness will be like medicine to me. i hate him so much it makes me sick, and whoever can ruin his happiness will make me happy. how will you wreck this marriage?
sir, such a life with such a wife is unlikely! but if you have the stomach for it, you'll have all the help from me you need. do you really mean to go after this wildcat?
that damned old lady! oh, that most wicked fiend! is it a worse sin for her to want me to break my vows or for her to say bad things about my husband after she praised him so many times before? away with you and your advice, nurse. from now on, i will never tell you what i feel in my heart. i'm going to the friar to find out his solution. if everything else fails, at least i have the power to take my own life.
i can only do it by lying, my lord, but i can do it so secretly that no one will suspect me.
do i mean to go on breathing?
on thursday, sir? that's very soon.
quickly, tell me how.
he'll woo her or i'll hang her.
that's how my future father-in-law capulet wants it, and i'm not dragging my feet.
i think it was a year ago that i told you how much margaret, hero's servant woman, likes me.
why did i come here if not for that? do you think a little burst of noise can intimidate me, i, who have heard lions roar? i, who have survived storms at sea where the winds raged like wild animals? i, who have heard the rumble of guns in battle, and thunder in the sky (heaven's version of artillery).
you say you don't know what the girl thinks. that's a rocky road to be riding. i don't like it.
i remember.
have i not stood in the middle of a battle, with loud calls to arms, horses neighing, and trumpets sounding all around me? and you worry how i'll react to a woman's tongue, which isn't even as loud as the pop! of a chestnut roasting in some farmer's oven? please. scare children with your bugaboos.
she's grieving too much over the death of tybalt. so i haven't had the chance to talk to her about love. romantic love doesn't happen when people are in mourning. now, sir, her father thinks it's dangerous that she allows herself to become so sad. he's being smart by rushing our marriage to stop her from crying. she cries too much by herself. if she had someone to be with her, she would stop crying. now you know the reason for the rush.
i can arrange it so that at some indecent hour of the night, she looks out hero's bedroom window.
because he's not afraid of them.
(to himself) i wish i didn't know the reason why the marriage should be slowed down. look, sir, here comes the lady walking toward my cell.
how will that kill this marriage?
listen, hortensio. i think this gentleman's arrival could be most fortunate, both for himself and for us.
i'm happy to meet you, my lady and my wife.
that part is up to you. go to the prince, your brother, and tell him that he has done a terrible thing by matching the renowned claudio, whom you greatly admire, with such a tainted whore as hero.
i promised him that we would all chip in and take care of the wooing expenses, whatever they come to.
that might be the case sir, after i'm married.
what will be my evidence?
absolutely, so long as he gets the girl.
that "may be" must be, love, on thursday.
evidence enough to deceive the prince, anger claudio, ruin hero, and kill leonato. is there anything else you wish?
i wish i could be as certain of a good dinner.
what must be will be.
that's all i want, and i'll do anything to accomplish it.
(speaking as lucentio) greetings, gentlemen. may i be so bold as to ask the fastest way to signior baptista minola's house?
that is a certain truth.
find a time to speak with don pedro and claudio alone. tell them you know that hero loves me. pretend to be very concerned about both the prince, who has compromised his honor by making the match, and claudio, whose reputation will be ruined by this woman who's pretending to be a virgin. of course, they won't believe you without proof. tell them you've seen the two of us at hero's bedroom window, and then bring them to see for themselves on the night before the wedding. i'll arrange it so that hero is away for the night, so what they'll actually see is margaret and me at the window, calling each other "hero" and "claudio." some editors assume "claudio" is an error, and change it to "borachio." "claudio." it'll be such blatant evidence of hero's disloyalty that claudio's jealousy will quickly turn to certainty, and the wedding will be instantly called off.
the old man with the two pretty daughters? is that the man you want?
have you come to make confession to this father?
make the arrangements, and i'll do it. do this carefully, and i will reward you with a thousand gold coins.
(speaking as lucentio) the very one, biondello.
if i answered that question, i'd be making confession to you.
if you make the accusation convincingly, then my cunning won't fail me.
pardon, sir, i hope you're not looking for the daughter, 
don't deny to him that you love me.
i'll go now to find out the date of the wedding.
(speaking as lucentio) i might be looking for both the daughter and her father. what's it to you?
i'll confess to you that i love him.
boy!
but not the woman who scolds, anyway, i hope.
you will also confess, i'm sure, that you love me.
yes signior?
(speaking as lucentio) i'm not a fan of scolds, my friend. come, biondello.
if i do so, it will mean more if i say it behind your back than if i say it to your face.
in my bedroom window there is a book. go get it and bring it to me here in the orchard.
(speaking quietly) nice work, tranio!
you poor soul, your face has suffered many tears.
i'm already here, sir.
sir, a word before you go. are you a suitor to the girl we speak of, yes or no?
the tears haven't done much because my face looked bad enough before i started to cry.
i see that you are here, but i'd like you to go there and then come back again. the boy means, "it\'s as good as done," but benedick plays as if he takes the boy literally.
what if i am? is there a problem?
you're treating your face even worse by saying that.
i'm amazed that a man, after watching romance turn another man into a fool and laughing at that man, can turn right around and become the thing he's scorned. that's the kind of man claudio is. i knew him when he listened to nothing but the military drum and fife; now he would rather hear the sweet and refined music of the tabor and pipe. i knew him when he would've walked ten miles to see a well-crafted suit of armor; now he spends ten nights awake in his room designing himself a fancy new jacket. he used to speak plainly and to the point, like an honorable man and soldier; now his speech is elaborate and flowery. his words are like a miraculous banquet, full of strange new dishes. will i be changed like that, and see the world through a lover's eyes? i'm not sure, but i don't think so.
not if you go away, there isn't.
what i say isn't slander, sir. it's the truth. and what i said, i said to my face.
i can't promise that love won't transform me, but i can promise you this: until i truly fall in love, a woman will never make me act like such a fool. a beautiful woman comes along, but i'm unmoved. a wise woman turns up, but i'm unmoved. a virtuous woman appears, but i'm unmoved. i refuse to fall in love until all three qualities unite in a single woman. she must be rich, certainly, and smart, or i'll have nothing to do with her. she has to be virtuous, or i'll never bid on her; beautiful, or i won't bother to look at her. mild-mannered, or else she should stay away from me. noble, or i won't have her even if she's an angel. she must be well spoken, an excellent musician, and her hair should be, well, i suppose the color doesn't matter. ha! look, it's the prince and mr. love. i'll hide in the arbor.
(speaking as lucentio) well, it seems to me that the streets are as much mine as yours.
your face is mine, and you have slandered it.
well, should we hear some music?
but she isn't.
that may be the case, because my face doesn't belong to me., do you have time for me now, father, or should i come to you at evening mass?
yes, my lord. listen to how quiet the evening is, as if it's purposefully setting the stage for a song.
and why is that, please?
i have time for you now, my sad daughter. (to paris) my lord, we must ask you to leave us alone.
(speaking so that only claudiocan hear) do you see where benedick is hiding?
because, if you must know, she's been chosen by signior gremio.
god forbid that i should prevent sacred devotion! juliet, i will wake you early on thursday. (kissing her) until then, good-bye, and keep this holy kiss.
(speaking so that only don pedrocan hear) yes, very well, my lord. once the music has ended, we'll give him more than he bargained for.
because she's been chosen by signior hortensio.
oh, shut the door, and after you shut it, come over here and weep with me. this mess is beyond hope, beyond cure, beyond help!
come on, balthasar, let's hear that song again.
wait a minute, gentlemen. be good enough to hear me out. baptista is a noble gentleman, one to whom my father is not completely unknown, and lovely as his daughter is, she is entitled to any number of suitors, myself among them.
oh, juliet, i already know about your sad situation. it's a problem too hard for me to solve. i hear that you must marry this count on thursday, and that nothing can delay it.
oh, my good lord, don't make me insult music again with my awful singing.
the beautiful helen of troy had a thousand suitors. let bianca have one more, anyway, she's got one. lucentio shall join the ranks, even if paris himself comes to woo her.
don't tell me that you've heard about this marriage, friar, unless you can tell me how to prevent it. if you who are so wise can't help, please be kind enough to call my solution wise. (she shows him a knife) and i'll solve the problem now with this knife. god joined my heart to romeo's. you joined our hands. and before i, who was married to romeo by you, am married to another man, i'll kill myself. you are wise and you have so much experience. give me some advice about the current situation. or watch. caught between these two difficulties, i'll act like a judge with my bloody knife. i will truly and honorably resolve the situation that you can't fix, despite your experience and education. don't wait long to speak. i want to die if what you say isn't another solution.
you can tell an artist is excellent when he denies his own perfection. please, sing for us; don't make me woo you anymore!
this fellow will out-talk us all.
hold on, daughter, i see some hope. but we must act boldly because the situation is so desperate. if you've made up your mind to kill yourself instead of marrying count paris, then you'll probably be willing to try something like death to solve this shameful problem. you can wrestle with death to escape from shame. and if you dare to do it, i'll give you the solution.
since you put it that way, i'll sing. you're like a suitor who courts a woman insincerely, swearing that he loves her even though he really doesn't find her worthy.
(speaking as cambio) well, let him. he'll talk himself out, soon.
oh, you can tell me to jump off the battle posts of any tower, or to walk down the crime-ridden streets of a slum. or tell me to sit in a field full of poisonous snakes. chain me up with wild bears. hide me every night in a morgue full of dead bodies with wet, smelly flesh and skulls without jawbones. or tell me to climb down into a freshly dug grave, and hide me with a dead man in his tomb. all those ideas make me tremble when i hear them named. but i will do them without fear or dread in order to be a pure wife to my sweet love.
come on, please sing. if you'd like to continue this discussion, at least do so with music.
hortensio, what's all this about?
hold on, then. go home, be cheerful, and tell them you agree to marry paris. tomorrow is wednesday. tomorrow night make sure that you are alone. don't let the nurse stay with you in your bedroom. (showing her a vial) when you're in bed, take this vial, mix its contents with liquor, and drink. then a cold, sleep-inducing drug will run through your veins, and your pulse will stop. your flesh will be cold, and you'll stop breathing. the red in your lips and your cheeks will turn pale, and your eyes will shut. it will seem like you're dead. you won't be able to move, and your body will be stiff like a corpse. you'll remain in this deathlike state for forty-two hours, and then you'll wake up as if from a pleasant sleep. now, when the bridegroom comes to get you out of bed on thursday morning, you'll seem dead. then, as tradition demands, you'll be dressed up in your best clothes, put in an open coffin, and carried to the capulet family tomb. meanwhile, i'll send romeo word of our plan. he'll come here, and we'll keep a watch for when you wake up. that night, romeo will take you away to mantua. this plan will free you from the shameful situation that troubles you now as long as you don't change your mind, or become scared like a silly woman and ruin your brave effort.
just know this before i begin: i can't play a single note that's worthy of note.
(to tranio) forgive me for asking, but have you ever actually seen baptista's daughter?
give me the vial. give it to me! don't talk to me about fear.
listen to him speaking in quarter notes! get on with your note-playing now.
(speaking as lucentio) no, but i hear he has two, the one as famous for her scolding tongue as the other is for her modesty and beauty.
(giving her the vial) now go along on your way. be strong and successful in this decision. i'll send a friar quickly to mantua with my letter for romeo.
(to himself) that music must be divine, because their souls have been captivated. isn't it strange that strings made of sheep's guts are capable of drawing men's souls out of their bodies? well, i'd rather listen to a plain old hunting horn than this music, when all is said and done.
the first one's mine, so hands off!
love will give me strength, and strength will help me accomplish this plan. goodbye, dear father.
(singing) don't cry anymore, ladies, don't cry anymore men have always been deceivers, one foot on a ship and one on the shore, never devoted to anything. so don't cry like that, just let them go and be happy and carefree forever, turning all your sad sounds around when you sing "hey, nonny nonny" instead. don't sing more sad songs about being down in the dumps for men have been committing this kind of fraud ever since the first summer trees had leaves. so don't cry like that, just let them go and be happy and carefree forever, turning all your sad sounds around when you sing "hey, nonny nonny" instead.
yes, leave that labor to great hercules, it's worse than the previous twelve put together.
(giving the first servingman a piece of paper) invite all the guests on this list.
that's a good song.
(to tranio) sir, let me be clear. as far as the youngest daughter, the one you were asking about, is concerned, the father refuses any suitors access to her. he will not promise her to any man until the elder sister is married. then and only then will the younger be free to marry.
(to second servingman) boy, go hire twenty skilled cooks.
and a bad singer, my lord.
(as lucentio) if that's the case, then you're the man to help us, me along with the rest. and if you carry it off and break the ice, win the older and make the younger accessible to us, whoever winds up with her will not be such a boor as to be ungrateful, i'm sure.
you won't get any bad cooks from me. i'll test them by making them lick their fingers.
ha! no, no, really, your voice is good enough in a pinch.
sir, that's well said and well thought out. now, since you count yourself among bianca's suitors, you must, as we already have, pay this gentlemen to whom we are all so indebted.
how can you test them like that?
(to himself) if a dog had howled like that, i would have hung it. i hope his horrible singing doesn't have any ill effects. i would've rather listened to the night raven screech, even if the bird's noise does give me the plague, as they say it will.
(speaking as lucentio) i'll ante up, certainly! and on that note, let's all pass the time this afternoon drinking rounds to our mistress's health and following the example of legal adversaries, who fight tooth and nail in court but eat and drink as friends.
easy, sir. it's a bad cook who can't lick his own fingers. so the cooks who can't lick their fingers aren't hired.
yes, do you hear me, balthasar? please, get some excellent music, because tomorrow we want to serenade lady hero at her bedroom window.
an excellent motion. let's go.
go, get out of here.
i'll do the best i can, my lord.
i second that motion a motion is a legal maneuver in court. motion . so be it. petruchio, i'm buying.
we're unprepared for this wedding celebration. (to the nurse) what, has my daughter gone to see friar lawrence?
please do. goodbye.
dear sister, it's unfair to me, and unfair to yourself, to turn me into a slave. that i won't stand for. but if you want my things, untie my hands and i'll give them to you myself, everything, even down to my slip. or anything else you order me to do. i know i should obey my elders.
yes, that's true.
come here, leonato. what was it that you told me today, that your niece beatrice was in love with signior benedick?
what i want is for you to tell me which of your suitors you like best. and don't lie.
well, there's a chance he may do her some good. she's a stubborn little brat.
oh yes. (speaking so that only don pedro can hear) go on, keep walking: our prey is in sight., i never thought that woman would love any man.
i swear, dear sister, i have not yet encountered that special face i might prefer to any other.
look, she's come home from confession with a happy look on her face.
i didn't, either. but how wonderful that she should be so fond of signior benedick, whom she has always appeared to hate.
you lying brat. it's hortensio, isn't it?
so, my headstrong daughter, where have you been?
(to himself) is it possible? is that the way the wind is blowing?
if you want him, dear sister, he's yours. i swear i'll woo him for you myself.
i went somewhere where i learned that being disobedient to my father is a sin. holy father lawrence instructed me to fall on my knees and beg your forgiveness. (she kneels down) forgive me, i beg you. from now on i'll do whatever you say.
really, my lord, i don't know what to make of it, but she loves him with such a passion that it's past all understanding.
oh, i see. you're more interested in money. you'll live in luxury with gremio.
send for the count. go tell him about this. i'll make this wedding happen tomorrow morning.
maybe she's just pretending.
is it because of him that you envy me? you must be kidding! and now i see that you've been joking all the while. please, kate, untie my hands.
i met the young man at lawrence's cell. i treated him with the proper love, as well as i could, while still being modest.
yes, that's quite likely.
if that's a joke, i guess the rest was, too.
well, i'm glad about this. this is good. stand up.
oh god! pretending? no one has ever faked passion as skillfully as this, then.
what in the world is going on! (to katherine) young lady, where do you get the nerve!, (to bianca) get behind me, bianca., poor girl, she's hysterical!, go do some sewing. don't even talk to her. (to katherine) you monstrous, good-for-nothing fiend! why would you want to hurt your sister? she never did you any harm! when has she spoken even one cross word to you?
this is the way it should be. i want to see the count. yes, alright, go, i say, and bring him here. now, before god, our whole city owes this friar a great debt.
why, what symptoms of love does she exhibit?
she mocks me with her silence, and i'll get my revenge on her.
nurse, will you come with me to my closet and help me pick out the clothes and the jewelry i'll need to wear tomorrow?
(speaking so that only leonatocan hear) bait the hook well; this fish is going to bite.
what, in my presence? how dare you!, bianca, go inside.
no, not until thursday. there's plenty of time.
what symptoms, my lord? she will have a seat, you heard my daughter tell you how.
you mean you don't even want to hear my side? of course! she's your treasure. she must have a husband and i must dance barefoot on her wedding day. you like her best and so i'll die an old maid. don't talk to me. i'll just go cry myself sick and think of some way to get back at all of you.
go, nurse, go with her. we'll have the wedding at the church tomorrow.
yes, she did tell us.
has any man ever had to put up with what i do? now what?
our supplies will be short for the party. it's already almost night.
please, please tell me! this is amazing. i would have thought she was invincible against any assault of love.
good morning, neighbor baptista.
don't worry, i will set things in motion. and everything will be alright, i promise you, wife. you should go to juliet and dress her up. i'm not going to bed tonight. leave me alone. i'll pretend to be the housewife for once.
i would have sworn that, too, my lord, especially against benedick.
good morning, neighbor gremio. greetings, gentlemen.
hey! what? they're all gone? well, i will walk by myself to count paris to get him ready for tomorrow. my heart is wonderfully happy because this troubled girl has been taken back and now will be married.
(to himself) i would take this as a joke if the old man weren't saying it. mischief surely can't be hiding in such a respectable man.
and to you, good sir. tell me, don't you have a virtuous and lovely daughter named katherina?
yes, those are the best clothes. but, gentle nurse, please leave me alone tonight. i have to say a lot of prayers to make the heavens bless me. you know that my life is troubled and full of sin.
(speaking so that only don pedrocan hear) we've infected him! keep it up.
i have a daughter named katherina, sir.
what, are you busy? do you need my help?
has she told benedick how she feels?
(to petruchio) you are too blunt. you're supposed to work up to it.
no, madam, we've figured out the best things for me to wear tomorrow at the ceremony. so if it's okay with you, i'd like to be left alone now. let the nurse sit up with you tonight. i'm sure you have your hands full preparing for the sudden festivities.
no, and she swears she never will. that's what's driving her crazy.
please, signior gremio. allow me to continue., i am a gentleman of verona, sir, who, hearing of your daughter's beauty and wit, her friendly disposition and bashful modesty, her uncommon virtues and her mild behavior, have taken the liberty of presenting myself as a guest at your house in the hope of seeing for myself if what i've heard is true. and, as the price of admission for being received by you, i here present you with a servant of mine. (he presents hortensio, disguised as litio). he is expert in the fields of music and mathematics. i thought he might instruct her in those branches of knowledge, of which she is, i gather, no beginner. be good enough to accept this gift, i'll be offended if you don't. his name is litio, and he comes from mantua.
good night. go to bed and get some rest. i'm sure you need it.
it's true, hero says so. beatrice asks, "does it make any sense to write and tell him i love him when i have always treated him with scorn?"
you and he are both welcome, sir. as for my daughter katherine, this much i know: she's not for you, more's the pity.
good-bye. only god knows when we'll meet again. there is a slight cold fear cutting through my veins. it almost freezes the heat of life. i'll call them back here to comfort me. nurse!, oh, what good would she do here? in my desperate situation, i have to act alone.
she says this as she begins to write the letter. she'll be getting up twenty times in a night, sitting there in her slip until she's written a page. my daughter told me everything.
i see you don't intend to part with her, or perhaps you don't like my company.
alright, here's the vial. what if this mixture doesn't work at all? will i be married tomorrow morning? no, no, this knife will stop it. lie down right there. (she lays down the knife) what if the friar mixed the potion to kill me? is he worried that he will be disgraced if i marry paris after he married me to romeo? i'm afraid that it's poison. and yet, it shouldn't be poison because he is a trustworthy holy man. what if, when i am put in the tomb, i wake up before romeo comes to save me? that's a frightening idea. won't i suffocate in the tomb? there's no healthy air to breathe in there. will i die of suffocation before romeo comes? or if i live, i'll be surrounded by death and darkness. it will be terrible. there will be bones hundreds of years old in that tomb, my ancestors' bones. tybalt's body will be in there, freshly entombed, and his corpse will be rotting. they say that during the night the spirits are in tombs. oh no, oh no. i'll wake up and smell awful odors. i'll hear screams that would drive people crazy.
now that you speak of paper, i remember a funny story of hero's.
don't misunderstand me, sir. i'm just stating the facts as i see them. where are you from? what's your name?
if i wake up too early, won't i go insane with all these horrible, frightening things around me, start playing with my ancestors' bones, and pull tybalt's corpse out of his death shroud? will i grab one of my dead ancestor's bones and bash in my own skull? oh, look! i think i see my cousin tybalt's ghost. he's looking for romeo because romeo killed him with his sword. wait, tybalt, wait! romeo, romeo, romeo! here's a drink. i drink to you.
oh, you mean when beatrice writes a letter and hero sees that it has "benedick" and "beatrice" written all over it?
my name is petruchio, son of antonio, a man well known throughout italy.
wait. take these keys and get more spices, nurse.
yes, that's the one.
i know him well. you are welcome for his sake.
they're calling for dates and quinces in the pastry kitchen.
oh, she tears that letter into a thousand small pieces and berates herself for being so forward as to write a letter to a man she knows would mock her. "i compare him," she says, "to myself, and i know that i would mock him if he wrote me such a letter. yes, even though i love him, i would mock him."
with all due respect, petruchio, give someone else a chance to speak. you're so aggressive!
come on, wake up, wake up, wake up! the second cock crowed. the curfew-bell rang. it's three o'clock. go get the baked meats, good angelica. don't worry about the cost.
then she falls down to her knees, weeps, sobs, beats her breast, tears her hair, prays, and curses: "oh sweet benedick! god give me patience!"
forgive me, signior gremio, but i'm anxious to get things moving.
go, you old housewife, go. go to bed, dear. you'll be sick tomorrow because you've stayed up all night.
she did indeed, my daughter says so. she worries that beatrice is so overwrought that she might do herself harm someday. it's true.
no doubt, but you may be going about it the wrong way, neighbor, this gift is very gracious, i'm sure. i myself, who am more indebted to you than anyone, have brought you this young scholar (presenting lucentio, disguised as cambio) who has long studied at rheims rheims was the site of a renowned university in france. rheims . he is as expert in greek, latin, and other languages as that other man is in music and mathematics. his name is cambio. please accept his services.
no, not at all. what? i've stayed up all night many times before for less important matters, and i've never gotten sick.
if she won't tell benedick, someone else should.
many thanks, signior gremio. welcome, good cambio. (to tranio as lucentio) as for you, sir, you would appear to be a stranger. may i be so bold as to ask your reason for coming?
yes, you've been a ladies' man in your time. but i'll make sure you don't stay up any later now.
and what would that accomplish? he'll just turn it into a joke and torment the poor woman even more.
(as lucentio) pardon me, sir, the boldness is all mine in seeking to court your fair and virtuous daughter, bianca. i am indeed a stranger in this city. i'm aware of your firm decision regarding her older sister. i only ask that when you know who my parents are, i may be made as welcome as her other suitors and given the same freedom and favor. my contribution toward the education of your daughters is a lute and this small package of greek and latin books. (biondello brings the gifts forward) you would add to their value by accepting them.
a jealous woman, a jealous woman!
if he did that, it would be a charitable deed to hang him. she's an excellent, sweet woman, and there's no doubt that she is virtuous.
your name is lucentio, you say. of what city, may i ask?
now, fellow, what have you got there?
and she is very smart.
(as lucentio) of pisa, sir, son of vincentio.
things for the cook, sir. but i don't know what they are.
except for the fact that she loves benedick.
a man of great influence. i know him well by reputation. you are very welcome here, sir. (to hortensio as litio) you take the lute (to lucentio as cambio), and you, the set of books. i'll send you to your pupils right away. you there in the house!
hurry up, hurry up.
oh, my lord, when wisdom and passion are in one body, it's ten to one that the passion will win. i am sorry for her, as i should be, since i am both her uncle and her guardian.
boy, take these gentlemen to my daughters, and tell them both they are to be their teachers and to be courteous to them.
(to second servingman) you, fetch logs that are drier than these. call peter, he'll show you where they are.
i wish she were in love with me instead. i would have thrown away all other considerations and made her my wife. please, tell benedick about her feelings and see what he has to say.
let's take a little walk in the orchard before dinner. you are all most welcome here; please make yourselves at home.
i'm smart enough to find the logs myself without bothering peter.
is that a good idea, do you think?
signior baptista, i'm actually in a bit of a hurry. i can't make this wooing into a daily thing. you knew my father well; therefore, you know me, the sole heir to all his property and possessions, which i have added to rather than depleted. so, tell me, assuming i win your daughter's love, what dowry would she bring to the marriage?
right, and well said. that guy's funny. he's got a head full of logs. goodness, it's daylight. the count will be here soon with music. at least he said he would. i hear him coming near.
hero thinks beatrice will surely die, for she says she'll die if he doesn't love her, and that she'll die before she tells him, and she'll die if he woos her and she's made to hold back even one of her usual insults.
twenty thousand crowns now, and half my lands after my death.
nurse! wife! what? hey, nurse!
she's probably right. if she offers him her love, it's very possible that he'll scorn it, since, as we all know, he tends to be contemptuous.
fair enough. and on my side, i'll guarantee that if i die before she does, she shall inherit all my land and the rent from any property i own. let's have explicit contracts drawn up to ensure that both sides keep their promises.
go wake juliet. go and get her dressed. i'll go and chat with paris. hey, hurry up, hurry up! the bridegroom is already here. hurry up, i say.
he's a very proper man.
certainly, as soon as you've gotten the most important thing, her love. that counts for everything.
mistress! hey, mistress! juliet! i bet she's fast asleep. hey, lamb! hey, lady! hey, you lazy bones! hey, love, i say! madam! sweetheart! hey, bride! what, you don't say a word? you take your beauty sleep now. get yourself a week's worth of sleep. tomorrow night, i bet, count paris won't let you get much rest. god forgive me. alright, and amen. how sound asleep she is! i must wake her up. madam, madam, madam! yes, let the count take you in your bed. he'll wake you up, i bet. won't he? (she opens the bed curtains) what? you're still dressed in all your clothes. but you're still asleep. i must wake you up. lady! lady! lady! oh no, oh no! help, help! my lady's dead! oh curse the day that i was born! ho! get me some brandy! my lord! my lady!
indeed, he is good-looking and carries himself well.
oh, that's nothing, believe me, sir. i'm as commanding as she is proud, and when two raging fires meet, they end up consuming the very thing that kindled them. blow on a fire and all you do is fan the flames. but a great gust of wind will blow the fire out completely. i'm that great gust to her fire. i'm rough, and i don't woo like a little boy.
what's all the noise in here?
and i swear to god he's very smart.
well, good luck! i hope you're successful. but prepare yourself for some unpleasantness.
oh, sad day!
he does indeed show sparks of something like wit.
i'll be completely prepared. mountains don't tremble, however much the wind may blow!
what is the matter?
and i believe him to be brave.
gracious! why so pale, my friend?
look, look! oh, what a sad day!
as brave as hector hector was a trojan warrior, legendary for his bravery. hector , surely. and you could say that he is wise in managing fights, for he either avoids them discreetly or enters into them timidly.
(as litio) i would have to say from fear.
oh my, oh my! my child, my reason for living, wake up, look up, or i'll die with you! help, help! call for help.
if he fears god, he must necessarily keep the peace. if he breaks the peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling.
will my daughter be a good musician, do you think?
for shame, bring juliet out here. her bridegroom is here.
and he'll do that, because he's a god-fearing man, even though his joking makes it seem otherwise. well, i'm sorry for your niece. should we go find benedick and tell him about beatrice's love?
i think she'll be a better soldier. she may be good with firearms. never lutes.
she's dead, deceased, she's dead. curse the day!
no, don't ever tell him, my lord. let her get over it, with the help of good advice.
you don't think you can teach her?
curse the day! she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
no, that's impossible. her heart will break first.
no, but she's taught me a thing or two! all i said was that she was using the wrong frets and tried to adjust her fingering. and she jumps up and says, "frets? i'll give you frets!" with that, she clobbers me with the lute so that my head goes right through,
no! let me see her. oh no! she's cold. her blood has stopped, and her joints are stiff. she's been dead for some time. she's dead, like a beautiful flower, killed by an unseasonable frost.
well, we'll hear more about it from your daughter. let it sit for a while. i am very fond of benedick, and i just wish he would take a look at himself and realize how unfairly he's treating this good woman.
and there i am, dazed, strings around my neck, looking through the sound hole like i was in the stocks, while she calls me "worthless fiddler," "twanging twerp," and twenty more hateful names, as though she'd prepared for me by composing a long list of insults to use on my behalf.
oh, sad day!
my lord, will you come with me? dinner is ready.
i like this girl! she has real character! now i want her more than ever. i can't wait to meet her!
oh, this is a painful time!
(speaking so that only don pedroand leonato can hear) if he doesn't fall in love with her now, i'll never trust my intuition again.
(to hortensio, disguised as litio) all right, come with me. don't be discouraged. continue your lessons with my younger daughter. she's quick to learn and responsive. signior petruchio, will you come with us, or shall i send my daughter kate to you?
death, which has taken her away to make me cry, now ties up my tongue and won't let me speak.
(speaking so that only leonatocan hear) the same trap must be set for her; that's your daughter's and servants' job. the real fun will be when they both believe the other to be in love, without any of it being true. i can't wait to watch that drama, it'll be a pantomime, since both of them will be totally speechless! let's send beatrice to call benedick in to dinner
please do.
come, is the bride ready to go to church?
(coming forward) this can't be a trick. they spoke with great seriousness, and they have hero's testimony. they seem to pity the lady. it seems her love is stretched to the limit. she loves me? well, that love must be returned! i hear how i'm criticized. they say i'll be smug if i find out she loves me. they also say she'd rather die than give any sign of her feelings. i never thought i'd marry. i can't appear to be proud. people who discover their faults and can then change them are lucky indeed. they say the lady is beautiful; it's true, i've seen it myself. and virtuous; that's true, i can't disprove that. and smart, except that she loves me. that may not be any proof of her intelligence, but i swear it won't be evidence of her stupidity, for i'm going to be horribly in love with her! people might tease me here and there, since i attacked marriage for so long. but don't tastes change? a man can love a dish when he is young that he hates when he turns old. will quips and clever remarks and scathing written words keep a man from getting what his heart desires? no! the world needs to be populated. when i said that i'd die as a bachelor, i just meant that i didn't think i'd live until i got married. here comes beatrice. by god! she's a beautiful lady. i think i sense some signs of love in her.
i'll wait for her here and when she comes i'll take a novel approach with her. if she rants, i'll tell her that she sings as sweetly as a nightingale. if she glares, i'll say her brow is as clear as roses newly washed with morning dew. if she is silent and won't speak at all, i'll praise her chattiness and say she speaks with piercing eloquence. if she orders me to go, i'll thank her warmly as if she'd just offered to put me up for a week. if she refuses my proposal, i'll tell her how much i'm looking forward to the announcement and the wedding. but here she comes. here goes!
she's ready to go, but she'll never return. (to paris) oh son! on the night before your wedding day, death has taken your wife. there she lies. she was a flower, but death deflowered her.
against my will, i've been told to bring you in to dinner.
good morning, kate, for i hear that's what you're called.
death is my son-in-law. death is my heir. my daughter married death. i will die and leave death everything. life, wealth, everything belongs to death.
lovely beatrice, i thank you for taking the pains to tell me that.
is that what you've heard? then you'd better get your ears checked. i am called katherine by those who have any business using my name.
have i waited so long to see this morning, only to see this?
i didn't take any more pains bringing this message than you took pains in thanking me. if the job had been painful, i would not have come.
liar. in fact, you're called kate, plain kate, and pretty kate, and sometimes kate the shrew. but it's definitely kate, the prettiest kate in the world, katie, kitty, kat-woman, the kate-ster, and so, kate, here's my pitch: that having heard your charming disposition praised, not to mention your beauty and your virtues, though none of them as richly as you deserve, i find myself driven to propose. i want you for my wife.
accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day! this is the most miserable hour of all time! i had only one child, one poor child, one poor and loving child, the one thing i had to rejoice and comfort myself, and cruel death has stolen it from me!
so you took pleasure in bringing me this message?
"driven?" really? well, let whoever drove you here drive you back again. i had you figured for a piece of furniture.
oh pain! oh painful, painful, painful day! the saddest day, most painful day that i ever, ever did behold! oh day! oh day! oh day! oh hateful day! there has never been so black a day as today. oh painful day, oh painful day!
yes, as much pleasure as one might take in choking a bird at knifepoint. you don't want to eat, sir? goodbye, then.
what do you mean by "furniture"?
she was tricked, divorced, wronged, spited, killed! death, the most despicable thing, tricked her. cruel, cruel death killed her. oh love! oh life! there is no life, but my love is dead!
ha! "against my will, i've been told to bring you in to dinner." there's a double meaning in that. "i didn't take any more pains bringing this message than you took pains in thanking me." that's like saying, "any thing i do for you is as easy as saying 'thank you.'" if this doesn't move me to take pity on her, i'm a horrible person. if i don't love her, i'm completely hard-hearted according to anti-semitic stereotypes, jews were supposed to be hard-hearted and lacking a sense of charity. hard-hearted . i will go get her picture.
a nice stool.
despised, distressed, hated, martyred, killed! why did this have to happen now? why did death have to ruin our wedding? oh child! oh child! my soul and not my child! you are dead! oh no! my child is dead. my child will be buried, and so will my joys.
margaret, run into the sitting room. you'll find beatrice there, talking to claudio and the prince. whisper to her that ursula and i are walking in the orchard and that we're talking all about her. tell her you heard us, and that she should sneak into the arbor where the crisscrossing branches overhead keep the honeysuckles out of the sun. (the same honeysuckles that were once ripened in the sun; they're like courtiers who rise because the king favors them, then plot to overthrow his majesty.) she can hide there and eavesdrop on our conversation. this is your job. do it well, and then leave us.
you're right, actually. come sit on me.
be quiet, for shame! the cure for confusion is not yelling and screaming. you had this child with the help of heaven. now heaven has her.
i'll make her come right away, i promise you.
asses are made for bearing, and so are you.
she is in a better place. you could not prevent her from dying someday, but heaven will give her eternal life. the most you hope for was for her to marry wealthy and rise up the social ladder, that was your idea of heaven. and now you cry, even though she has risen up above the clouds, as high as heaven itself? oh, in this love, you love your child so badly, that you go mad, even though she is in heaven. it is best to marry well and die young, better than to be married for a long time. dry up your tears, and put your rosemary on this beautiful corpse. and, in accordance with custom, carry her to the church in her best clothes. it's natural for us to shed tears for her, but the truth is, we should be happy for her.
all right ursula, as beatrice arrives, we'll be walking up and down this alley and speaking about nothing but benedick. whenever i mention him, praise him more than any man deserves. it'll be my job to talk about how benedick is sick with love for beatrice. we'll make our arrows the same way cupid does: with gossip and rumor.
women are made for bearing a double pun, "to bear," here, means first "to bear weight" and second "to give birth to children." bearing , and so are you.
all the things that we prepared for the wedding party will now be used for the funeral. our happy music will now be sad. our wedding banquet will become a sad burial feast. our celebratory hymns will change to sad funeral marches. our bridal flowers will cover a buried corpse. and everything will be used for the opposite purpose from what we intended.
let's start. see, beatrice has run over like a little bird, keeping close to the ground and trying to overhear us.
not by the likes of you!
sir, you go in. and, madam, go with him. and you go too, sir paris. everyone prepare to take this beautiful corpse to her grave. the heavens hang threateningly over you for some past sin. don't disturb the heavens any more by trying to go against heaven's will.
(speaking so that only hero can hear) the best part of fishing is watching the fish cut through the water and greedily take the bait. now we're fishing for beatrice, who's hiding right now in the honeysuckle arbor. don't worry, i'll do my part.
oh heavens, kate, i wouldn't think of burdening you. i know how light in shakespeare' day, "light" could mean "loose", as in "a loose woman" light and carefree you are.
well, we can put away our pipes and go home.
(speaking so that only ursulacan hear) then let's get closer, so she can hear all the false, sweet bait we're setting for her., (approaching the bower) no, truly, ursula, she's too scornful. she's as devious and fierce as the wild hawks on the rocks.
too light for a lout like you to catch, though no lighter than i should be.
honest good boys, ah, put 'em away, put 'em away. as you know, this is a sad case.
but are you sure that benedick loves beatrice that much?
should be? maybe you should be the subject of some buzz!
yes, well, things could get better.
that's what the prince and my fianc say.
buzz off, buzzard buzzard was another word for "fool" or "useless person" because a buzzard was a kind of hawk that was useless for falconry. buzzard .
musicians, oh, musicians, play "heart's ease," "heart's ease." oh, i'll die if you don't play "heart's ease."
and did they ask you to tell beatrice about this, madam?
if i'm a buzzard, you're a turtledove the turtledove was a symbol of faithful love. turtledove .
why "heart's ease"?
they did want me to tell her, but i persuaded them that, if they truly loved benedick, they would try to get him to battle his emotions and keep beatrice in the dark.
only a buzzard would think so.
oh, musicians, because my heart is singing "my heart is full of woe." oh, play me some happy sad song to comfort me.
why did you do that? doesn't benedick deserve as much luck with a mate as he would have with beatrice?
come, my little wasp, you're too angry.
no, not a sad song. it's not the right time to play.
by the god of love, i know that he deserves all that a man might possess. but nature never made a woman's heart as proud and tough as beatrice's. there is scorn and disdain in her eyes, and those sparkling eyes despise everything they look upon. she values her wit more highly than anything else, which looks weak by comparison. she's so in love with herself, she's incapable of loving anyone else. she can't even imagine what "love" is.
if i'm a wasp, look out for my stinger.
you won't, then?
yes, you're right. it would be bad if she knew about benedick's love and teased him about it.
all i have to do is remove it.
no.
it's true. whenever she meets a man, no matter how wise, noble, young, handsome, she rearranges all his good qualities so they end up looking bad. if he has a fair complexion, she'll say the pretty man should be her sister, not her husband. if he's dark-skinned, nature must have spilled some ink while drawing his foolish face. if he's tall, she'll say he's a spear topped by an odd head; if he's short, she says he looks like a badly carved miniature. if he's talkative, he's a weathervane, moving in all directions at once; if he's silent, he's a block that can't be moved at all. and so she turns men inside out and never acknowledges the integrity and merit that a man has.
true, if a fool such as yourself could find it.
then i'll really give it to you.
it's true, her nitpicking is hardly admirable.
everyone knows where a wasp wears its stinger. in its tail.
what will you give us?
no, it certainly is not admirable to be so perverse and eccentric. but who would dare tell her? if i said something, she'd mock me so mercilessly that i'd probably disintegrate into air. she'd laugh me right out of my body and kill me with her wit.
no, in its tongue.
no money, i swear. but i'll play a trick on you. i'll call you a minstrel.
so benedick should conceal his emotions. like a fire that gets covered up, benedick should smother his love and waste away. it would be better to die that way than to die from being mocked, which is as bad as being killed by tickling.
whose tongue?
then i'll call you a serving-creature.
but you should tell her about this, and hear what she has to say.
yours, if we're talking about tales "tales" here means "lies," as in "telling tales," and is a pun on "tail," which, when petruchio first mentions it, means "butt." their punning involves a lot of sexual innuendo. tales . i'm leaving.
then i'll smack you on the head with the serving-creature's knife. i won't mess around. i'll make you sing. do you hear me?
no, instead i'll go to benedick and advise him to fight his emotions. i'll make up some awful things about my cousin and ruin her reputation. you don't know how quickly affection can be killed with a single nasty word.
you're leaving with my tongue in your tail? no, come back, kate. i'm too much of a gentleman.
if you make us sing, you'll hear us.
oh, don't injure your cousin like that! with the quick, intelligent wit she's rumored to have, she can't really be such a bad judge of character that she'd refuse a man as exceptional as signior benedick.
a gentleman? we'll see about that!
please, put down your knife and stop kidding around.
he's the only worthy man in italy, aside from my dear claudio.
i swear i'll smack you if you hit me again.
so you don't like my kidding around! i'll kid you to death, and then i'll put down my knife. answer me like men.
don't be angry with me for speaking my mind, but throughout italy, benedick is considered the best man in looks, bearing, intelligence, and bravery.
not if you want to keep your arms! if you hit me, that proves you're not a gentleman a noble family, like that of a "gentleman," would have a "coat of arms." gentleman . and if you're not a gentleman, you don't have any arms.
(sings) when sadness wounds your heart, and pain takes over your mind, then music with her silver sound, 
true, he has an excellent reputation.
are you a herald a herald's books officially registered gentlemen. herald , kate? put me in your books!
(speaks) why the line "silver sound"? what do they mean, "music with her silver sound"? what do you say, simon catling catling = a violin string catling ?
and he deserves it, having been excellent before he had a reputation for it. when are you getting married, madam?
what is your crest a crest is a symbol on a nobleman's family coat of arms. crest ? a coxcomb a coxcomb was a dunce cap such as worn by fools and jesters. coxcomb ?
well, sir, because silver has a sweet sound.
tomorrow, and then every day after that. come on, let's go inside. i want to show you some clothing, so you can tell me what i should wear tomorrow.
i'll give up my comb cock = rooster. the comb was the symbol of a rooster's masculinity, so petruchio is willing to be "unmanned" for her. comb , if you'll be my hen.
that's a stupid answer! what do you say, hugh rebeck rebeck = a fiddle rebeck ?
(speaking so that only hero can hear) we caught her in our trap, madam, i'm sure of it.
your cock is not for me. it has no fighting spirit.
i say "silver sound," because musicians play to earn silver.
(speaking so that only ursulacan hear) if so, then you never know where love will come from. cupid gets some lovers with arrows, but some he lays traps for!
oh, come on now, kate. don't look so sour.
another studpid answer! what do you say, james soundpost soundpost = part of a violin soundpost ?
(coming forward) i'm burning up with shame! can this be true? do people criticize me this much for being proud and scornful? then i'll say goodbye to my contempt and my pride in being unmarried! no good is spoken of such a person as me behind her back. benedick, keep on loving me and i will return your love, like a wild hawk being tamed by her handler. i'll be kind to you from now on, and if you really do love me, that kindness will encourage you to seal our love with a wedding band. people say that you deserve my love, and i believe it, not just because they've said so.
that's my way, when i see a crab-apple.
well, i don't know what to say.
i'll stay in messina until you're married, and then i'll go to aragon.
there's no crab-apple here, so don't look sour.
oh, i beg your pardon. you're the singer. i'll answer for you. it is "music with her silver sound," because musicians have no gold to use to make sounds.
i'll go with you, my lord, if you'll allow me.
there is a crab-apple here.
(sings) then music with her silver sound makes you feel just fine.
no, taking you away from your new marriage would be like showing a child a new coat and then not letting him wear it. i'll ask only benedick to come with me, for from the top of his head to the soles of his feet he's a joker. he's evaded love once or twice, and since then cupid doesn't dare to shoot at him. benedick's heart is like a bell, with his tongue as the clapper: everything his heart thinks, his tongue speaks.
show me.
what an annoying man, this guy is!
gentleman, i am not the same man i was before.
i would, if i had a mirror.
forget about him, jack! come, we'll go in there. we'll wait for the mourners and stay for dinner.
i agree. i think you seem more serious.
what, you mean my face looks like a crab-apple?
if i can trust my dreams, then some joyful news is coming soon. love rules my heart, and all day long a strange feeling has been making me cheerful. i had a dream that my lady came and found me dead. it's a strange dream that lets a dead man think! she came and brought me back to life by kissing my lips. i rose from the dead and was an emperor. oh my! how sweet it would be to actually have the woman i love, when merely thinking about love makes me so happy.
i hope he's in love.
what a clever child he is!
do you have news from verona!, what is it, balthasar? do you bring me a letter from the friar? how is my wife? is my father well? how is my juliet? i ask that again because nothing can be wrong if she is well.
come off it, man! there isn't a single drop of sincerity in him that could be touched with love. if he looks serious, he must need money.
you know, you're right. i probably am too young for you.
then she is well, and nothing is wrong. her body sleeps in the capulet tomb, and her immortal soul lives with the angels in heaven. i saw her buried in her family's tomb, and then i came here to tell you the news. oh, pardon me for bringing this bad news, but you told me it was my job, sir.
i have a toothache toothache was an ailment associated with lovers. toothache .
maybe, but you're wrinkled all the same.
is it really true? then i rebel against you, stars! you know where i live. get me some ink and paper, and hire some horses to ride. i will leave here for verona tonight.
draw it. "pull it out." draw it.
oh, that's with worry.
please, sir, have patience. you look pale and wild as if you're going to hurt yourself.
hang it! an expression of impatience. hang it!
well, that doesn't worry me.
tsk, you're wrong. leave me and do what i told you to do. don't you have a letter for me from the friar?
you have to hang it first. then you can draw claudio plays on the fact that criminals were hanged and then "drawn," or disemboweled. draw it.
listen, kate! you won't get away like that.
no, my good lord.
what, are you moaning on about your toothache?
let me go. i'll make you angry if i stay.
no matter. get on your way and hire those horses. i'll be with you right away.
it could only have been caused by some humor or worm most illnesses were attributed to bodily fluids or parasites. worm .
no, not a bit. i find you quite gentle. i was told that you were violent, proud, and sullen. but now i see that people have been lying about you, for you are funny, playful, and beautifully behaved, not sharp-tongued, but as sweet as flowers in springtime. you haven't got it in you to frown or look displeased or bite your lip as angry women do. you don't take pleasure in bitter conversation. no, you entertain your suitors with mild and gentle conversation, quiet and pleasant. why does the world report that kate is lame?
well, juliet, i'll lie with you tonight. let's see how. destructive thoughts come quickly to the minds of desperate men! i remember a pharmacist who lives nearby. i remember he wears shabby clothes and has bushy eyebrows. he makes drugs from herbs. he looks poor and miserable and worn out to the bone. he had a tortoise shell hanging up in his shop as well as a stuffed alligator and other skins of strange fish. there were a few empty boxes on his shelves, as well as green clay pots, and some musty seeds. there were a few strands of string and mashed rose petals on display.
well, everyone knows how to overcome an injury except the one who actually has one.
the world's a liar. kate is as straight and slender as a hazel-twig, her hair as brown as hazelnut shells, and she herself sweeter than the kernels. take a few steps, i want to see you walk. you don't limp at all!
noticing all this poverty, i said to myself, "if a man needed some poison", which they would immediately kill you for selling in mantua, "here is a miserable wretch who'd sell it to him." oh, this idea came before i needed the poison. but this same poor man must sell it to me. as i remember, this should be the house. today's a holiday, so the beggar's shop is shut. hey! pharmacist!
i repeat, he's in love.
get out of here, fool, and give orders to your servants, not me.
who's that calling so loud?
no, there's no love in him, unless you mean his love for strange costumes. he's a dutchman today, a frenchman tomorrow, and sometimes wears the clothing of two countries at once: a german from the waist down, with his baggy pants, and a spaniard from the hips up, with a cloak and no jacket. unless you're talking about his love for this kind of foolishness, which, judging from his appearance, he has, he is no fool for love, as you pretend.
did diana ever beautify a grove as much as kate beautifies this room with her queenly movements? you be diana, and let diana be kate. then let kate be the chaste one, while diana plays with me.
come here, man. i see that you are poor. here are forty ducats. let me have a shot of poison, something that works so fast that the person who takes it will die as fast as gunpowder exploding in a canon.
if he's not in love with a woman, then you can't trust the usual symptoms. he brushes his hat in the mornings. what do you think that means?
where do you memorize all this smart talk?
i have lethal poisons like that. but it's against the law to sell them in mantua, and the penalty is death.
has any man seen him at the barber's?
i make it up as i go. it's born of my mother wit mother wit = natural intelligence. mother wit .
you're this poor and wretched and still afraid to die? your cheeks are thin because of hunger. i can see in your eyes that you're starving. anyone can see that you're a beggar. the world is not your friend, and neither is the law. the world doesn't make laws to make you rich. so don't be poor. break the law, and take this money. (he holds out money)
no, but the barber's assistant has been seen with him. the beard that used to decorate benedick's cheeks has been shaved off and is now stuffing tennis balls tennis balls used to be stuffed with hair. tennis balls .
a witty mother! too bad about the son!
i agree because i'm poor, not because i want to.
getting rid of the beard definitely makes him look younger.
am i not wise?
i pay you because you're poor, not because you want me to buy this.
and he's rubbed himself with perfume. can you smell out his secret now?
enough to keep yourself warm. "enough wit to keep yourself warm" was a proverbial expression for "stupid." enough to keep yourself warm.
(gives romeo poison) put this in any kind of liquid you want and drink it down. even if you were as strong as twenty men, it would kill you immediately.
that's as good as proof that the sweet young man's in love.
yes, i intend to keep myself warm, sweet katherine, in your bed. so let's cut to the chase: your father has consented for you to become my wife. your dowry is agreed upon, and whether you like it or not, i will marry you. i tell you, i'm the man for you, kate. i swear by this light, which shows me your beauty, the beauty that makes me love you, that you must be married to no man but me. i'm the man who was born to tame you and change you from a wildcat kate into a kate as gentle and domestic as other household kates.
(gives apothecary money) there is your gold. money is a worse poison to men's souls, and commits more murders in this awful world, than these poor poisons that you're not allowed to sell. i've sold you poison. you haven't sold me any. goodbye. buy yourself food, and put some flesh on your bones. i'll take this mixture, which is a medicine, not a poison, to juliet's grave. that's where i must use it.
the biggest clue is his seriousness.
here comes your father. don't even think about refusing. i must and will have katherine for my wife.
holy franciscan friar! brother, hey!
and when has he ever been known to wash his face?
now, signior petruchio, how are you getting on with my daughter?
that sounds like the voice of friar john. welcome back from mantua. what does romeo say? or, if he wrote down his thoughts, give me his letter.
yes, or to wear cosmetics? i hear what they say about him for doing that.
beautifully, sir, beautifully! it couldn't go any other way.
i went to find another poor friar from our order to accompany me. he was here in this city visiting the sick. when i found him, the town health officials suspected that we were both in a house that had been hit with the plague. they quarantined the house, sealed up the doors, and refused to let us out. i couldn't go to mantua because i was stuck there.
indeed, his mocking spirit has now crawled into a lute a lute is an instrument used in lovers' serenades. lute , and he can be played like an instrument, 
now, daughter katherine? are you down in the dumps?
then who took my letter to romeo?
truly, it all adds up to a serious story for benedick. a conclusion, a conclusion: he is in love.
you have the nerve to call me daughter? is this a father's loving care, wanting to marry me off to a total madman, a worthless, irresponsible louse who thinks if he swears enough, he'll get his way?
i couldn't send it. here it is. (he gives friar lawrence a letter) i couldn't get a messenger to bring it to you either because they were scared of spreading the infection.
oh, and i know who loves him.
sir, this is the truth: you and the rest, all the people who have ever talked about her, have all been wrong. if she seems fierce, it's for a reason. she's not obstinate but gentle as the dove, not high-strung but peaceful as the morning. she has the patience of a griselda griselda was a much put-upon wife in medieval song and story. lucretia was the wife of a roman senator, famous for her chastity. griselda and the modesty of rome's lucrece. in short, we've gotten along so well that sunday is our wedding day.
unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood, the letter was not just a nice greeting. it was full of very important information. it's very dangerous that it hasn't been sent. friar john, go and get me an iron crowbar. bring it straight back to my cell.
i bet i know, too: someone who clearly doesn't know him at all.
i'll see you hanged on sunday first!
brother, i'll go and bring it to you.
no, she does know him, and she also knows all his bad qualities, and in spite of all this, she still dies for him.
listen to that petruchio: she says she'll see you hanged first.
now i must go to the tomb alone. within three hours juliet will wake up. she'll be very angry with me that romeo doesn't know what happened. but i'll write again to mantua, and i'll keep her in my cell until romeo comes. that poor living corpse. she's shut inside a dead man's tomb!
she'll be buried with her face upwards, then. in shakespeare's time, "to die" was slang for having an orgasm; decision pedro jokes that the woman will actually die when she "dies", during sexual intercourse.
is this your idea of success? so much for our plan.
give me your torch, boy. go away and stay apart from me. put the torch out, so i can't be seen. hide under the yew-trees over there. listen to make sure no one is coming through the graveyard. if you hear any one, whistle to me to signal that someone is approaching. give me those flowers. do as i tell you. go.
this chatter is no cure for my toothache. (to leonato) old sir, please walk with me a bit. i have eight or nine well-considered words to say to you, and i don't want these fools to hear.
relax, gentlemen. i've made my choice. if she and i are happy, what's it to you? when we were alone, we agreed that in public she would go on being unpleasant. i tell you, though, it's incredible how much she loves me. darling kate! she hung about my neck, smothering me with kisses, making vow after vow. in this way, she won my heart lickety-split! you men are rank beginners! it's amazing how even a timid wretch can tame the most dreadful shrew, if the two are left alone together. give me your hand, kate. i'm off to venice to buy outfits for the wedding. plan the feast, sir, and invite the guests. i want my katherine decked out in the finest clothes.
(to himself) i am almost afraid to stand alone here in the graveyard, but i'll take the risk.
i bet my life he's gone to speak with leonato about beatrice!
i don't know what to say. well, give me your hands. god give you joy, petruchio. call it a match!
(he scatters flowers at juliet's closed tomb) sweet flower, i'm spreading flowers over your bridal bed. oh, pain! your canopy is dust and stones. i'll water these flowers every night with sweet water. or, if i don't do that, my nightly rituals to remember you will be to put flowers on your grave and weep.
it must be. by now, hero and margaret have done their part with beatrice. the two bears won't bite each other the next time they meet.
amen to that! we'll be your witnesses.
the boy is warning me that someone approaches. who could be walking around here tonight? who's ruining my rituals of true love? it's someone with a torch! i must hide in the darkness for awhile.
my lord and brother, god save you.
father, wife, friends, farewell! i'm off to venice. sunday is just around the corner. we will have rings and things and fancy dress! so kiss me, kate. we're to be married on sunday.
give me that pickax and the crowbar. (he takes them from balthasar) here, take this letter. early in the morning deliver it to my father. (he gives the letter to balthasar) give me the light. (he takes the torch from balthasar) swear on your life, i command you, whatever you hear or see, stay away from me and do not interrupt me in my plan. i'm going down into this tomb of the dead, partly to behold my wife's face. but my main reason is to take a precious ring from her dead finger. i must use that ring for an important purpose. so go on your way. but if you get curious and return to spy on me, i swear i'll tear you apart limb by limb and spread your body parts around to feed the hungry animals in the graveyard. my plan is wild and savage. i am more fierce in this endeavor than a hungry tiger or the raging sea.
good evening, brother.
was there ever a match put together so quickly?
i'll go, sir, and i won't bother you.
if you don't mind, i'd like to speak with you.
truly, gentlemen, this is a chancy piece of business. i've made a risky investment.
that's the way to show me friendship. take this. (he gives balthasar money) live and be prosperous. farewell, good fellow.
in private?
(speaking as lucentio) yes, but the item was just gathering dust. this way, you'll either make a profit by it or lose it on the high seas.
(speaking so that only paris can hear) despite what i said, i'll hide nearby. i'm frightened by the look on his face, and i have doubts about his intentions.
if you wish. but count claudio can stay, for what i'm about to say concerns him.
the only profit i seek is a peaceful match.
(speaking to the tomb) you horrible mouth of death! you've eaten up the dearest creature on earth. now i'm going to force open your rotten jaws and make you eat another body. (romeo begins to open the tomb with his tools)
what's the matter?
there's no doubt that petruchio's got quite a catch. now, baptista, let's turn to your younger daughter. we've been waiting a long time for this day. i'm your neighbor and came courting first.
(speaking so that romeo can't hear) it's that arrogant montague, the one who's been banished. he's the one who murdered my love's cousin tybalt. they think she died with grief for that cousin. this guy has come here to commit awful crimes against the dead bodies. i'll catch him.
(to claudio) do you plan on getting married tomorrow?
(speaking as lucentio) and i am one who loves bianca more than words can express, more than you can imagine.
(to romeo) stop your evil work, vile montague! can you take revenge on dead bodies? condemned villain, i've caught you. obey and come with me. you must die.
you know that he does.
callow youth, you don't yet know how to love!
i must indeed. that's why i came here. good and noble young man, don't mess with someone who's desperate. get away from here and leave me. think about the ones who have died. let them put fear in your heart. please, young man, don't make me angry. i don't want to commit another crime. oh, go away! i swear, i love you more than i love myself. for i've come here with weapons to use against myself. don't stay here, go away. live, and from now on, say a madman mercifully told you to run away.
i don't know that, once he knows what i know.
(speaking as lucentio) old man, your love is ice.
i refuse your request. i'm arresting you as a criminal.
if there's any reason we shouldn't get married, i urge you to tell me.
and you're all sizzle. stand back, boy. age is the thing that nourishes.
are you going to provoke me? alright, let's fight, boy!
you may think that i don't love you. i hope that, after i tell you my news, you will think better of me. my brother thinks highly of you, and because of his affection, has helped arrange your marriage, but that was definitely a waste of his time and energy.
(speaking as lucentio) yes, but in the ladies' eyes, it's youth that flourishes.
oh lord, they're fighting! i'll go call the watch.
why, what's the matter?
enough, gentlemen. i will settle this matter. deeds "deeds" is a pun; it means both actions (as opposed to words) and the legal documents for property and real estate. deeds will determine the winner here. whichever of you can promise bianca the greatest dower shall have my daughter's love. tell me, signior gremio, what can you offer her?
(he falls) oh, i've been killed! if you are merciful, open the tomb and lay me next to juliet.
i came here to tell you, i'll make this short, since she's already been talked about for too long, the lady is unfaithful.
first of all, my house in the city, as you know, is filled with expensive furniture and household articles, china and gold, basins and pitchers for her to wash her dainty hands in. all my wall hangings are tapestries from tyre. my ivory strongboxes are stuffed with gold, my wooden trunks filled with elegant rugs, expensive clothing, hangings and bed curtains, fine linens, turkish cushions trimmed with pearls, venetian draperies, pewter and brass, and everything else a household could possibly want. then, at my farm i have a hundred milk cows, a hundred and twenty fat oxen in my stables, and all the equipment necessary to maintain them. i'm getting on in years, and if i died tomorrow, all this will belong to bianca, if only while i live she'll belong solely to me.
alright, i will. let me look at this face. it's mercutio's relative, noble count paris! what did my man say? i was worried, so i wasn't listening to him while we were riding. i think he told me paris was about to marry juliet. isn't that what he said? or was i dreaming? or am i crazy? did i hear him say something about juliet and jump to conclusions? oh, give me your hand. both of us had such bad luck! i'll bury you in a magnificent grave.
who, hero?
(speaking as lucentio) that "solely" is very much to the point. (to baptista) sir, hear me out: i am my father's only son and, as such, his sole heir. if you give me your daughter's hand in marriage, she will end up with three or four houses in pisa as good as any one that gremio has in padua, not to mention the two thousand ducats a year that my land earns me. all of which i'll leave her in my will. did i see you flinch, signior gremio?
a grave? oh no! this is a lantern, dead paris. juliet lies here, and her beauty fills this tomb with light. dead men, lie there. you are being buried by another dead man. (he lays paris in the tomb)
that's the one: leonato's hero, your hero, every man's hero.
two thousand ducats a year from his land! (to himself) all my land together isn't worth that much!, aha! i forgot to mention the merchant ship that lies in marseilles harbor. (to tranio) sorry, have i caught you choking on a merchant ship?
how often are men happy right before they die! they call it the lightness before death. oh, how can i call this lightness? oh, my love! my wife! death has sucked the honey from your breath, but it has not yet ruined your beauty. you haven't been conquered. there is still red in your lips and in your cheeks. death has not yet turned them pale. tybalt, are you lying there in your bloody death shroud? oh, what better favor can i do for you than to kill the man who killed you with the same hand that made you die young. forgive me, cousin! ah, dear juliet, why are you still so beautiful? should i believe that death is in love with you, and that the awful monster keeps you here to be his mistress? i don't like that idea, so i'll stay with you. and i will never leave this tomb. here, here i'll remain with worms that are your chamber-maids. oh, i'll rest here forever. i'll forget about all the bad luck that has troubled me. eyes, look out for the last time! arms, make your last embrace! and lips, you are the doors of breath. seal with a righteous kiss the deal i have made with death forever. (romeo kisses juliet and takes out the poison) come, bitter poison, come, unsavory guide! you desperate pilot, let's crash this sea-weary ship into the rocks! here's to my love! romeo drinks the poison. oh, that pharmacist was honest! his drugs work quickly. so i die with a kiss.
unfaithful?
(speaking as lucentio) please, gremio! everyone knows that my father has no less than three, huge merchant ships and fourteen galleys, two large and twelve small. these also i promise to bianca, and whatever your next offer is, i'll double it.
saint francis, help me! how often tonight have my old feet stumbled on gravestones! who's there?
the word is too good to represent her wickedness. she is worse than wicked. if you can think of a more awful title, i'll call her that. but don't keep wondering without more proof. come with me tonight, and you'll see a man enter her bedroom chamber, even tonight, the night before her wedding. if you still love her after that, then marry her tomorrow. but you would be more honorable if you changed your mind.
i have nothing else to offer. that's everything i own. i can't offer her more than all i have. (to baptista) if you choose me, she shall have me and mine.
i'm a friend, a friend who knows you well.
(to don pedro) is this possible?
(speaking as lucentio) in that case i, of all the men in the world, have won the maid, by your explicit promise. gremio is outbid.
god bless you! tell me, my good friend, what is that light over there? the one that vainly lights up the darkness for worms and skulls without eyes? it looks to me like it's burning in the capulet tomb.
i won't consider it.
i must admit your offer is the best. and provided that your father will be your guarantor, she shall be yours. otherwise, forgive me, but if you should die before him, what becomes of her dowry?
that is where it's burning, father. my master is there. the one you love.
if you won't risk coming to see her tonight, then don't claim to know what she's like. if you follow me, i'll give you all the proof you need. once you have seen more and heard more, then you can decide what to do.
(speaking as lucentio) that's nothing! he is old, i'm young.
who is it?
if i see anything tonight that convinces me not to marry her, i'll shame her tomorrow in the very congregation where i would have married her.
oh, and young men never die?
romeo.
and since i wooed her in your name, i'll join you in disgracing her.
well, gentlemen, that's my decision. as you know, next sunday my daughter katherina is to be married. (to tranio as lucentio) therefore, the sunday after, bianca shall be married to you, if you obtain that guarantee. if not, she'll be married to signior gremio. and so i thank you both and bid you goodbye.
how long has he been there?
i won't say anything else about her until you two see things for yourselves. remain calm until midnight, and then you'll see what the trouble is.
farewell, good neighbor.
for a full half hour.
oh, this day has turned into a disaster!
now i'm not worried. you there, young sport! your father would be a fool to give you all his wealth and spend his declining years as a guest in your house. it's absurd. an old italian fox is never that generous, my boy.
go with me to the tomb.
oh, mischief has ruined our plans!
sneaky, dried-up old coot! we'll see who gets the upper hand! i've already bluffed pretty well, and without even a face card. i have a mind to help my master. clearly, the fake lucentio will have to produce a father, call him "fake vincentio", and it will be a miracle. usually fathers produce children, not the other way around. but in this case of wooing, a child shall father his own father, if my wits don't fail me.
i don't dare, sir. my master doesn't know i'm still here. he threatened me with death if i stayed to look at what he was doing.
oh, a plague has been prevented, thank god! that's what you'll say once you've seen part two.
(speaking as cambio) restrain yourself, fiddler! you're too insistent. have you forgotten how her sister katherine thanked you for your lessons?
stay, then. i'll go alone. i'm suddenly afraid. oh, i'm very scared something awful has happened.
are you all good and honest men?
(speaking as litio) quarrelsome teacher! this lady is the queen of heavenly harmony. therefore allow me to claim her attention first, and after we have spent an hour on music you can have equal time for your lecture.
as i slept under this yew-tree here, i had a dream that my master and someone else were fighting and that my master killed him.
yes they are, otherwise it would be proper for them to suffer salvation by "salvation," he means "damnation." salvation , body and soul.
(as cambio) ridiculous ass! you're not even educated enough to know why music was created. wasn't it to refresh the mind of man after his studies and daily toil? therefore allow me to read philosophy with her, and then, when i am finished, indulge in your harmony.
(approaching the tomb) romeo! oh no! what is this blood that stains the stony entrance of this tomb? why are these bloody swords lying here, abandoned by their masters? next to this place of peace? (he looks inside the tomb) romeo! oh, he's pale! who else? what, paris too? and he's covered in blood? ah, when did these horrible things happen? the lady's moving.
if they had any allegiance by "allegiance," he means "disloyalty." allegiance when they were chosen for the prince's watch, a punishment like that would be too good for them.
(as litio) sir, you go too far! i will not stand for it!
oh friendly friar! where is my husband? i remember very well where i should be, and here i am. where is my romeo?
well, give them their assignment, sir dogberry.
gentlemen, it seems to me you're both out of line to be laying down the law about things that are really up to me. i am no schoolboy, and i won't be dictated to with hours and schedules. i'll have my lessons in the order and manner i prefer. so to cut short this argument, let's figure this out.
i hear some noise. lady, come out of the tomb. a greater power than we can fight has ruined our plan. come, come away. your husband lies dead there, and paris too. come, i'll place you among the sisterhood of holy nuns. don't wait to ask questions. the watch is coming. come, let's go, good juliet, i don't dare stay any longer.
first, which man do you think is most desertless by "desertless" (a made-up word), he means "deserving." desertless to be leader of the watch?
(to hortensio) you take your instrument and play awhile. he'll be finished with his lecture before you've even tuned it.
go, get out of here. i'm not going anywhere.
either hugh otecake, sir, or else george seacole, because both of them can read and write.
(as litio) you'll leave his lecture when i'm in tune?
what's this here? it's a cup, closed in my true love's hand? poison, i see, has been the cause of his death. how rude! he drank it all, and didn't leave any to help me afterward. i will kiss your lips. perhaps there's still some poison on them, to make me die with a medicinal kiss. (she kisses romeo) your lips are warm.
come here, sir seacole. god has blessed you with a good name. to be good-looking is a matter of luck, but to read and write is a natural gift.
(to himself) that will be never. (to hortensio) tune your instrument.
(coming to the page) lead, boy. which way?
both of which, master constable, 
where did we leave off?
oh, noise? then i'll be quick. oh, good, a knife! my body will be your sheath. rust inside my body and let me die. (she stabs herself with romeo's dagger and dies)
you have. i knew that would be your answer. well, for your good looks, sir, thank god and don't boast about it. as for your reading and writing, use those skills when you can't use your looks. you're thought to be the most senseless by "senseless," he means "sensible." senseless and fit man here, so you will carry the lantern and be constable. this is your assignment:
here, madam: hic ibat simois, hic est sigeia tellus a line from ovid. hic ibat simois, hic est sigeia tellus , hic steterat priami regia celsa senis.
this is the place. there, where the torch is burning.
you will comprehend by "comprehend," he means "apprehend." comprehend any vagrant men you see. you are to order all men to stop, in the prince's name.
translate.
the ground is bloody. search the graveyard. go, some of you, arrest whoever you find.
and what if he won't stop?
hic ibat, as i told you before, simois properly translated: "here ran the simois river, here is the sigeian land, here stood the sky-high palace of old priam." simois , i am lucentio, hic est, son of vincentio of pisa, sigeia tellus, disguised as a teacher so as to win your love, hic steterat, and the fellow who comes to court you calling himself "lucentio," priami, is my servant tranio, regia, pretending to be me, celsa senis, so we can get the better of the foolish old man.
this is a pitiful sight! the count is dead. juliet is bleeding. her body is warm, and she seems to have been dead only a short time, even though she has been buried for two days. go, tell the prince. run to the capulets. wake up the montagues. have some others search.
well then, don't bother with him and let him go. then immediately call the rest of the watch together and thank god that you've gotten rid of such a criminal.
(as litio) madam, my instrument's in tune.
we see the cause of all this pain. but we'll have to investigate to discover the whole story.
if he won't stop when he's told to, then he isn't one of the prince's subjects.
let's hear. (he plays) oooh, no! the high note's off.
here's romeo's man. we found him in the churchyard.
true, and you aren't supposed to meddle with anyone but the prince's subjects. you will also stay quiet in the streets, for a babbling watch is most tolerable by "tolerable," he means "intolerable." tolerable and will not be endured.
(as cambio) spit on the tuning-peg, man, and try again.
hold him in custody until the prince gets here.
we'll sleep instead of talk. we know what's appropriate for a watch.
now let me see if i can translate it. hic ibat simois, i don't know you, hic est sigeia tellus, i don't trust you, hic steterat priami, don't let him hear you, regia, don't take anything for granted, celsa senis, don't give up.
here is a friar who's trembling, sighing and weeping. we took this pickax and this shovel from him, as he was walking from this side of the graveyard.
why, you speak like an experienced and quiet watchman. sleeping on the watch shouldn't be a problem; just make sure that your weapons don't get stolen. also, you're supposed to visit all the bars and tell anyone who's drunk to go home and go to bed.
(as litio) madam, now it really is in tune.
very suspicious. hold the friar too.
and what if they won't go?
(as cambio) all but the low note.
what crimes happen so early in the morning that i have to wake up before the usual time?
well then, leave them alone until they're sober. if even then they don't answer to your satisfaction, you can say that they're not the men you thought they were.
(as litio) the low note's fine; it's this low-minded dog that's out of tune! (to himself) how touchy and insistent this fellow is! i'm beginning to think he's wooing my darling. little professor! i'll have to keep an eye on you.
what's the problem, that they cry out so loud?
very good, sir.
(to lucentio) in time i may come to believe you, but i'm wary.
some people in the street are crying "romeo." some are crying "juliet," and some are crying "paris." they're all running in an open riot toward our tomb.
if you meet a thief, you can expect him to be dishonest. the less you have to do with that kind of man, the more honest you will be.
there's no need to be, really, for, (he breaks off, seeing that hortensio is listening, and pretends to go back to the latin lesson), "aeacides" is just another name for ajax. he gets it from his grandfather.
what's this awful thing that everyone's crying about?
so if we know that a man is a thief, should we try to arrest him?
you're my teacher, so i must believe you. otherwise, i would have to argue the point with you. but let it go., now, litio, it's your turn. i hope, sir, that you're not angry that i've been equally attentive to you both!
prince, here lies count paris killed. and romeo dead. and juliet. she was dead before, but now she's warm and hasn't been dead for long.
your position permits you to, but i think that those who stick their hands in pitch pitch is a dark sticky, tar-like substance. pitch get their hands dirty. if you encounter a thief, i think the most peaceable thing to do is to let him be himself, and steal away.
(as litio, to lucentio) you can take a break. leave us alone, why don't you? i don't teach music for a threesome.
investigate how this foul murder came about.
you have always been known as a merciful man, partner.
(as cambio) well, aren't we strict! okay, i guess i'll have to wait. (to himself) and watch, too. for unless i'm very much mistaken, our fancy musician is turning romantic!
here is a friar, and dead romeo's man. they've got tools on them, tools they could use to open these tombs.
truly, i wouldn't even hang a dog, much more by "more," he means "less." more a man who has any honesty in him.
(as litio) madam, before you take up the instrument or begin to learn the fingering, i must teach you certain fundamentals. to help you remember the scales, i've come up with a little trick, more fun and effective than those that any of my colleagues use. here, i've written it out.
oh heavens! oh wife, look at how our daughter bleeds! that knife should be in its sheath on that montague's back, but instead it's mis-sheathed in my daughter's breast.
(to the watchmen) if you hear a child crying in the night, you should call the nurse and tell her to quiet the child.
i think i know my scales by now!
oh my! this sight of death is like a bell that warns me i'm old and i'll die soon.
what if the nurse is asleep and doesn't hear us?
(speaking as litio) well, read hortensio's scale anyway.
come, montague. you're up early to see your son down early.
well then, leave quietly, and let the child's crying wake up the nurse. the ewe that doesn't go to her lamb when it baas will never tend to another animal's child.
(reading) "i am the scale, the basis of all harmony. a re, im here to argue for hortensio's love; b mi, bianca, take him for your husband, c fa ut, he loves you with all affection; d sol re, i have one clef but only two notes; e la mi, have pity on me, or i'll die." you call this a scale? i don't like it. i don't go in for these new-fangled methods. i like doing things the old-fashioned way.
oh, my liege, my wife died tonight. sadness over my son's exile stopped her breath. what further pain must i endure in my old age?
that's very true.
mistress, your father requests that you leave your books and come help decorate your sister's room. you know tomorrow is her wedding day.
look, and you'll see.
and that's the end of your assignment. you, constable, are representing the prince himself. if you meet the prince in the night, you can order him to stop.
farewell to both of you, dear teachers. i have to go.
(seeing romeo's body) oh, you undisciplined boy! where are your manners? it's not right for a son to push past his father on his way to the grave.
no, by our lady, i don't think he can.
(as cambio) in that case, mistress, there's no reason for me to stay.
be quiet and hold back your remarks of outrage, until we can clear up these questions. we want to know how it started and what really happened. and then i'll be the leader of pain, and maybe i'll lead you as far as death. in the meantime, hold on, and be patient. bring forth the men under suspicion.
i'll bet any man who knows the law five shillings to one on it. truly though, you can't stop the prince without the prince's consent, for the watch shouldn't offend anyone, and it's an offense to keep a man without his consent.
but there's reason for me to look more closely at this schoolmaster. he acts like a man in love. but if bianca is so vulgar as to stoop for any man she sees, the hell with her. whoever wants her can have her. the first time i catch her straying, it's over. end of story.
i am the greatest, but i was able to do the least. i am under the most suspicion, because i was here at the time of this awful murder. and here i stand, you can question me and punish me. i have already condemned and excused myself.
by our lady, i think that's true.
(to tranio as lucentio) signior lucentio, this is the day appointed for katherine and petruchio's wedding, but there's no sign of the groom. what will people say? to have the priest right here, ready to perform the marriage ceremony, and be missing a bridegroom! what do you think about our humiliation, lucentio?
tell us what you know about this affair.
ha, ha, ha! well, gentlemen, good night. and if anything important happens, find me and let me know. keep each other's secrets and your own. good night. come, friend.
the humiliation is all mine. you forced me to accept this man against my will, this fancy con artist who was in such a hurry to get engaged. he has no intention of marrying me. i knew it, i told you. the whole thing was a joke. he pretends to be this simple, backward guy, but it's all a gag to amuse his witty friends. he goes around proposing to women, they set a date, he gets introduced around, they send out the invitations and make a public announcement, but he has no intention of going through with it. so now everyone will point at me and say, "look, there goes the wife of that comedian petruchio, if he could be bothered to marry the pathetic thing!"
i will be brief because i'm not going to live long enough to tell a boring story. romeo, who lies there dead, was the husband of that juliet. and she, who lies there dead, was that romeo's faithful wife. i married them; their secret wedding day was the day tybalt died. his untimely death caused the bridegroom to be banished from the city. juliet was sad because romeo was gone, not because of tybalt's death. to cure her sadness, you arranged a marriage for her with count paris. then she came to me, and, looking wild, she asked me to devise a plan to get her out of this second marriage. she threatened to kill herself in my cell if i didn't help her. so i gave her a sleeping potion that i had mixed with my special skills. it worked as planned. she seemed to everyone to be dead.
well gentlemen, we've heard our assignment. let's sit here on the church bench until two and then go off to bed.
(speaking as lucentio) no, no, i assure you, katherine, and you, too, baptista, petruchio means well, whatever circumstance prevents him from keeping his word. he's rough-edged, but he's a good man, and though he likes a joke, he's not a liar.
in the meantime i wrote to romeo and told him to come here on this awful night to help remove her from her temporary grave when the sleeping potion wore off. but the man who carried my letter, friar john, was held up by an accident. last night he gave me the letter back. so i came here alone at the hour when she was supposed to wake up. i came to take her out of her family's tomb, hoping to hide her in my cell until i could make contact with romeo. but by the time i got here, just a few minutes before juliet woke up, paris and romeo were already dead. she woke up, and i asked her to come out of the tomb with me and endure this tragedy with patience. but then a noise sent me running scared from the tomb. she was too desperate to come with me, and it seems that she killed herself. i know all of this. and her nurse knows about the marriage too. if any part of this tragedy is my fault, let my old life be sacrificed and let me suffer the most severe punishment.
one more thing, good gentlemen. watch over signior leonato's house; with the wedding being held there tomorrow, there's a great to-do there tonight. adieu. be vigitant by "vigitant," he means "vigilant." vigitant , i beg you.
maybe, but i wish i'd never laid eyes on him.
we have always known you to be a holy man. where's romeo's man? what does he have to say about this?
conrade!
go, daughter. i cannot blame you now for weeping. an insult like this would try the patience of a saint, let alone a hot-tempered shrew like you!
i brought my master news of juliet's death. and then he rode from mantua here to this tomb. (he shows a letter) earlier this morning he asked me to give this letter to his father. when he went into the vault, he threatened me with death if i didn't leave him alone there.
(whispering) quiet! don't move!
master, master! i have news, old news such as you never heard before!
give me the letter. i'll look at it. (he takes the letter from balthasar) where is the count's page, the one who called the watch? boy, what was your master doing here?
conrade, i say!
you say you have news that's old? how can that be?
he came with flowers to spread on his lady's grave. and he asked me to stand far away and leave him alone, and so i did. then someone with a torch came to open the tomb. so my master drew on him. and then i ran away to call the watch.
i'm here, man, at your elbow.
well, is it not news that petruchio's coming?
(skimming the letter) this letter confirms the friar's account. it describes the course of their love and mentions the news of her death. here he writes that he bought poison from a poor pharmacist. he brought that poison with him to this vault to die and lie with juliet. where are these enemies? capulet! montague! do you see what a great evil results from your hate? heaven has figured out how to kill your joys with love. because i looked the other way when your feud flared up, i've lost several members of my family as well. everyone is punished.
come to think of it, i thought i felt a scab there.
is he here?
oh, brother montague, give me your hand. this is my daughter's dowry. i can ask you for nothing more.
i'll get you for that. now get on with your story.
why, no, sir.
but i can give you more. i'll raise her statue in pure gold. as long as this city is called verona, there will be no figure praised more than that of true and faithful juliet.
since it's drizzling, stand under this overhang with me and, like a true drunk, i'll tell you everything.
what then?
the statue i will make of romeo to lie beside his juliet will be just as rich. they were poor sacrifices of our rivalry!
(speaking so that only the other watchmen can hear) there's some treason occurring, gentlemen. stay here.
he is coming.
we settle a dark peace this morning. the sun is too sad to show itself. let's go, to talk about these sad things some more. some will be pardoned, and some will be punished. there was never a story more full of pain than the story of romeo and juliet.
you should know i've earned a thousand gold pieces from don john.
when will he be here?
is it possible that any crime could be so valuable?
when he stands where i am and sees you there.
before we go any further, listen to me.
you should ask instead if it's possible that any criminal could be so rich. because when rich villains need poor villains' services, those poor ones can name the price.
(as lucentio) so what's the old news?
speak, speak.
i can't believe it.
well, petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old vest, a pair of old pants turned inside out, unmatched boots that have been used as spittoons, one buckled, the other laced; a rusty old sword from the town armory with a broken hilt and no scabbard. he's got on worn-out garters and is riding a swayback old horse with a moth-eaten saddle, stirrups from two different sets, a bad hip, swollen glands, lockjaw, leg ulcers, bedsores, arthritis, jaundice, a hernia, hives, worms, cancer, a mossy overbite, and post-nasal drip. he's knock-kneed too. his bit's lopsided and his cardboard bridle, which breaks when you pull on it, is taped in a few places. the saddle strap is made out of patchwork, and the strap that goes under his tail to keep the saddle in place is velvet, with the initials of some woman written in studs.
are you all certain that you'd rather die fighting than starve to death?
that only proves how inexperienced you are. you know that the style of a man's jacket or hat or coat means nothing.
who comes with him?
yes, we're certain.
yes, it's just clothing.
just his servant, sir, pretty much got up like the horse, with a linen stocking on one leg and a big woolen booty on the other, a pair of red and blue garters, and an old hat with something no one's ever seen before where the feather should be. he's dressed like a freak, a total freak, and not at all like a proper footman or a gentleman's valet.
as you know, caius martius is our chief enemy.
no, i mean, the fashion of a man's clothing tells us nothing about the man.
(as lucentio) he must be in a strange mood to go in for this fashion, though from time to time he has been known to dress down.
yes, we know.
yes, fashion is fashion.
i am glad he's coming, however he's dressed.
let's kill him, so we can sell our corn at the price we choose. are we agreed?
c'mon, i might as well say the fool's the fool! but don't you see what a deformed "deformed" here means "deforming." deformed villain fashion is?
why, sir, he's not coming.
no need to talk about this anymore, let's do it. let's go.
(speaking so that only the other watchmen can hear) i know that man, deformed the watchman thinks that "deformed" is the name of one of the criminals. deformed . for the past seven years, he's been a wicked thief. he walks around as if he were a gentleman. i remember that name.
didn't you just say he was?
may i speak, good citizens?
did you hear someone?
who? petruchio?
we're poor. the nobles are rich. the nobles have so much to eat that they overindulge and get sick, but if they'd only give us their excess food, we wouldn't be starving any longer. we'd think they were compassionate if they helped us, but they think we're too expensive to feed and don't deserve to eat. they look at our thin, starving bodies and see them as a measure of their own abundance. our suffering shows them how much they have. let's seek revenge with our pitchforks before we become as thin as rakes. the gods know i only say this because i'm hungry for bread, not thirsty for revenge.
just the weathervane moving.
yes, petruchio.
would you attack caius martius in particular?
as i was saying, fashion is a deformed villain. it makes hot-blooded young men spin around feverishly, forever changing their appearances, dictating that sometimes they dress like pharoah's soldiers in that grimy painting and sometimes like the priests of the god baal, as seen in old church windows. and sometimes fashion dresses them like the great hercules in that dirty, worm-eaten tapestry, the one where his codpiece a codpiece was a pouch, sometimes stuffed and decorated, worn over pants and covering a man's genitals. codpiece seems almost as big as his club.
no, i said his horse is coming, with him on its back.
we should attack him first. he's like a cruel dog to the people.
i get all this. and i also understand how fashion changes so quickly that a man's clothing never gets a chance to wear itself out. but you're all wound up about fashion, too. otherwise, why would you stray from your story to blabber on about it?
well, that's the same thing.
have you considered the ways he has served our country?
no, i'm not wound up. but i will tell you that i seduced margaret, the lady hero's waiting woman, tonight. i called her "hero" the whole time. she leaned out of her mistress's bedroom window and told me good night a thousand times, but i am telling this story poorly. i should backtrack and begin with how my master, don john, arranged for the prince, claudio, and himself to witness this friendly encounter from the orchard.
no, by saint jamy, i'll bet you a penny! a man and his horse aren't the same person, not that there's much difference.
i've considered them very well, and i'd be happy to honor him for his service, except he already honors himself by being proud.
and they thought margaret was hero?
whoa! where is everybody?
don't speak so harshly.
the prince and claudio did, but the devil, my master, knew that it was margaret. they believed the charade partially because of my master's testimony, which first caused them to doubt hero, and partially because of how dark and deceiving the night was, but mostly because of my villainous actions, which confirmed don john's slander. claudio went away enraged, swearing that he'd meet hero at the temple as planned and there, before the entire congregation, shame her with what he'd discovered and send her home without a husband.
you are welcome, sir.
listen, all that he's famous for doing, he did simply to become famous. slow-witted men can be content to say he acted on behalf of his country, but the truth is that he fought to please his mother and also, in part, out of pride. he has just as much pride as courage.
we charge you, in the prince's name, to stop!
i don't feel well.
you call it a vice, but being proud is his nature. and you can't accuse him of being interested in the spoils of war.
call up the master constable dogberry. we have recovered recovered=discovered; lechery=treachery recovered the most dangerous piece of lechery that was ever known in the commonwealth.
i don't notice you limping.
even if i stop accusing him of pride, i'll still have plenty of other complaints against him. he has so many faults, i grow tired of repeating them to you.
and one of them is the criminal deformed. i know him; he wears a lock of hair.
(as lucentio) and i would like it if you were a bit more formally dressed.
who's shouting? the other side of the city is taking action. why are we standing around talking? let's go to the capitol!
gentlemen, gentlemen, 
isn't it better this way? but where is kate? where is my lovely bride? (to baptista) how is my father-in-law? gentlemen, you seem displeased. what's everyone staring at? you look as if you'd seen something unusual, a comet or something.
let's go.
(to borachio) i bet you'll be forced to bring deformed forward.
why, sir, you know this is your wedding day. first we were sad because we were afraid you wouldn't come. now we're even sadder to see that you've come so unprepared. for heaven's sake, take off that get-up. it's a disgrace to a man of your social position and an insult to this solemn ceremony.
wait, who's coming?
gentlemen, don't speak. we obey obey = order obey you to go with us.
and tell us what extraordinary occurrence made you so late for your wedding and drove you to present yourself in an outfit that's so, not typical of you.
it's worthy menenius agrippa, one who has always loved the people.
we're probably a very valuable catch for these guys.
it's a long story, and tough to listen to. it's enough that i'm here according to my promise, though i will have to deviate from it to some extent, for reasons which, when i explain them later, you'll understand completely. but where is kate? we're wasting time here. it's getting late and time we were in church.
he's decent enough. i wish that all the other nobles were!
well, our value is debatable, i bet. let's go, we'll obey you.
don't greet your bride in these disgraceful clothes. go to my room and put on something of mine.
what are you working on, my countrymen? where are you going with bats and clubs? what's the matter? please tell me.
good ursula, go wake my cousin and ask her to get up.
not me. i'll see her like this.
the senate knows what we're upset about. they've known for two weeks what we intend to do, and now we're going to show them. they say poor workers have bad breath. they're about to find out that we have strong arms too.
i will, lady.
but surely you're not planning to marry her in what you're wearing!
masters, my good friends, my honest neighbors, why will you harm yourselves?
and request that she come here.
yes, just like this. but enough talk. it's me she's marrying and not my clothes. though i expect she'll wear me out more quickly than i'll wear out what i'm wearing, which will be good for her and even better for me! but what a fool i am to stand here chatting when i should bid good morning to my bride and seal the bargain with a loving kiss.
we're already hurt.
very well.
he must be wearing this crazy outfit for some reason. i'll try to persuade him to put on something more appropriate before going to the church, if it's at all possible.
i tell you, friends, the nobles take very good care of you. for the relief you want from your suffering, you'd do just as well to rise up against the heavens as against the roman state. the senate isn't going to change its course. however strong a chain you form, the senate will break you because it's ten thousand times stronger. the gods, not the nobles, are responsible for whatever you lack, therefore you should fall to your knees and pray, not raise your arms and fight. you're getting carried away by your calamity, and you're only inviting more trouble. you're slandering the senators, cursing them as your enemies, without realizing that they care for you like fathers care for their children.
really, i think your other ruff is better.
i'll go too and make sure that happens.
care for us? as if! they've never cared for us. they force us to starve while their storehouses are full of grain. they make laws about loaning money that protect the loan sharks. every day they repeal the laws that interfere with the interests of the wealthy and instead make strict laws to chain up and restrain the poor. if the wars we fight in don't kill us, these laws will. that's how well they care for us.
no, please good meg, i'll wear this one.
but sir, you need to get her father's consent as well as her love. and to that end, as i explained to your worship, i'm looking for a man, any man, it doesn't matter; we'll suit him to our purpose, who can pretend to be your father, vincentio. and he'll guarantee the dowry, for even more money than i've promised on your behalf. this way, you'll get your wish and marry sweet bianca with her father's consent and with the least possible hassle.
you must either admit that you're being extremely malicious or you'll be accused of foolishness. i'll tell you a relevant story. you may have heard it, but since it illustrates my point, i'll venture to tell it again.
honestly, it's not as good as the other one, and i'm sure your cousin will agree with me.
if my fellow schoolmaster weren't keeping such a close watch on her, i'd think about eloping. then it wouldn't matter what anyone said, i'd keep what's mine, whatever the rest of the world said.
well, i'll listen sir, but don't think you can trick us out of our suffering with a story. but if it pleases you, tell it.
my cousin's a fool, and you are too. i'll wear this one and none other.
don't worry, i'm looking into that too. i'm on top of the situation, monitoring it very closely. we'll outwit them all, that old geezer, gremio; the suspicious father, minola; the prim musician lover, litio, all for the sake of my master, lucentio.
there was a time when all the body's parts rebelled against the belly. they accused the belly of being an idle, inactive pool in the middle the body, always hoarding the food, never working as much as the rest of the parts. the other body parts did see and hear, think, instruct, walk, feel, and together worked for the needs and desires of the whole body. the belly answered, 
i like your new wig and headdress, though i'd like it more if the hair were a shade browner. and your gown is really stylish. you know, i saw the duchess of milan's gown, the one that everyone praises so highly.
signior gremio, are you coming from the church?
well, sir, what did the belly answer?
oh, they say that dress surpasses all others.
as eagerly as i ever came from school.
sir, i'll tell you. with a disdainful smile, look, i can make the belly smile as well as speak, the belly tauntingly replied to the aggravated, mutinous parts that envied the food it received, much like you who rightly accuse our senators for not starving as you do.
compared to your dress, it's no better than a nightgown. the cloth is interwoven with gold thread, and slashes in the material show the fabric beneath. it is trimmed with silver lace and embroidered with pearls. it has one set of fitted sleeves and another ornamental pair that hangs open from the shoulders. the skirts are trimmed with a blue, metallic fabric. but for a fine, elegant, graceful, and excellent dress, yours is worth ten of those.
(speaking as lucentio) and will the bride and bridegroom be here soon?
what did the belly say? that the regal head, the watchful eye, the wise heart, the fighting arms, the mobile legs, the expressive tongue, with some small help from the other parts, if they, 
i hope i enjoy wearing it, for my heart is very heavy.
bridegroom? this guy is more like the groom who cleans the stable, a grumbling groom at that, as the poor girl is discovering.
what then? my word, you're quite a speaker! what then? what then?
it will be made even heavier soon, by the weight of a man.
(speaking as lucentio) you mean he's worse than she is? that's not possible!
the greedy belly, the sink of the body, should be restrained, 
watch your tongue! have you no shame?
no, he's a devil, a devil, i tell you! an utter fiend.
and then what?
shame of what, lady? sex and marriage are honorable things, even for a beggar, right? and isn't your husband an honorable man? you're so prudish you'd probably like me to say, "i beg your pardon, your husband", as if husband were a dirty word! so long as suspicious minds aren't misinterpreting my honest words, i'll offend no one. what's wrong with admitting your husband's going to lie on you? nothing, as long as it's the right husband with the right wife. that's right and proper, anything else is frivolous and immoral. ask beatrice. here she comes.
(speaking as lucentio) no, she's a devil, a devil, i tell you. the devil's grandmother.
if the parts complained, what could the belly answer?
good morning, cousin.
why, she's a lamb, a dove, a child compared to him! picture this: when the priest asked katherine if she would have him, he answered, "hell, yes!" and swore so loud that the priest drops the prayer book. everyone froze, and as the priest stooped to pick it up again the lunatic bridegroom smacked him so hard that the priest and book went flying! then he said, "now pick them up, if anyone dares."
i'll tell you. if you'll exercise a little bit of what little patience you have, you'll hear the belly's answer.
good morning, sweet hero.
(as lucentio) what did the girl say when the priest got up?
you're taking a long time to tell it.
why do you sound so odd? are you ill? you sound out of tune.
she trembled and shook because he stamped and swore and carried on as though the vicar were trying to put something over on him. finally, the ceremony done, he called for wine. "a health!" he shouted, like some sailor aboard ship, carousing with his mates after a storm. then he chugs the wine and throws the dregs in the sexton's face. why? because the fellow's beard looked thin, he said, and it seemed to be asking him for the dregs while he was drinking. next he slung his arm around the bride's neck and kissed her with such a smack that when they parted the sound of their lips made the whole church echo. that was the limit for me. i got out of there as fast as i could. i know the rest of the crowd isn't far behind me. it's disgraceful! you never saw such a mockery of a marriage in your life!
pay attention, good friend. the belly was serious and deliberate, not rash like his accusers, and so he answered, "it's true, my fellow parts," he said, "that i am first to receive the food supply that you live on. this is as it should be, because i am the storehouse and the shop of the whole body. but if you'll remember, i send it through the rivers of your blood, even to the court of the heart, to the throne of the brain, and through the ducts and chambers of the body, the strongest nerves and small inferior veins receive from me all that they need to survive. and despite all that, you, my good friends," says the belly, 
i must be ill, i don't think i can speak in any other tune.
there go the minstrels. they've started up.
yes, sir, go on.
if it's a tune we want, let's sing "light on love!" it's a light song and doesn't require a man to sing the baritone. you sing, and i'll dance.
gentlemen and friends, thanks for bothering to come. i know you expected me to stay to dinner and have prepared a celebratory feast, but as it happens i'm called away. so let me say goodbye.
"even though all the parts can't see at once what i deliver out to each, i can account that all parts receive from me all the flour i get, and that all i'm left with is the bran." what do you say that?
you're "light on love" sure enough, your frivolous dancing proves you have light heels! when you're married one of these days, if your husband is rolling in dough, you'll let him roll in the hay whenever he wants.
you're not thinking of leaving tonight, surely?
it's an answer. how does it apply to us?
never! i reject that life; i kick it away with my heels "light-heeled" is slang for sexually loose. heels .
not tonight, today. if you knew the reason, you'd understand and would urge me to go rather than stay. good friends, i thank you all for coming to see me wed this patient, sweet, virtuous wife. dine with my father and drink a health to me. i have to leave. goodbye to you all.
the senators of rome are this good belly, and you are the unhappy parts. examine their decisions and their responsibilities, see how they relate to the common good, and you'll find that there is no public benefit that you receive that doesn't come from them to you. nothing is being taken from you. what do you think, you, the great toe of this assembly?
(to hero) it's almost five o'clock, cousin. you should be ready by now. oh, i really don't feel well. heigh-ho!
(as lucentio) please, stay till after dinner.
i am the great toe? why the great toe?
are you sighing for a hawk, a horse, or a husband?
can't do it.
for the fact that you're the leader of these ignorant rebels who are the lowest, basest, poorest of men. you're like a stray dog that runs after whatever it can catch first. but prepare your sturdy bats and clubs: rome and you, her rats, are at the point of battle. one side is going to lose.
i have an ache; i'm sighing for the letter that begins all those words.
as a favor to me?
hail, noble martius!
well, if you haven't renounced the word "ache" was once pronoun-ced like the letter h. renounced your old faith yet, we can't trust anything anymore.
nope.
thanks. what's the matter, you dissenting rebels? are you make yourselves miserable by rubbing the minor itch of your opinion?
what does the fool mean by that, i wonder?
as a favor to me?
you always speak kindly to us.
i don't mean anything, but god sends everyone their heart's desire.
i'm delighted.
whoever speaks kindly to you flatters you undeservingly. what do you want, you dogs, who are satisfied by neither peace nor war? the one frightens you, and the other makes you self-righteous. whoever trusts you sees you as lions, though he should see you as hares, and sees you as foxes, though he should see you as geese. you're as unstable as a burning coal on ice or a hailstone in the sun. your nature is to honor those who should be punished for their crimes and then to curse the justice that punishes him. he who deserves greatness deserves your scorn. your instincts are perverted: you most desire the things that will make you sicker. he who depends on your approval swims with fins of lead and cuts down oaks with blades of grass. you should be hanged! trust you? you change your mind every minute. you call the man you hated a moment ago "noble," and you call the one you used to praise "vile." why do you cry against the noble senate all around the city? second only to the gods, they take care of you, you who would otherwise eat each other. what do the people want?
the count sent me an excellent pair of perfumed gloves.
delighted to stay?
they want to sell corn at their own rates. they say the city has plenty.
sorry, i'm all stuffed. i can't smell a thing.
delighted to hear you ask so nicely, but i won't stay in any case.
hang them if that's what they say! they'll sit by the fire and presume to know what goes on in the capitol: who's likely to rise, who thrives, and who declines. they'll take sides with factions and make hasty alliances, making some groups strong and squashing those that they don't like beneath their cheap shoes. they say there's enough grain? if the nobility would stop taking pity on the poor and let me use my sword, i'd slaughter these thousands of slaves into a pile of pieces as high as i could throw my lance.
oh, just a young lady and already stuffed! margaret makes an obscene pun on the word "stuffed." stuffed! that's a nice way to catch a cold.
look, if you love me, stay.
no, they've almost all calmed down. even though they make a scene, they're actually very cowardly. but tell me, what happened with the other group of rebels?
oh, god help me! since when have you claimed to be such a great wit?
grumio, get me my horse.
they've disbanded. hang them! they said they were hungry, they quoted proverbs: that hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat, that meat was made for mouths, that the gods didn't send corn only for the rich. with these small statements they vented their complaints, and when the nobles answered by granting them a petition, which is unusual because it breaks the solidarity of the nobles and makes them look weak, they threw their caps into the air with joy, shouting their delight.
ever since you lost yours. doesn't my wit suit me well?
yes, sir, they're ready. they've eaten themselves sick.
what was granted to them?
it doesn't get seen enough; you should wear it in your cap, the way fools wear coxcombs. god, i'm really sick.
all right, then, do what you like. i won't leave today. not tomorrow, either. i'll leave when i'm good and ready. the door is open, sir. feel free to use it. go on, wear your boots out! as for me, i'll leave when i like. if you're this high-handed to start with, i can imagine how arrogant and arbitrary you'll be as a husband.
five representatives of their own choosing to defend their ignorant views. junius brutus, sicinius velutus, and i don't know who else. god's death! the rebels would have to tear the roofs off the city before they could ever prevail upon me to grant them that. they'll soon become more powerful and make more arguments for insurrection.
you should get some distilled carduus benedictus carduus benedictus = holy thistle, a medicinal herb good for the heart. carduus benedictus and put it on your chest. it's the only way to cure a sudden faintness.
calm down, kate. please don't be angry.
this is strange.
with that you've managed to prick her with a thistle.
i will be angry. what business is it of yours?, father, be quiet. he'll stay as long as i say.
(to the rebels) go home, you crumbs!
benedictus! why do you suggest i use benedictus? is there some double meaning in that word, "benedictus"?
okay, now it starts!
where's caius martius?
double meaning! no, honestly, there's no other meaning. i just meant that you should use some holy thistle. maybe you think that i think you're in love. no, by our lady, i'm not such a fool to think what i please, and i don't please to think what i can, and in fact i cannot think, even if i could think my heart right past thinking, that you are in love or that you will be in love or even that you can be in love. but benedick was once an enemy of love as well, and now he's become a real man. he swore that he'd never get married, but now, despite his earlier protestations, he loves ungrudgingly. how we're going to convert you i'll never know. and yet i think you look with your eyes just like every other woman does.
gentlemen, on to the bridal dinner. i see a woman may be made a fool of if she doesn't have nerve enough to stand up for herself.
i'm here. what's going on?
why are you talking at such a crazy clip?
they shall go in to the bridal dinner, kate, they're yours to command. obey the bride, guests! go to the banquet: revel, feast, and carouse! drink yourselves silly toasting her virginity! be wild and merry, or go to hell. but as for my bonny kate, she must come with me. no, don't puff out your chests and stamp and stare wonderingly. i will be master of what belongs to me. she is my property, one of my possessions, just like my house and everything in it, and my field, my barn, my horse, my ox, my donkey, anything of mine you care to name. here she is; i dare you to touch her! i'll sue anyone in padua who tries to stand in my way, no matter how powerful he is., grumio, draw your sword! we are surrounded by thieves. rescue your mistress! prove yourself a man! don't be afraid, sweet girl, i won't let them touch you. i'll protect you, kate, against a million of them.
sir, the news is that the volsces are prepared to fight.
it's not a false gallop, anyway.
no, let them go. they're certainly a peaceful couple!
i'm glad about this. this means we'll have a way to get rid of our excess population. look, here come our best elders.
madam, we have to go: the prince, the count, signior benedick, don john, and all the gentlemen of the town have come to bring you to church.
if they hadn't left soon, i would have died laughing.
martius, it's true what you've been telling us lately: the volsces are ready to fight.
good cousin, good meg, good ursula, come help me get dressed.
(as lucentio) of all the mad matches, this is by far the craziest.
they have a leader, tullus aufidius, that will put you to the test. it's a sin, but i envy his leadership. if i could be anyone other than who i am, i would only wish to be him.
what do you want from me, my good man?
(as cambio) mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
you've fought each other?
please, sir, i would like to discuss some news that decerns "decerns" is a mistake for "concerns." decerns you greatly.
that since she's mad herself, she's married a madman.
if a quarter of the world were fighting and he were on my side, i'd revolt to fight only him. he's a lion that i am proud to hunt.
be brief, please, because, as you can see, this is a busy time for me.
i guarantee you, petruchio's going to suffer from his kate.
then, worthy martius, help cominius with these wars.
indeed, sir, it is.
neighbors and friends, though we don't have anyone for the bride and bridegroom's places at the table, you know there's nothing missing in the feast itself.
as you promised earlier.
yes, it truly is.
(to tranio) lucentio, you shall assume the bridegroom's place and let bianca take her sister's seat.
sir, i did, and i'll keep my word. titus lartius, you'll see me strike at tullus's face once more. are you hesitating? do you not want to fight?
what's the news, my good friends?
(as lucentio) shall sweet bianca practice how to be a bride?
no, caius martius, i'll lean upon one crutch and fight with the other before i stay out of this business.
sorry, sir, goodman verges tends to ramble. he's an old man, sir, and his wits are not as blunt "blunt" is a mistake for "sharp." blunt as i wish they were. but truly, he's as honest as the skin between his brows.
she shall, lucentio. come, gentlemen, let's go in.
oh, you were raised to fight!
yes, i thank god that i am as honest as all the other old men who are not honester than me.
to hell with all worn-out horses, all crazy masters, and all bad roads. was a man ever beaten as much as me? was a man ever as dirty as me? was a man ever so tired? i have been sent on ahead to light a fire, and they are coming after to warm themselves. it's a good thing i'm like a little pot and warm up quickly, or else my lips themselves would freeze and stick to my teeth, my tongue to the roof of my mouth, and my heart would freeze in my belly, before i managed to get thawed out. i'll warm myself by blowing on the fire. a taller man than i would catch cold in weather like this. hey! curtis! hello!
let's go to the capitol. i know our greatest friends wait for us there.
making comparisons is odorous "odorous" is a mistake for "odious" (hateful). odorous , verges. get on with your story.
who calls so coldly?
(to cominius) take the lead.
friends, you are becoming tedious.
a piece of ice. trust me, you could slide all the way from my shoulder to my heel taking no more of a running start than the distance between my head and my neck. start the fire, good curtis.
follow cominius, and we'll follow you. you deserve to go before us.
thank you for saying that, your worship, but we're just the poor duke's officers. but truly, if i were as tedious dogberry takes "tedious" to mean "rich." tedious as a king, i would give everything to you, your worship.
are my master and his wife coming, grumio?
noble martius!
oh, so you'd give me all your tediousness?
yes, yes, curtis, so hurry up and start the fire. leave out the water.
(to the citizens) go now to your homes, be gone.
yes, even if i had a thousand more pounds than that, for i hear that you are exclaimed "exclaimed" is a mistake for "acclaimed." exclaimed throughout the city, and though i am only a poor man, it makes me glad to hear it.
is she as fiery a shrew as they say?
no, let them follow us. the volsces have a lot of corn. take these rats to gnaw at their granaries. worshipful rebels, your courage is impressive, please follow us.
me, too.
well she was, good curtis, before this frost. but you know how winter tames man, woman, and beast. and it's tamed my old master and my new mistress and myself, my good colleague.
was there ever a man as proud as martius?
gentlemen, please, i'd like to hear your news.
who are you calling "beast," midget. you're no bigger than three inches!
he has no equal.
sir, our watch tonight, expectfully "expectfully" is a mistake for "respectfully." expectfully , sir, has captured a couple of the worst criminals in messina.
three inches? really? your horn is a foot long, and i'm at least that size. now are you going to make a fire, or am i going to have to report you to our mistress, whose hand, now that she is herself at hand, you'll be feeling soon. you'll find it cold comfort, but that's what you get for being slow with your warming duties.
when we were chosen as representatives for the people, 
(to leonato) verges is a good old man, sir, but he's always babbling. like they say, "when age comes, wit goes." god help us, what a world! (to verges) you did well, verges, honestly. (to leonato) well, god's a fair man. if two men are riding on one horse, one must naturally ride behind. verges is as honest a man as any, but, god bless him, not all men are created equal. am i right, my friend?
so tell me, grumio, how goes the world?
did you notice his lip and eyes?
truly, my friend, he isn't nearly as impressive as you are.
cold, curtis. it's a cold world, except for people who have to start fires. therefore, do your duty and take your reward, because my master and mistress are nearly frozen to death.
no, only his taunts.
god gives those gifts, i had nothing to do with it.
the fire is ready. so go on, tell me the news.
when he's angry, he'll even taunt the gods.
now i must return to the wedding.
" why, jack boy, ho boy grumio response is a line from a song. why, jack boy, ho boy !" and all the news you want.
he'd mock the calmness of the moon.
one more thing, sir. our watch, sir, as you know, has comprehended "comprehended" is a mistake for "apprehended"; "auspicious" is a mistake for "suspicious." comprehended two auspicious persons. we'd like for you to examine them this morning.
oh, you're just so funny.
may this war destroy him! his courage has made him too proud.
examine them yourselves, then bring me your findings. now i'm in a great hurry, as i'm sure you can see.
well, make a fire, then. i think i'm getting delirious. where's the cook? is supper ready? is the house fixed up, the floor covered, the cobwebs swept out of the corners, the servingmen in their new work clothes and the household servants each in his wedding suit? are all the cups and glasses in their places, the tablecloths laid out, everything in order?
a nature such as his, which has been amplified by all his successes, disdains his own shadow, which he walks on at noon. i wonder if his pride can handle being under cominius's command.
that will be suffigance "suffigance" is a mistake for "sufficient." suffigance .
everything's ready. so tell me what's been going on.
the fame he aims for, and with which he has already been graced, can't be maintained or increased in any position other than the lead. whatever goes wrong will be seen as the general's fault, even though he'll do the best job a man could do, and fickle public opinion will then say of martius, "oh, if only he had been in charge!"
have some wine before you go. goodbye.
well, first of all, my horse is tired and my master and mistress have had a falling out.
besides, if things go well, public opinion that favors martius will steal praise away from cominius.
my lord, they're waiting for you to give your daughter away to claudio.
how?
indeed, half of all cominius's victories have been credited to martius, though he didn't win them. and whatever faults cominius has are seen as martius's honors, though martius really doesn't have any merit.
i'm coming.
from their saddles into the dirt, but that's another story.
let's go and hear what's happening. let's see how, our feelings about his personality aside, he prepares for this battle.
go to francis seacole, the constable of the watch. tell him to bring his pen and his inkwell to the jail. we will now go to examination "examination" is mistake for "examine." examination these men.
well, let's have it, grumio.
let's go.
we must do this wisely.
lean forward.
so aufidius, your opinion is that the romans have spied on our council meetings and know how we proceed.
we won't hold back any of our wisdom. we'll drive them to a noncome "noncome" is a mistake for "outcome"; "excommunication" is a mistake for "examination." noncome . go get the educated writer to record our excommunication, and i'll meet you at the jail.
here.
don't you agree? haven't all the plans we've ever discussed here that could be put into action against rome been thwarted? not even four days have gone by since i heard from the field, these are the words, i think i have the letter here, yes, here it is.
all right, friar francis, let's keep this short. do a simple ceremony, and list all the particular duties of marriage later.
there!
"they've raised an army, but it's not known whether they will march east or west. the famine is serious, the people are rebelling, and it's rumored that cominius, your old enemy martius, who the romans hate worse than you, and titus lartius, a most valiant roman, these three lead the attack, wherever it's headed. most likely toward you. think about it."
(to claudio) have you come here, my lord, to marry this lady?
this is to feel the news, not hear it.
our army's in the field. we've never doubted that the romans were ready to fight back.
no.
that's what makes it "sensitive" news. i was just knocking to see if anyone was home. now, i'll begin: first, we came down a steep hill, my master riding behind my mistress, 
you thought it was wise to keep your plans secret until they needed to be revealed, but it seems that the romans knew your plans as soon as they were hatched. since they know our intention, we can't proceed as we had planned: to capture as many towns as possible before the romans knew we were moving toward them.
no, he comes to be married to her. friar, you are the one who has come to marry her.
both on one horse?
noble aufidius, do your duty. go to your men. leave us here to guard corioles ourselves. if they attack us, bring your army back before they take the city, but i think you'll find they haven't prepared for us.
lady, do you come here to be married to this count?
what's the difference?
don't be so sure. i'm certain when i say that some part of their army is already moving toward us. i leave you now, noblemen. if we happen to meet caius martius, he and i have sworn that we'll always strike at each other until one of us can strike no more.
i do.
well, the difference of a horse!
may the gods assist you!
if either of you knows any secret reason why you two should not be joined in marriage, i order you on your souls to say so.
oh, tell it yourself if you're so smart. it's too bad. if you hadn't made me angry, you would have heard all about how her horse fell with her under it, how swampy the place was, too, and how she was covered in mud, and how he left her like that, with the horse on top of her, and how he beat me because her horse stumbled, and how she waded through the dirt to pull him off me, and how he swore, how she prayed, this woman who never prayed before, and how i yelled, and how the horses ran away, and how her bridle broke, and how i lost my riding crop, and many other things worth telling, which now will all be lost to memory, and you'll go to your grave ignorant.
and keep you noblemen safe!
do you know any, hero?
by the sound of it, he's a bigger shrew than she is.
farewell.
none, my lord.
yes, as you and the rest will find out as soon as he's home. but why am i telling you this? get them in here, nathaniel, joseph, nicholas, philip, walter, sugarsop, and the rest. tell them to slick down their hair, brush their blue coats, and make sure their socks match. have them click their heels together and don't dare touch a hair of the master's horse's tail till they kiss their hands. are they all ready?
farewell.
do you know any, count?
they are.
farewell.
i'm sure i can answer for him, he doesn't know any, either.
get them in here.
please, my daughter-in-law, sing or express yourself more cheerfully. if my son were my husband, i would be happier with him away winning honors than lovingly embracing me in bed. before he was full grown, when he was still my only child, when he was boyishly handsome and attracting much attention, when even if the king begged me i shouldn't have let him out of my sight for an hour, i considered how honored he would become, and that unless he were inspired to make a name for himself, he would be no better than a picture hanging on the wall, so i happily let him face danger, because that's how he was likely to find fame. i sent him to a cruel war from which he returned crowned with garlands of oak. i tell you, daughter-in-law, i jumped for joy more to see that he had proven himself as a man than i did when i first heard he was a boy child.
oh, the things men dare to do! the things men are allowed to do! the things men do daily, not knowing what they're doing!
(calling offstage) hey! does anyone hear me? hey! you have to come and greet the master and face the new mistress.
but if had he died in the war, madam, how would you feel then?
what, are we playing with interjections? well then, add some interjections that indicate laughter, like "ah," "ha," and "he!" benedick is jokingly referring to a passage from a popular latin grammar book of the day. "ah," "ha," and "he!"
she already has a face.
then his noble deeds would have been my son, in them i would have found my legacy. listen to me seriously: if i had a dozen sons and loved them equally, as much as i love our martius, i would rather that eleven of them die nobly for their country than one choose the pleasures of making love over doing his duty.
hold on, friar. (to leonato) father, are you giving me your daughter freely?
yeah, so?
(to volumnia) madam, the lady valeria has come to see you.
as freely, son, as god gave her to me.
you just said they had to face her.
may i please be excused to have some time alone?
and what should i give you that would be equal in value to this rare and precious gift?
i meant they had to give her credit.
no, you may not. i think i hear your husband's drum coming toward us. he must have plucked out all aufidius's hairs so the volsces will avoid him the way children run from a bear. i think i see him stamping like this, and calling like this: "come on, you cowards! you were born in fear even though you were born in rome." he's wiping his bloody forehead with his armored hand. he's unrelenting like a laborer who must harvest a whole field or not be paid at all.
nothing, sir, except grandchildren.
she's not going to borrow money from them.
his bloody forehead! oh, jupiter, king of the gods, not blood!
good prince, you have taught me how to accept things nobly. there, leonato, take your daughter back. don't insult a friend by giving him a beautiful orange that rots inside. she only appears honorable from the outside. look, how she blushes like a virgin! oh, sin can disguise itself so artfully! doesn't that rising blush suggest that she is virtuous and innocent? all of you who are looking at her, wouldn't you swear that she's a virgin, judging by these outward shows? but she is no virgin. she has been in a man's bed. she blushes from guilt, not modesty.
welcome home, grumio.
don't be foolish! blood belongs on a man more than gold belongs on his trophy. when hecuba suckled hector, her breasts were no lovelier than hector's forehead when a grecian sword struck it and it gushed furiously with blood. tell valeria that we welcome her in.
what do you mean, my lord?
what's up, grumio?
heavens protect my husband from the deadly aufidius!
i won't be married. i won't join my soul to such a proven slut.
hey, grumio!
he'll beat aufidius's head down below his knees and then stand on his neck.
my dear lord, if it was you who conquered her and took her virginity, 
my man grumio!
my ladies, good day to you both.
i know what you're about to say. if i had slept with her, you'd say that we did so as husband and wife, merely anticipating our eventual marriage. no, leonato. i never seduced her, or tempted her with indecent words. i treated her like a brother would treat a sister, with modest sincerity and appropriate affection.
so what's the story, old boy?
sweet madam.
and have i ever seemed less than modest or appropriate to you?
welcome yourself!, what's up with you?, hey to you!, so much for greetings. now, my well-dressed friends, is everything ready and in order?
i'm glad to see you, your ladyship.
curse you for your false appearances! to me, you seemed like diana diana was the virgin goddess of the hunt and moon; venus was the goddess of love generally portrayed as fickle and promiscuous. diana in her orbit, as virginal as the flower bud before it blooms. but you're actually as hot-blooded as venus, or a pampered animal allowed to run wild.
everything's ready. how soon will the master be here?
how are you both? you are remarkable house-keepers. (to volumnia) what are you sewing here? it looks like fine embroidery. (to virgilia) how is your little son?
are you sick, my lord? is that why you're talking so wildly?
any minute. probably here already. so be careful, and don't, god! quiet, i hear him coming.
thank you, your ladyship. he's fine, good madam.
good prince, say something!
where are those bastards? where is the boy who's supposed to help me get off my horse and take him to the stable? where is nathaniel? where's gregory? where's philip?
he'd rather see the soldiers and hear a drum than do his schoolwork.
what should i say? i've been dishonored: i arranged for a friend of mine to marry a common whore.
here, here, sir! here, sir!
it's true, he's his father's son. he's a very good-looking boy. i spent half an hour with him on wednesday. he is so determined. i saw him run after a golden butterfly, and when he caught it, he let it go and then went after it again. he fell down and got back up and again he caught the butterfly. i don't know whether his fall enraged him or what, but he clenched his teeth and tore it. i tell you, he ripped it apart!
are you really saying these things, or am i dreaming?
"here, sir! here, sir! here, sir! here, sir!" you stupid, unpolished dolts! i get no service, no respect, no attention! where is the fool i sent on ahead?
he has his father's moods.
they're really being spoken, sir, and they're true.
here, sir, as foolish as ever.
indeed, dear, he's a noble child.
this doesn't look like a wedding.
you unwashed farmworker! you bastard workhorse drudge! didn't i tell you to meet me outside and bring these morons with you?
he's devilish, madam.
it's true! oh god!
nathaniel's coat was being fixed, sir. and one of gabriel's shoes had a broken heel. and peter couldn't find a matching hat. and walter couldn't get his dagger out of its sheath. only adam, rafe, and gregory were ready. the rest were just a mess, but such as they are, sir, they're here to welcome you.
set aside your stitching. pretend to be an idle housewife with me this afternoon.
leonato, am i standing here? is this the prince? is this the prince's brother? is this face hero's? are these our eyes?
go, blockheads, go, and bring my supper to me.
no, good madam. i can't go out today.
yes, that's all true, but what do you mean by it, my lord?
(singing) where is the life i led until recently? where are those, sit down, kate, make yourself at home., come on, come on, come on, come on.
can't go out?
let me just ask her one question, and by your authority as her father, order her to answer truthfully.
did i say later? i said now!, smile, kate! be happy., get my boots off, you apes! you idiots, now!
she will, she will.
as my child, i order you to do so.
(singing) it was a friar in robes of gray, who walked along the road one day:, (a servant tries to take off petruchio's boots) stop, you moron! you're twisting my foot! take that, and see you do a better job with the other one. (he strikes the servant) be happy, kate!, bring me some water! where's my spaniel troilus? hey boy, go tell my cousin ferdinand to get in here.
no. please let me stay in. i won't cross the threshold until my husband returns from the war.
oh, god help me! how i'm being attacked! what kind of game is this?
you'll love this guy, kate, anyway, you'd better! where are my slippers? can we have some water please here?, 
you're being unreasonable to confine yourself. come, you must go visit our neighbor, who's expecting a baby.
we just want you to answer to your real name.
come and wash, kate, make yourself at home. son of a bitch, you spilled it! (he strikes the servant)
i wish her an easy birth and send her my prayers, but i can't go see her.
isn't my name hero? who can stain that name with a just accusation?
take it easy! please! it was just an accident!
why not?
indeed, hero herself can! you've stained your virtue with your own actions. what man were you talking to at your window last night, between the hours of midnight and one? if you're a virgin, you'll answer this question.
he's a son of a bitch, a moron, a total jerk., come sit down, kate, i know you must be hungry. will you say grace, sweet kate, or shall i?, what is this? mutton?
it's not because i'm lazy or don't care for her.
i wasn't talking to any man at that time, my lord.
yes.
you're like another penelope, except they say that all the yarn she spun in ulysses' absence only filled ithaca with moths. i wish your embroidery cloth were as sensitive as your finger, that way you might take pity on it and stop pricking it. come with us.
well then, you are no virgin. leonato, i'm sorry you have to hear this. i swear on my honor that we saw and heard hero talking to a brute at her window last night. and that man confessed at length how he has secretly come to her bedroom thousands of times.
who brought it out here?
no, good madam, please excuse me. i won't go.
no, my lord, don't name her sinful acts or speak of them! there's no way to describe them without offending everyone here. pretty lady, i'm much ashamed of your shocking behavior.
i did.
truly, come with me, and i'll tell you excellent news about your husband.
oh hero, you could have equaled the mythical hero the mythical hero, who died for her lover, leander, was considered the model of perfect love. mythical hero if only half your outward beauty matched your inner thoughts and desires! goodbye, beautiful sinner. goodbye to your pure wickedness and your wicked purity. because of you, i'll keep myself away from love. i'll hang suspicion on my eyelids, so that all the beautiful things i see are transformed into dangers and are never able to trick me again.
it's burnt. the whole thing is burnt. you bastards! where is that moron of a cook? you devils! how dare you serve it to me this way! there, take it all back, plates, cups, the whole thing. (throws the meat and everything else around the stage) you careless blockheads and unwashed slaves! i heard that! i'll deal with you in a minute.
oh, good madam, there can't be good news yet.
does anyone have a dagger for me?
please, dear, calm down. the meat was fine if you wanted to eat it.
i'm not kidding you. news came from him last night.
what's wrong, cousin? why have you collapsed?
and i'm telling you it was burnt and dried out. i'm not allowed to eat overcooked meat overcooked meat was through to produce choler, one of the four humors, the one that gave rise to anger. overcooked meat . it gives me indigestion and that makes me irritable. very, very irritable.better for us to go hungry, since we're both hotheaded, than for us to eat meat that's been cooked too long. but don't worry, tomorrow it will get straightened out. tonight we'll go without food.
really, madam?
come, let's go. these revelations have overwhelmed her.
come, i'll show you your bridal chamber.
yes, it's true. i heard a senator talking. he said cominius the general is leading one part of our roman army against the oncoming volsces. your husband and titus lartius are attacking their city corioles. they have no doubt that they'll win and that the battle won't last long. on my honor, this news is true. please come out with us.
how is she?
peter, did you ever see anything like it?
forgive me, good madam. i'll do as you say from now on.
she's dead, i think., help, uncle!, hero, why hero! uncle! signior benedick! friar!
he's giving her a taste of her own medicine.
(to valeria) let her stay home, lady. the way she is now, she'll only detract from our celebration.
oh fate, don't spare hero from being punished! death is the best way to cover over her shame.
where is he?
i think you're right, she will. cheer up then, good sweet lady. please, virgilia, shake off your sad mood and come out with us.
how are you, hero?
in her room, lecturing her on the virtues of self-control. he rants and rails and swears and she, poor thing, doesn't know how to stand or look or speak. she sits like a person who's just woken up from a dream. look out, he's coming!
no. in a word, madam, i simply can't. i wish you much happiness.
(to hero) take comfort, lady.
well, i've begun my reign with a carefully thought-out plan, and i have every hope of succeeding. my falcon is now hungry and unfed and must not be given enough to eat until she comes to me, for if her hunger is satisfied, she'll pay no attention to the bait. i have another plan to make my bird come to me and recognize her owner's call is to keep her from sleeping, 
well then, goodbye.
(to hero) are you looking up?
the way trainers do with young hawks that flutter and flap and will not obey. she had no food today and will have none. last night she got no sleep, and she won't get any tonight. just as i did with the meat, i'll make up some problem with the way the bed is made, and throw the pillow one way and the cushion the other, and the blanket over here and the sheets over there. and through all the shouting and fuss, i'll swear that it's all out of love for her. the end result will be that she'll sit up all night. and if she starts to drop off, i'll rant and yell until i wake her up. this is how to kill a wife with kindness. and this way i'll cure her wild and willful nature. if anyone here knows a better way to tame a shrew, speak up, please. it would be much appreciated.
here comes news. i bet there's been a battle.
yes, why shouldn't she?
(as lucentio) i don't believe it, litio. it's not possible that bianca could prefer another man to me. i've seen the way she behaves.
i bet you my horse for yours that there hasn't been a battle.
why not! isn't every living thing condemning her? can she deny the accusations that are proven by her guilty blush? die, hero, don't open your eyes. if i didn't think you were about to die soon, if i thought your spirit could bear this shame, i would risk punishment and kill you myself. am i sorry that i only had one child? do i blame nature for being so thrifty? oh, one child is one too many! why did i ever have one? why did you once seem lovely to me? why didn't i just adopt a beggar's child left at my doorstep, whose shame and dishonor i could have denied, not being its true father? but you were mine, and i loved and praised you for being mine, and was proud of you for being mine, i loved you so much that i hardly cared about myself.
(as litio) you want proof of what i'm telling you? stand right here and watch this fellow's "lesson." (they stand off to one side)
it's a bet.
oh, but now you have fallen into a pit of ink, and there's not enough water in the whole wide sea to wash you clean again, and not enough salt to cover your stink.
(as cambio) well, mistress, are you learning from what you're reading?
agreed.
sir, sir, calm down. i'm so amazed by this, i don't know what to say.
what are you reading, teacher? answer me that first.
tell us, has our general been in battle with the enemy?
oh, on my soul, my cousin has been slandered falsely!
(as cambio) i'm reading the book i know best, the art of love ovid the art of love was a manual of seduction. the art of love
they can see each other, but they haven't fought yet.
lady, did you sleep in her room last night?
i hope you're an expert in your field.
so, your good horse is mine.
no, i didn't, but i did every night for the past year.
(as cambio) well, my dear, you're the mistress of my heart in any case!
i'll buy him back from you.
then it's confirmed! that's even more proof, and the case against her was airtight already. would the two princes and claudio lie? claudio, who loved her so much that talking about her wickedness made him weep?
(as litio) quick work for schoolwork! how do you explain that? i though you said your precious bianca loved no one better than you, lucentio!
no, i'll won't sell or give him away. i'll lend him to you for fifty years. alert the town.
listen to me a moment. i've only remained silent this whole time because i've been watching hero. i've seen her begin to blush a thousand times, only to watch those blushes disappear a thousand times and an innocent paleness take over her face. and in her eyes i see a fire that would seem to burn away the lies the princes have told about her chastity. call me a fool, don't trust my observations, the truth of which is backed up by all my years of experience, don't trust my age, my reputation, my position, and my holiness.
(as lucentio) oh spiteful love! faithless womanhood! it's incredible, litio!
how far away are the armies?
you can doubt all these things if this sweet lady turns out to be guilty.
let me come clean. i'm not really litio. i'm not even a musician, really. in fact, i refuse to go on with this charade for a woman who would choose a lower-class guy like this over a gentleman of my stature. my name is hortensio, sir.
within a mile and a half.
but she must be, friar. you see that any morals she has left are preventing her from denying the charges: she doesn't want to add perjury to her list of sins.
(as lucentio) signior hortensio, i've often heard of your total devotion to bianca. so, now that i've seen with my own eyes proof of her worthlessness, i'm willing to join you in swearing her off for good, if you like.
then we'll hear their call to arms, and they'll hear ours. now, mars, god of war, i pray to you, make our attack quick, so that with victorious swords we may march from here to help our friends on the battlefield! (to the trumpeter) come, blow your blast.
lady, who do they accuse you of having taken as your lover?
look how they kiss and carry on! signior lucentio, it's a deal. i hereby swear to have nothing more to do with this girl. i formally declare her unworthy of all the attention and expense i have wasted on her.
(to the senators) is tullus aufidius inside these walls?
you should ask them. i don't know who they're talking about. if i've been with a man in any improper way, let all my sins be punished! oh, father, if you yourself can prove that i talked with a man at an indecent hour, or indeed that i spoke to any creature last night, you can disown me, hate me, and torture me to death!
and i hereby make the same promise, never to marry her, not even if she begs me. the hell with her! look how she carries on with him! it's revolting!
no. and there isn't a man here who fears you any less than he does, which is virtually not at all.
the princes are under some strange misunderstanding.
i wish all her lovers had given her up. well, to be on the safe side, so i don't go back on my promise, i plan to get myself married to a wealthy widow within the next three days. she's been after me for years, the way i've been for this proud, haughty hag. farewell, then, signior lucentio. from now on, goodness in women, not superficial beauty, will win my heart. i bid you all goodbye. i've made up my mind, and i'm going to stick to it.
(to the volsces) listen! our drums are summoning our young soldiers. we'd rather break down our own walls than let them fence us in. our gates, which look locked, are actually just gently shut. they'll open on their own.
two of them are completely honorable, and if they have been tricked in this, we must blame john the bastard, who lives to create conflict.
miss bianca, may you be blessed with all the happiness you deserve. no, i've caught you out, my dear. you're busted. hortensio and i have given you up.
(to the romans) listen! in the distance, that's aufidius. listen to how he's beating your divided army.
i don't know. if they have spoken the truth about hero, i will tear her apart with my bare hands. but if they have accused her falsely, even the greatest of them will have to deal with me. age hasn't dried up my body or eroded my intelligence so much, and luck hasn't robbed me of so much of my fortune, and my bad ways haven't deprived me of so many friends, that they won't find me ready to seek revenge both physically and mentally, with money and friends at my disposal.
you can't mean it, tranio! have you both really given me up?
oh, they're fighting each other!
hold on a moment, and listen to my advice. the princes left your daughter here for dead. hide her for a while in your house, and tell everyone that she has, in fact, died. make a bug show of mourning for her, hang sad epitaphs up at your family's tomb, and perform all the appropriate burial ceremonies.
yes, ma'am, we have.
their noise tells us what to do. raise the ladders!
why should we do this? what will this do?
so litio's out of the picture.
they're not afraid of us, instead they march out of their own city. cover your hearts with your shields now and fight with hearts that are stronger than these shields. go forward, brave titus. they hate us more than we think, which makes me sweat with anger. come on, my fellow soldiers. whoever hangs back, i'll think you're a volsce, and you'll feel the edge of my sword.
listen, if we do this correctly, the men who slandered hero will feel remorse for her instead. that will be a good thing. but i have an even greater goal in mind. we'll maintain that she died the instant she was accused, and everyone who hears this will grieve for her, pity her, and excuse her actions. that's how it goes: we don't value the things we have until we lose them, when we suddenly rack up their value and see all the virtues we were blind to when they were alive and with us. that's how claudio will respond. when he hears that she died from his words, his imagination will be sweetly overtaken by thoughts of her. in death, every aspect of her life will be got up more beautifully, and in his mind she will seem more moving, more delicate, and more lively even than when she was alive. then, if he ever truly felt love, he'll mourn and wish he hadn't accused her, even though he believed his accu-
he's going after a young widow. he says he'll court and win her in a day.
i curse you with the plague of the south, you shameful romans! you bunch of, may blisters and infection cover over you so that people will smell you before they see you, and may your disease spread on the wind for a mile, even when the wind blows against you! you look like men, but you have the souls of geese. why did you run from slaves that even apes could beat? pluto, god of the dead and the underworld! you ran away and didn't fight back; your backs are red with blood and your faces pale with fear! pull yourselves together and charge again, or, by the fires of heaven, i'll stop fighting the volsces and attack you instead. listen, if you can hold steady, we'll beat them and take their wives. they're in our trenches. follow me!
sation to be true. follow my plan, and trust that the actual events will play out even better than i am describing. and even if they don't, at least hero's supposed death will stop the rumors of her infidelity. and if it doesn't go well, then you can keep her hidden in a nunnery, the best place for someone with her kind of dirtied reputation, away from the public's eyes, tongues, mind, and insults.
well, good for him!
so, the gates are open now. support me well. fortune opens the gates for those who follow me, not for those who run from battle. listen to me, and do as i say.
signior leonato, listen to the friar's plan. and even though you know i'm very close to the prince and claudio, i swear i'll keep your counsel and deal with this secretly and justly.
yeah, and he's going to tame her.
that's crazy. i'm not going.
because i'm drowning in my grief, i'll grab onto the smallest piece of string dangled in front of me.
is that what he says?
neither am i.
this is a good agreement. now, let's go. a strange disease requires a strange cure. come, lady; you must die in order to live. hopefully, your wedding day is only postponed. have patience and endure.
yep. he's gone to study at the taming school.
look, they've locked him in.
lady beatrice, have you been crying this entire time?
the taming school? is there such a place?
i'm sure he'll end up in their cooking pot.
yes, and i'll keep crying a while longer.
yes, ma'am. petruchio runs it. there he teaches piles of tricks for taming a shrew and her tongue.
what happened to martius?
i don't wish that on you.
master, master, i've been on the lookout so long, i'm ready to fall down dead, but i've got one, finally! there's a trustworthy old fellow coming down the hill who will do the job.
he has undoubtedly been killed, sir.
you don't have to; i do it of my own free will.
what does he look like, biondello?
he followed right behind the fleeing volsces and entered the city with them. they closed the gates behind him, and he's in there all alone to fight the whole city.
i really believe your cousin was falsely accused.
a merchant or a schoolmaster, sir. well, i don't know exactly, but his clothes are respectable, and to judge from his face and walk, he's old enough to be lucentio's father.
oh, noble fellow! he's braver than his sword, which cannot feel pain, and he stands firm while even his sword bends. you are gone for, martius. a flawless red gem, as large as you, wouldn't be as valuable a jewel as you are. you were the soldier {cato  a military adviser in ancient rome.} would have wished for, not just fierce and terrible on occasion, but with your serious looks and your thunderous voice, you terrified your enemies as if the whole world were shaking with a fever.
oh, the man who avenged her could ask anything of me!
and what about him, tranio?
look, sir.
is there any way i could show such friendship to you?
if he's an easy mark and buys my story, i think i can get him to pose as vincentio, and be as ready to vouch for you with baptista minola as the real vincentio would. go, take your sweetheart and leave him to me.
oh, it's martius! let's rescue him or we'll be assaulted by the volsces, too.
a very clear way, but there is no friend who will undertake it.
may god keep you well, sir.
i'll bring this back to rome.
can a man do it?
(as lucentio) and you too, sir. welcome. are you going far, or is this your destination?
and i'll bring this.
it's a job meant for a man, but not you.
this is it, for now. then, in a week or two, i'll continue on as far as rome, then on to tripoli, god willing.
curse it! i thought this was silver.
there is nothing in the world that i love as much as you. isn't that strange?
(speaking as lucentio) what country are you from, if i may ask?
look at these scavengers who spend their time gathering worthless coins! cushions, lead spoons, cheap swords, clothes that hangmen would bury along with whoever died wearing them. these lowly slaves are packing up before the fight is even over. they're the worst! and listen to the noise cominius makes! let's go help him! aufidius, the one my soul hates, is driving our roman army apart. valiant titus, take enough men with you to secure the city. i'll go now with those who have the spirit and help cominius.
it's as strange as this other thing which i don't understand. i could just as easily say that there is nothing in the world that i love as much as you. but don't believe me, though i'm not lying. i confess nothing, and i deny nothing. i feel awful for my cousin.
mantua.
worthy sir, you're bleeding. your efforts have been too violent for you to fight again now.
by my sword, beatrice, you love me.
(as lucentio) mantua, sir? oh lord, i hope not. and coming to padua? do you want to get killed?
don't flatter me. i'm not even warmed up yet. good luck to you. bleeding is more helpful to me than it is dangerous. i'll find aufidius and fight.
don't swear like that and then go back and eat it beatrice means "eat your words" (i.e., go back on your pledge to love me). eat it later.
killed? why? that would be a little extreme!
may the fair goddess fortune fall deeply in love with you, and may she cast a spell on your opponents so their swords don't strike you! brave gentlemen, may you be successful!
i'll swear by my sword ...but benedick takes it to mean "eat your sword." sword that you love me, too, and i'll make any man who says that i don't love you eat it.
it's a capital offense for anyone from mantua to come to padua. didn't you know? the duke of padua has publicly proclaimed it. he's feuding with your duke, and all ships from mantua are being held up at venice. it's strange that you haven't heard. there are signs up all over town, but i guess it's because you've only just arrived.
may fortune be no less a friend to you than she is to those she loves most! good luck.
but you won't eat your words?
oh dear, oh dear. this is very bad, very bad. i have promissory notes from florence that i have to deliver.
you're the bravest, martius!
not with any sauce they could provide for them. i swear, i love you.
(as lucentio) well, look, just to be nice i'll help you out and give you some advice to boot. first tell me, though, have you ever been to pisa?
go, sound your trumpet in the marketplace. bring all the town officials here. we'll tell them what we're thinking. go!
well then, god forgive me!
oh yes, sir, i have often been to pisa, pisa, city of wise men.
catch your breath, my friends. you fought well. we've cleared the enemy like romans, neither foolish in our attacks nor cowardly in our retreat. believe me, sirs, we'll fight again. while we've been attacking, news has intermittently come to us, carried on the winds, about the battles fought by our friends. oh, roman gods! grant them the success that we wish for as well, and may both our armies, with smiling faces, then gratefully offer you a sacrifice.
why, what have you done, sweet beatrice?
(as lucentio) there's one of them called vincentio? do you know him?
what news do you have?
you got to me first. i was about to swear that i loved you.
i've heard of him but i've never met him. a merchant of unheard-of wealth.
the citizens of corioles have left the city and are fighting with lartius and martius. our group was driven to their trenches, and then i got away.
then do so, with all your heart.
(as lucentio) he is my father, sir, and i have to tell you, you look a little like him.
you're telling the truth, but you're leaving something out. how long ago did this happen?
i love you with so much of my heart that none of it is left to protest with.
(speaking to the audience) as much as an apple looks like an oyster, but whatever.
more than an hour ago, my lord.
come, ask me to do anything for you.
(as lucentio) under the circumstance, to save your life, here's what i'm willing to do, and it's actually not an unlucky thing that you happen to look like sir vincentio. we'll pass you off as him, you can assume his name and reputation and stay in my house. you just have to act your part, you understand? you'll stay here in the city until you've taken care of your business. if this is kindness, you're welcome to it.
they're not even a mile away. a little while ago we heard their drums. how could you waste an hour traveling only one mile and bring your news so late?
kill claudio.
oh sir, i accept. and i'll be eternally grateful to you.
volscian spies chased me and i was forced to go three or four miles out of my way. otherwise i would have brought my report half an hour earlier.
ha! i wouldn't do that for the whole wide world.
(as lucentio) then come with me and we'll set it up. and, by the way, i should probably tell you: my father himself is coming any day to vouch for me in the matter of a dowry, a marriage contract between me and the daughter of a fellow named baptista. i'll fill you in on the whole situation. come, let's go and get your costume.
who's over there, looking like he's been skinned alive? oh, gods, it looks like martius, and i've seen him look like this before.
then, rejecting my request, you kill me, instead. goodbye.
no, no, i can't, really. he'd kill me.
(from offstage) am i too late?
wait, sweet beatrice.
the more i suffer, the more spiteful he becomes. did he marry me just to starve me? beggars at my father's door are given money as soon as they ask for it. and if they don't find charity there, they find it someplace else. but i, who have never known how to beg and never had to beg, am starved for food, dizzy with lack of sleep, kept awake with curses and fed with brawling. and what irks me more than all these things put together is that he does it under the pretense of love, as though for me to eat or sleep would bring on fatal illness or sudden death. please, go and get me something to eat. i don't care what so long as it's nutritious.
i know the difference between the sound of martius's tongue and every lesser man even more than the shepherd knows the difference between the sound of thunder and a drum.
my body waits here, but the rest of me is gone. you don't really love me. i beg you to let me go.
what do you say to a calf's foot?
am i too late?
beatrice, 
oh, lovely. can i have some?
yes, but only if you're drenched in your own blood, not the blood of others.
i swear, i'm going.
i'm afraid it will raise your blood pressure "choleric" = angry raise your blood pressure . what do you say to an ox stomach, nicely broiled?
oh, let me hug you with arms as strong as when i wooed my wife, with a heart as happy as the day we married and the candles burned down, telling us it was time for bed!
not until we part as friends.
i'd love it. nice grumio, bring me some.
prized warrior, how is titus lartius?
how dare you try to be my friend when you refuse to fight my enemy.
i don't know. i'm afraid it will make you too hot, too. what do you say to a piece of beef with mustard?
he's busy with decrees: condemning some to death and some to exile, releasing men for ransom or pity, and threatening others. he's holding corioles in the name of rome, as if the city were a greyhound on a leash, eager to please and ready to run.
is claudio your enemy?
a favorite dish of mine.
where is that slave who told me they had beaten you back to your trenches? where is he? call him here.
hasn't he proven himself to be a great villain, slandering, scorning, and dishonoring my cousin? oh, i wish i were a man! he pretended that everything was fine until the moment they were exchanging vows, and then, with public accusation, blatant slander, pure hatred, oh god, if only i were a man! i would rip his heart out in public and eat it.
yes, but the mustard is probably too hot.
leave him alone. he told the truth. but as for our men, the common soldiers, i curse them with a plague! may they be tried in court! like stray dogs, they ran away from the volsces, who are lower-bred than they are. they ran like a mouse runs from a cat.
listen to me, beatrice, 
well then, the beef without the mustard.
how did you triumph then?
talking with a man outside her bedroom window! a likely story!
absolutely not. you'll take the mustard or you'll get no beef from grumio.
do i have enough time to tell you? i don't think so. where is the enemy? have you captured this field? if not, why did you stop before you did?
no, but beatrice, 
then both, or one, or anything you like.
martius, we've been fighting without enough soldiers or supplies, so we retreated temporarily to regroup, and then we'll win.
sweet hero, she's been wronged, she's been slandered, she's been ruined.
how about the mustard without the beef.
what's their battle formation? do you know what side their best men are on?
beat, 
get out of here, you measly, lying wretch. (she beats him.) you feed me with only the names of foods. to hell with you and the whole pack of you who triumph at my misery. go on, i said get out of here.
my guess, martius, is that the antiates, who they trust highly, are in the front. leading them is aufidius, the very heart of their hope.
princes and counts! oh, of course, it was all so proper and ceremonious, they gave a truly princely testimony. he's a proper count, that count sugarplum, a sweet gentleman, for sure! oh, if only i were a man! or had a friend who would be a man for me! but there are no real men left. their manliness has melted into pretty curtsies and fancy manners, and their bravery is spent on making clever compliments. all this conversing has turned men into tongues, and fancy ones, at that. the man who tells a lie and swears by it is now considered as brave as hercules. i can't make myself a man by wishing i were, so as a woman i'll die, from grieving.
how is my kate? feeling blue, darling?
by all the battles we've fought, by the blood we have shed together and by the vows we made to remain friends, i beg that you put me directly against aufidius and his antiates. and that you not hesitate but rather fill the air with raised swords and darts. now is the time for us to prove ourselves.
wait, good beatrice. i swear by this hand that i love you.
mistress, how are you?
i wish you were going now to a gentle bath and to have balms applied to you, but i never dare to deny what you ask. take your choice of the men who can best help you.
don't just swear by it; put your hand to some use that will prove you love me.
believe me, i've been better.
the men i choose are the ones most eager to fight. if there is any man here, and it would be a sin to doubt it, who loves seeing me smeared in blood, that fears more for his honor than for his personal safety, that thinks a brave death outweighs a bad life, and that his country is more important than himself, let him alone, or others if they feel the same, wave their arms now to tell me who they are. and then follow me.
do you honestly think, in your soul, that claudio has wrongly accused hero? hercules was a great hero in greek and roman mythology. hero?
cheer up. give us a smile. look, love, see how devoted i am? i've prepared a meal for you myself, and here it is. i am sure, sweet kate, this kindness deserves thanks. what, not a word? i guess you don't want it. ah well, all my trouble was for nothing. here, take away the dish.
choose me! make me one of your swordsmen! if these aren't just superficial words, are there four among you who aren't traitors? all of you would be able to fight the great aufidius, your shields are as hard as his. i will only select four men, but thank you, all of you. the rest of you will fight our enemy in some other battle when the time comes. please march, and i'll quickly choose which men are best suited to this fight.
yes, as sure as i have a thought or a soul.
please, leave it here.
march forward, men. perform well, and we'll all share the honor.
that's enough for me, then. i'll challenge him. i'll kiss your hand, and with that i leave you. i swear that claudio will pay dearly for this. keep me in your thoughts and go comfort your cousin. i'll go tell them that she's dead. goodbye.
the smallest service is repaid with thanks. mine will be, too, before you touch the food.
guard the gate. do your job as i've explained it. if i send a message, send those hundreds of soldiers to help us. the remaining soldiers can hold the city on their own for a little while. after all, if we lose in the field, we can't keep the city anyway.
is our whole dissembly "dissembly" is a mistake for "assembly." dissembly here?
thank you, sir.
don't worry, sir, we'll guard the city.
oh, we need a stool and a cushion for the sexton.
shame on you, petruchio! you are too harsh. come, mistress kate, i'll join you.
good, and shut these gates once i'm gone. here comes our scout to bring us to the roman camp.
which ones are the malefactors?
(speaking so that only hortensio can hear) do me a favor and scarf it all down yourself, hortensio., may it do your gentle heart good, kate. eat up quickly, my honey lamb, we're off to your father's house to join in the revelry, where we'll dress as well as the best of them, with silk robes and caps and golden rings, collars and cuffs and fancy frocks and things, with scarves and fans and two changes of clothes, amber bracelets, beads, and plenty of gewgaws. all finished? the tailor is waiting to deck you out in ruffled finery.
i'll fight only against you, because i hate you worse than a traitor.
sir, that would be me and my partner.
now, tailor, let's see what you've got. lay out the gown.
we feel the same hatred. there's not a snake in africa that i hate more than your fame and envy. prepare to fight.
yes, yes, we've been exhibitioned "exhibitioned" is a mistake for "commissioned." exhibitioned to examine this case.
what can i do for you, sir?
whoever runs away from this fight first must become the other's slave until death, and after that may the gods curse him!
no, you've misunderstood me, where are the criminals whom i'm supposed to examine? have them come in front of the master constable.
here is the cap your worship ordered.
if i run, martius, hunt me like a hare.
yes, indeed, bring them before me.
why, this was modeled on a porridge bowl! it's a velvet dish! no, definitely not! it's cheap and nasty! it's like a cockleshell or a walnut shell, a joke, a prank, a doll's cap. take it away. bring me a bigger one.
less than three hours ago, tullus, i fought alone inside the walls of corioles, and i killed whoever i wanted. it's not my own blood you see me covered in. for your revenge, fight me with your fullest force.
what's your name, friend?
i won't have one any bigger. this is the fashion. gentlewomen are wearing caps like this right now.
if you're anything like hector, the failed champion of your ancestors whom you're so proud of, you won't escape me here.
borachio.
when you are gentle, you shall have one, too, and not till then.
you're intrusive, not brave. you've shamed me with your assistance, and i condemn you for it.
please, write down "borachio.", and yours?
(to himself) that won't be anytime soon.
if i told you about all you did today, you wouldn't believe it. but when i tell the senators, they'll both cry and smile. great noblemen will pause, shrug their shoulders in bewilderment, and wonder. ladies will be frightened, happily frightened, and ask to hear more. the somber tribunes, who along with the moldy peasants hate it when you triumph, will say under their breath: "we thank the gods that rome has a soldier like you." but for you this victory was only like a small bite, since you had already had a feast of victory before.
i'm a gentleman, sir, and my name is conrade.
sir, i think i have the right to speak, and speak i certainly will. i am not a child or an infant. better men than you have heard me speak my mind, and if you can't take it, then you'd better plug your ears. i'll express my anger or die concealing it. and rather than have that happen, i'll give myself permission to speak as freely as i like, whatever i may have to say.
oh, general, martius was like the horse, and we were only along for the ride. if you had seen, 
write down "master gentleman conrade.", gentlemen, are you good christians, and do you serve god?
you know, you're right. it's a measly little cap, a dessert crust, a plaything, a silk pie. i love you all the more for not liking it.
please, say no more. my mother, who has a right to praise me since i am her son, irritates me when she does so. i've done what you've done: i've done the best i can. i was trained as you were: to serve my country. whoever who has done what he intended to do has accomplished more than i have.
yes, sir, we hope so.
i don't care if you love me or not, i like the cap and i'll have it or i won't have any.
don't dismiss the praise you deserve. rome must know your value as her soldier. to conceal your achievements would be worse than stealing, and not less than slander, because for what you have done, no matter how highly we praise you, it will never be sufficient. so i ask you, in recognition of your importance to rome, not to boast of your achievements, let me address you in front of our army.
write down that they hope they serve god. oh, and write "god" first, for god forbid we put these criminals before god!, gentlemen, it's already been proven that you aren't much better than lying criminals, and soon we'll know almost for certain. how do you both plead?
now, your gown? yes, yes. come, tailor, show it to us. merciful god! what sort of costume do we have here? what do you call this? a sleeve? it's like a cannon.
i'm wounded, and my wounds hurt when they hear how i got them.
honestly, sir, we say that we are not criminals.
what have you done? carved it up and down like an apple tart? snip and snip and cut and slash, it's got more holes than a sieve! what in the world do you call this, tailor!
if your wounds don't hear, they might think we're ungrateful, become infected, and cause your death. of all the many good horses we've taken from the enemy and of all the treasures we've won in the battlefield and in the city, we'll give you one tenth to take now, before the rest is divided among us. take whatever you choose.
he's a marvelously witty fellow, no doubt, but i'll outmaneuver him., come over here; i'll whisper a word in your ear. sir, i tell you we believe you're both lying criminals.
(to himself) i see she's likely to have neither cap nor gown.
thank you, general, but my heart won't to take a bribe to pay my sword. i refuse to stand there and listen to my deeds be told to those who saw me do them.
sir, i tell you that we are not.
you told me to make it well and properly and in keeping with the current style.
may these instruments, which you play in the wrong moment, never make a sound again! if drums and trumpets could flatter the enemy into submission in battle, then we should build our courts and cities on their false praise! when steel grows soft as the diplomat's silk, let us make an army of diplomats! stop all this flattery! because i haven't washed my bloody nose or because i triumphed over some weakling, which, you fail to note, many others have done, too, you praise me in overstated terms, as if i enjoyed having my small achievements puffed up with exaggerations.
well, okay., i swear to god, both their stories match. have you written that down, that they aren't criminals?
certainly, i did. but if you remember, i didn't tell you to parody the style. go on home, sir. you've lost me as a customer. i won't take it. do whatever you want with it.
you're too modest. you express more resentment about the praise we offer than you express gratitude for our true account of your service. allow me to suggest that if you're going to get upset, we'll tie you up as we would someone suicidal and then reason with you. it must be known, not only to us but to all the world, that caius martius is the hero of this war. so i give you my magnificent horse, whose value is known to our men, and all his equipment. and from this time on, in honor of what you did in corioles, you will be called, with all the applause and clamor you deserve, caius martius coriolanus! use this additional title nobly, always!
master constable, you're going about this all wrong. first, you have to speak to the watchmen who accused them.
i never saw a better-designed gown, more elegant and pleasing and well made. perhaps you think you can make me into some sort of plaything?
caius martius coriolanus!
yes, good idea; that's the eftest "eftest" is a mistake for "aptest." eftest way. bring the watchmen forward. gentlemen, i order you in the prince's name to accuse these men.
yes, that's it! the tailor thinks he can make you into some sort of plaything.
i'll go wash and when my face is clean, you'll see whether or not i'm blushing. thank you for this honor. i'll ride your horse and try always to live up to this noble title you have given me.
this man said, sir, that don john, the prince's brother, was a villain.
she says your worship thinks you can make her into some sort of plaything.
let's go to our tent. before we rest, we'll write to rome of our success. you, titus lartius, must go back to corioles. send us the best citizen of corioles with whom we may negotiate a treaty, one that is fair to them and to us.
write down that prince john is a villain. why, that's flat-out perjury dogberry probably means "treachery on "slanden." perjury , to call a prince's brother a villain.
what monstrous arrogance! it's a lie, you thread, you thimble, you measurement! you flea, you louse, you winter cricket! disrespected in my own house by a spool of thread! get out of here you rag, you remnant, you piece of yardage, or i'll measure you within an inch of your life with your own yardstick, and you'll remember your yammering for the rest of your life. i tell you, you've ruined her gown.
i will, my lord.
master constable, 
it's not true. the gown was made just as my master was directed. grumio gave the order for how it should be done.
the gods begin to mock me. i, who just refused amazing gifts, must now beg something of you, my lord general.
be quiet, you. i swear, i don't like the look of you.
i gave him no order. i gave him the material.
whatever you want is yours. what is it?
(to the watchmen) what else did you hear him say?
but how did you want it made?
when i was in corioles, i stayed for some time in a poor man's house. he treated me kindly, and now he's a prisoner. he cried out for my help, but i was focused on aufidius, and anger overwhelmed my pity. i request that you free my poor host.
that don john had given him a thousand pieces of gold for wrongfully accusing the lady hero.
with a needle and thread.
you're persuasive! even if he were the butcher of my son, he'd be as free as the wind. release him, titus.
that's burglary, that is.
but didn't you expect us to cut the cloth?
martius, his name?
yes, by god, that it is.
you've faced to face means to decorate with trim. faced many things, haven't you?
by jupiter! i've forgotten. i'm worn out and my memory is tired. do we have any wine here?
what else did you hear?
i have.
let's go our tent. the blood on your face is drying. it's time you were looked at. come.
i heard that count claudio meant to disgrace hero in front of the whole wedding party and refuse to marry her.
well, don't face off with me. you have bested many things, well don't try and best me. i will not be faced or bested. i tell you i requested that your master cut out the gown, but i didn't ask him to cut it all to pieces. therefore, it follows you're a liar.
the town is taken!
(to borachio) oh, you villain! you'll be condemned to everlasting redemption "redemption" is a mistake for "damnation." redemption for this!
why, here is the order to prove it.
it'll be given back with fair conditions.
what else?
read it.
conditions! i wish i were a roman, but i can't be other than what i am: a volsce. conditions! under what conditions can a treaty be fair to the side that has lost? i've fought martius five times, and every time he has beaten me. and i think he would beat me again in the future if we met in battle as often as we eat. by the elements, if i ever see him face to face again, i'll kill him or he'll kill me. my desire to beat him isn't as honorable as it once was, for while i once wanted to crush him with our forces being equal, fighting fairly sword to sword, but now i'll stab him however i can and let either my anger or my trickery bring him down.
that's all.
the note is a big fat liar if it says i said so.
he's the devil.
(to conrade and borachio) you can't deny this, gentlemen. this morning, prince john secretly snuck out of messina. hero was accused exactly as the watchman described, and died on the spot from the grief. master constable, tie up these men and bring them to leonato's. i'll get there first and tell him what we found out.
(reading) "item one, a loose-bodied gown, "
bolder, but not as subtle. he's the only one who has compromised my honor, and for that i will seek vengeance. neither sleep nor sanctuary, nor being unarmed, nor sick, nor the constraints of the temple or the capitol, the prayers of priests or times of sacrifice, none of these obstacles to my fury will stop me from hating martius. wherever i find him, even at home in my brother's protection, despite the law of hospitality, i'll wash my fierce hand in his heart. go to corioles, find out how it's being occupied and who's been taken hostage by the romans.
come on, let's get them opinioned by "opinioned," he means "pinioned" (tied down by the arms). opinioned .
master, if ever i said " loose-bodied gown grumio acts if "loose-bodied" meant intended for a loose woman loose-bodied gown ," sew me into the skirts of it and beat me to death with a bobbin of brown thread. i said "a gown."
you're not going?
let them be in the hands, 
go on.
they're waiting for me at the cypress grove, south of the city mills. please bring word to me there about how things are going so i can plan my journey accordingly.
get off me, you fool!
(he reads) "with a half-circle cape, "
i will, sir.
honest to god, where's the sexton? he should write down that the prince's officer was called a fool. come on, tie them up. (to conrade) you're a nasty little stinker!
i admit the cape.
the fortuneteller tells me we'll receive news tonight.
get away from me, you ass! you ass!
(he reads) "with a wide sleeve, "
good news or bad?
how can you call me that? don't you suspect my office? don't you suspect "suspect" is a mistake for "respect." suspect my age? oh, if only the sexton were here to write down that i'm an ass! gentlemen, remember that i am an ass; even though it's not written down, don't forget that i'm an ass. oh, you're a rotten bastard, you are. i'm a wise man and, what's more, i'm an officer of the law and, what's more, i'm a householder and, what's more, i'm as handsome a hunk of meat as any in messina. and i know the law, damn you, and i'm rich enough, damn you, and i used to have more, but i still have two robes and lots of lovely things., take him away!, oh, if only the sexton had recorded that i'm an ass!
i admit two sleeves.
not the news people prayed for, they have no love for martius.
if you keep on the way you've been going, you'll kill yourself. there's no point in adding to your grief.
(he reads) "the sleeves carefully cut."
in nature, animals learn who their friends are.
stop advising me; your words pass through my ears like water through a sieve. don't counsel me. only someone who's been wronged as i have can comfort me. find a father who loved his child as overwhelmingly as i loved hero and askhim to be patient. compare the length and width of that man's sadness against my own; match up all the complaints and strong emotions that run through our bodies. if a man who has suffered as i have gave me advice the way you do, smiling and stroking his beard, telling me to toss away my sorrow, giving speeches when he should be wailing with me, trying to heal my grief with little proverbs, spinning my head around with philosophy, then i would take his advice and be patient. but that man doesn't exist. you can try to comfort a man who feels a pain that you have never felt, but once you feel it too, your sober advice will also turn into passion. you can't treat madness with rules or bind up insanity with little silken threads or cure heartache with hot air or lighten agony with pat phrases.
ah, there's the problem.
tell me, who does the wolf love?
every man thinks it's his duty to advise those who are overwrought with sorrow to be patient. but no man is so moral or so strong that they can endure the same advice when they themselves are grieving. so don't advise me. my sorrow is crying too loudly to hear what you have to say.
error in the bill, sir, error in the bill! i ordered that the sleeves be cut out and sewed up again, and i'll prove it in combat even if your little finger is armed with your thimble.
the lamb.
well then you're no better than a child.
what i say is true. and if this were a fitting place, i'd prove it.
yes, to devour him, as the hungry citizens would love to devour the noble martius.
please, leave me alone. i intend to be flesh and blood, not airy philosophy, for there has never yet been a philosopher who could endure a toothache patiently, even though they all write as if they had risen above human suffering and misfortune.
i am ready for you. you take the bill and i'll take your yardstick. do your worst!
martius is like a lamb, a lamb that roars like a bear.
but don't take all that pain on yourself. make sure the ones who have wronged you suffer too.
god have mercy, grumio! he won't have a chance.
martius is like a bear, a bear that lives like a lamb. you two have been around a long time, answer one question for me.
now you're talking. i definitely will. in my soul, i believe hero has been falsely accused. and i'll make sure that claudio, the prince, and anyone else who helped dishonor her know about it.
well, sir, the gown is not for me.
what do you want to know, sir?
the prince and claudio are hurrying this way.
you are right, it's for my mistress.
tell me a quality that martius lacks but that you two have in abundance.
good evening, good evening.
go, take it away and let your master make whatever use of it he can.
he doesn't have just one fault, he has every fault.
good day to both of you.
certainly not! take off my mistress' gown for your master's use!
especially pride.
listen, my lords, 
why, what's the problem?
and boasting, above all.
we're in a bit of a hurry, leonato.
oh, sir, the problem goes far deeper than you realize. take up my mistress' gown for his master's use! oh, that's disgusting!
one thing is strange though. do you two know how you are regarded by the nobles of the city? do you?
a bit of a hurry, my lord! well then, good bye, my lord. you're in a hurry, are you? well then, don't bother.
(speaking so that only hortensio can hear) hortensio, tell the tailor you'll make sure he gets paid. (to tailor) take it away. off you go. there's no more to be said.
how are we seen?
come on, don't quarrel with us, good old man.
(speaking so that only tailor can hear) tailor, i'll pay you for the gown tomorrow. don't be offended at his angry words. go on, then. regards to your master.
because you talk of pride now, won't you get angry if i tell you?
if it's fighting he is after, some of us here should run and hide.
ah well, my kate. we'll go to your father's house dressed as we are, in simple but honest clothes. our purses shall be rich, our garments poor. after all, it's the mind that enriches the body, and just as the sun shines through the darkest clouds, well, that's how clearly honor peeps through even the humblest style of dress. i mean, is the jay more precious than the lark because his feather is more beautiful? is the snake better than the eel because the pattern on his back pleases the eye?
no, not at all, sir.
who has wronged him?
hardly, kate. by the same token you are worth no less for your simple clothes and lack of finery. if you regard it as shameful, put the shame on me. so, let's perk up! we're off to eat and whoop it up at your father's house.(to grumio) go, call my men so we can leave right away. and bring our horses to the end of long lane. we'll walk there on foot and mount up there. let's see, i think it must be seven o'clock, so we should get there easily by lunchtime.
well, it doesn't take much. even the slightest incident will cause you to lose your patience and let your disposition take over. you become angry at what you should have enjoyed, and your only enjoyment comes from being angry. and yet you blame martius for being proud?
indeed, you have wronged me, you liar. don't bother trying to intimidate me by putting your hand on your sword. i'm not scared of you.
i hate to say it, but it's almost two and we won't get there before suppertime.
we're not alone in our opinion, sir.
curse my hand if it ever threatened an old man like you. really, i had no intention of going for my sword.
it shall be seven o'clock before i get on my horse. whatever i say, or think, or do, you're continually contradicting it. sirs, never mind. we won't go today, or any day until it's clear that it shall be whatever time i say it is.
i know you can do very little alone. without all the help you get, your actions would be totally insignificant. your abilities aren't strong enough for you to do much on your own. you talk of pride. if only you could see yourselves as you really are! i wish you could!
damn you, don't mock and sneer at me. i'm not a doddering old fool who brags about the things he did when he was young, and what he would do now if he weren't so old. claudio, i'm telling you right to your face that you have wronged me and my innocent child. i am forced to lay aside my old man's respectability, and with my gray hairs and my aching body i challenge you to a duel. you have ruined my innocent child. your slander has broken her heart, and now she lies buried with her ancestors in a tomb, ancestors who had never been tainted by scandal until you caused one with your wickedness.
(to himself) i see this fellow intends to command the sun.
and what if we could, sir?
my wickedness?
(as lucentio) sir, this is the house. would you like me to ring?
you'd see that you are equal to all the other unqualified, proud, violent, testy government officials, in other words, fools, in rome.
yours, claudio, yours, i say.
yes, certainly. unless i am mistaken, signior baptista may remember me from the pegasus in genoa, where we both stayed twenty years ago.
menenius, you have a bad reputation, too.
you've got it wrong, old man.
(as lucentio) fine, fine. just play your part and act as serious as a father should.
i'm known as a moody aristocrat, and one that loves a cup of hot wine not diluted by even a drop of water from the tiber river. i'm said to be somewhat flawed as a judge because i'm hastily swayed by the first argument i hear. i'm quick to anger at the slightest disturbance. i stay up late at night and don't rise early in the morning. i say whatever i think and express my anger when i speak. meeting two statesmen such as yourselves, i cannot call you lawmakers, if i don't like the drink you give me, i make a crooked face at it. i don't think you deserve the respectful titles of your profession, when i find most of what you say to be asinine. and though i can tolerate those that say you are respectable, serious men, the ones who say you are honest are deadly liars. if you see these same qualities in me, doesn't it make sense that i'm known for my bad qualities? what harm can your misperceptions do to my character, if i already have a bad reputation?
my lord, if he dares to accept my challenge, i'll beat him and prove he's guilty. i'll beat him despite his fancy fencing techniques and all the practicing he does, despite his youth and manliness.
of course i will.
that's enough, sir. we know your reputation well.
not a chance! i'll have nothing to do with you.
but, sir, here comes your servant. better fill him in.
you don't know anything about me, or about yourselves. your ambition is to have poor citizens take off their hats and bow down to you. you'll waste a whole morning listening to a dispute over three pence between an orange vendor and a wine tap seller and then postpone settling the issue until the next day. when you're hearing a matter between two parties, if you're feeling the tiniest bit sick, you become very dramatic: you violently refuse to be patient and, demanding a chamber pot, dismiss the controversy, leaving it even more entangled as a result of your hearing it. the only justice you show is in calling both parties scoundrels. you're a pair of strange men.
you think you can get rid of me that easily? you killed my child. take on someone your own size: if you kill me, boy, you'll have killed a man.
(as lucentio) don't worry about him., you there, biondello, now act your part convincingly. behave as though this were the real vincentio.
come, come. you're well known to be a better dinner-table conversationalist than a serious judge.
he'll have to kill both of us, and indeed we're both men. but let him start off easy by killing one of us. come on, kill me and brag about it! let me at him. come on, come after me, little boy. come on and get me. little man, i'll be right in your face with my sword. i will, as surely as i am a gentleman.
don't worry about me.
even our priests would become mockers if they encountered anyone as ridiculous as you. when you stay on topic, what you say isn't worth the wagging of your beards. and your beards don't even deserve the honorable burial of being stuffed in a seamstress's cushion or being entombed in the pack saddle of a donkey. you say martius is proud, but even guessing conservatively, he's worth all your predecessors since deucalion, who survived the flood, even though some of them may have been hangmen. good evening to you both. to keep talking with you would infect my brain, since you are the herdsmen of the beastly common people. i must go.
brother, 
(as lucentio) and did you take the message to baptista?
how are you, my dear noble ladies? you are like the moon on earth, what are you looking at?
quiet. god knows i loved my niece, and now she's dead, slandered to death by cowards who would just as likely fight a real man as i would grab a poisonous snake by the tongue. boys, fools, braggers, scoundrels, babies!
i told him that your father was in venice, and that you expected him to arrive in padua today.
honorable menenius, my son martius approaches. for the love of juno, let's go.
brother anthony, 
(as lucentio) good lad! here, buy yourself a drink on me. he gives biondello some money.
what? martius is coming home?
hold your peace. i know their kind, i know them exactly. they're petulant, disrespectful, fashion-crazy boys who lie and cheat and mock, defame and slander. they walk around in outlandish outfits, pretending to be brave and wild and saying a few inflammatory things about how they'll hurt their enemies, and that's all they do.
here comes baptista. places, everyone!
yes, worthy menenius, and he's proudly victorious.
but brother anthony, 
signior baptista, i'm glad to see you., sir, this is the gentleman i told you of. i hope you'll be a good father to me now. give me bianca for my inheritance.
i take my hat off in thanks to you, jupiter, king of the gods. hoo! martius is coming home!
don't, it's no big deal. don't bother with it. let me deal with this.
(as vincentio) hush, son., sir, may i? having come to padua to collect some debts, my son lucentio acquainted me with a serious matter, namely the love between your daughter and himself. now, since i've heard good reports of you, and in view of the love between your daughter and my son, i'm willing to give my consent to his marriage right away. so, if you think you can put up with no worse a man than i am, you'll find me willing, pending some agreement, to see your daughter betrothed to him. i can't haggle with you, signior baptista. i have too much respect for you.
yes, it's true.
gentlemen, we won't stay here and anger you further. i'm sorry about your daughter's death, but i swear our accusations were true, and backed up with proof.
sir, pardon me for what i am about to say. i appreciate your frankness and your brevity. it's true that your son lucentio here loves my daughter, and she loves him, or else they're putting on quite an act. therefore, provided that you assure me that you will treat your son as a father should and offer my daughter a sufficient dowry, we'll call it a match and be done with it. your son will have my consent to marry my daughter.
look, here's a letter from him. he sent another to the senate and another to his wife. i think there's one at home for you.
my lord, my lord, 
(as lucentio) thank you, sir. where can we draw up the necessary papers and get this settled?
my household will be thrilled tonight. a letter for me!
i don't want to hear any more about it.
not in my house, lucentio. my servants might overhear, and old gremio is still hanging around, so we might be interrupted.
yes, i'm certain there's a letter for you. i saw it.
no? come on, brother! i'm determined to be heard by someone.
(as lucentio) then at my place, if you like. that's where my father's staying. we can get everything sorted out in private there tonight. send your servant for bianca. mine shall go and fetch the notary. the only drawback is that, with such short notice, we'll be able to offer you only modest refreshment.
a letter for me! it makes me live seven years longer, and all the while i'll laugh at my doctor. the most well-established prescription according to the great doctor galen is nothing but an experimental cure, and compared to this news, it's worth no more than horse medicine. is he wounded? he was likely to come home wounded.
and you will be, or some people here will suffer for it.
this is all very acceptable., cambio, hurry home and tell bianca to get ready right away and, if you don't mind, tell her what's happened: that lucentio's father has arrived in padua, and that she's likely to become lucentio's wife.
oh, no, no, no.
look, here comes just the man we were looking for.
i hope with all my heart she will!
oh, yes, he's wounded, and i thank the gods for it.
what's up, mister?
(as lucentio) forget about your heart and get busy., signior baptista, shall i lead the way? you'll be welcome, though dinner will probably be only one course. we'll make it up to you in pisa.
as do i, if he's not wounded too much. if he brings home victory, the wounds are appropriate.
(to don pedro) hello, my lord.
i'll come with you.
he's wounded on his forehead. menenius, this is the third time he's come home with the garland of oak.
welcome, sir. you just missed a fight that was barely avoided.
cambio.
has he thoroughly beaten aufidius?
we were about to have our noses snapped off by two old men with no teeth.
what is it, biondello?
titus lartius writes that they fought each other, but aufidius got away.
leonato and his brother. what do you think? i think if we had fought, we would have proven too young and strong for them after all.
you saw my master wink and laugh at you?
it was aufidius's time to die. for all the chests in corioles and the gold that's in them, i bet that if martius had captured him, he would've gotten the beating he deserved. does the senate know about this?
there's no bravery in an unfair fight. i've been look- ing for you two.
what about it?
good ladies, let's go. yes, yes, yes! cominius has written to the senate and named my son responsible for the victory. his accomplishments in this war are double all his past deeds.
we've been looking for you, too. we're really depressed. will you tell us some jokes to beat our sad- ness away?
nothing. it's just that he left me here behind to interpret his signs and signals.
it's true, there are wonderful things said about him.
my wit's in my scabbard a scabbard is a covering for a sword. scabbard . should i unsheath it?
please, educate me.
wonderful! yes, it's true, and none that he didn't earn.
you wear your wit next to you?
here's the deal: we're safe on the baptista front. he's talking with the bogus father about the bogus son.
oh, gods, may these words be true!
no one carries their wit next to them, though some people are beside their wit "beside their wit" = crazy beside their wit . come on, draw your wit, just as musicians draw their bows across the instru- ments: draw for our pleasure.
and so, ?
true? pooh-whoo!
look: benedick is so pale, are you sick, or angry?
you are to bring his daughter to the supper.
true? i promise they're true. where is he wounded?
(to benedick) buck up, man! care "care" here means "seriousness." claudio puns on an old proverb. care may have killed the cat, but you are strong enough to kill care. lighten up.
and then?
may you be well, good sirs! martius is coming home. he has new reasons to be proud. (to volumnia) where is he wounded?
sir, don't even try to beat me in a battle of wits. i'll meet all your attacks, even if you come charging at me with a lance at full gallop. choose another tack.
the old priest at saint luke's church is at your command at all hours.
in the shoulder and in the left arm. there will be large scars to show the people, when he stands to receive his place as consul. when he defeated the king tarquin, he was wounded seven times.
(to don pedro) that was poor, benedick! give him another lance, that last one got broken in half.
and what of all this?
once in the neck and twice in the thigh. there are nine wounds that i know of.
lord, he seems to be getting paler by the minute. i think he really is angry.
i don't know, except they are busy with some phony guarantee. so go and put your stamp on the girl. go to the church: take the priest, the clerk, and some reasonably honest witnesses. if this isn't what you've been hoping for, i have no more to say except that you ought to say goodbye to bianca forever.
before this last expedition, he had twenty-five wounds in total.
if he is, that's his problem.
listen, biondello, 
now it's twenty-seven. every gash represents an enemy who has died.
can i have a word with you privately?
i can't stay. i knew a girl who was married in an afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit. it could happen to you. farewell, sir. my master has instructed me to go to saint luke's to tell the priest to be ready in case you should show up with your better half.
hark! the trumpets.
god forbid he wants to challenge me!
i may. i will if she likes the idea. she will be pleased. then why am i worried? oh well, whatever. i'll ask her straight out. it will be hard if "cambio" loses her.
these men walk ahead of martius to introduce him. many cheers welcome him, and he leaves behind many tears. death, that dark spirit, lies within his strong arm. when he raises his arm, it comes down upon his enemies and they die.
(speaking so that only claudiocan hear) you are a vil- lain. i'm not kidding. i challenge you however you like, with whatever weapons you choose, and whe- never you want. meet this challenge, or i'll say that you're a coward. you've killed an innocent woman, and you're going to pay dearly for her death. what do you say?
come, let's continue on toward your father's house. good lord, how bright and splendid is the moon tonight!
romans, let it be known that martius fought all alone within corioles's gates. there he won, along with honor, a new name. the name "coriolanus" now respectfully follows "caius martius." welcome to rome, the renowned coriolanus!
i'll be there, and i'll enjoy myself.
the moon? you mean the sun! it is not nighttime now.
welcome to rome, renowned coriolanus!
what, are we having a feast?
i say it's the moon that shines so bright.
no more praise. i don't like it. please now, no more.
yes, we are. he has invited me to have a calf's head and a capon calf's heads, capons, and woodcocks are all dishes that symbolize stupidity. calf's head and a capon . he says if i don't carve them up and serve them elegantly, he'll declare i have no skills with a knife. should i go get us a woodcock, too?
i know it's the sun that shines so bright.
look, sir, your mother!
sir, you have a very slow, rambling wit.
now, by my mother's son, and that's me, it will be moon or star or whatever i want before i'll travel to your father's house. (to servants) go return our horses., constantly contradicted and contradicted, and nothing but contradicted!
you have, i know, begged all the gods to grant me victory!
benedick, beatrice praised your wit the other day. i said you had a fine wit. "true," she said, "a fine little one." "no," i said, "a huge wit." "right," she said, "a hugely awful one." "no," i said, "he has a good wit." "exactly," she said, "it's good and mild; it doesn't hurt anyone." "no," i said, "benedick is wise." "he is certainly," she said, "a wise gentleman." "a wise gentleman" was often used to describe an old, foolish man. "a wise gentleman." "no," i said, "he can speak many languages:" "i can believe that," she said, "because he swore one thing to me on monday night and took it back on tuesday morning. he spoke two languages then." she turned all your virtues into vices just about an hour ago. but in the end she sighed and admitted you were the handsomest man in italy.
(to katherine) say what he wants or we'll never go.
no, my good soldier, get up. my gentle martius, worthy caius, and through your honor achieved by your actions, newly named, what is it?, coriolanus must i call thee? (coriolanus rises) but oh, your wife!
she cried a lot at that, and said she didn't care.
since we've come this far, please, let's continue on. and whatever it is, moon or sun or anything you like, if you want to call it a tea candle, that's what it is as far as i'm concerned. from now on, i promise.
there you are, my lovely silent wife! would you have laughed if i had come home in a coffin, since you are crying to see me come home in victory? ah, my dear, your eyes look like the widows and the mothers who have lost sons in corioles.
that she did. and yet for all that, if she didn't hate him to death, she'd love him to death. leonato's daughter had told us everything.
i say it's the moon.
now, the gods crown you!
absolutely everything. and, moreover, god saw benedick when he was hid in the garden.
i know it's the moon.
are you still alive? (to valeria) i'm sorry, my sweet lady.
but when exactly will we see benedick married?
well, you're a liar, then. it's the blessed sun.
i don't know where to turn. oh, welcome home! and welcome, general! welcome all!
yes, with the sign underneath him that says: "here lives benedick the married man"?
then god be praised, it is the blessed sun. but it is not the sun when you say it is not, and the moon changes according to your mind. whatever you want to call a thing, that's what it is, and that's what it will always be for me.
a hundred thousand welcomes. i could weep and i could laugh. i'm happy and sad. welcome. may a curse reach to the very root of anyone's heart who isn't happy to see you! rome should honor you as it would three men. however, we have some bitter old men here who refuse to applaud you. but welcome, warriors! some things just are what they are, and fools don't understand.
goodbye, boy. you know what i intend. i'll leave you now to chatter and gossip like an old woman. the wit you flaunt is like a blunt sword, it can't hurt anyone, thank god., my lord, i thank you for your many kindnesses. i'm leaving your court now.
petruchio, do whatever you like. you've won.
you're right.
your brother don john the bastard has run away from messina. the three of you have killed a sweet, innocent woman. lord babyface over there will meet me in a duel, and good luck to him then.
well, onward, then. that's how things should be, straight and smooth. but, hang on! i hear someone coming.
you're always right, menenius.
he's serious.
(to vincentio) good morning, young miss, where are you going?, tell me, sweet kate, and tell me truly, have you ever seen a young gentlewoman blooming more with health? the way the shades of white and red compete in her complexion. which of the stars in heaven shine with such beauty as the two eyes that sparkle in that heavenly face? fair lovely maid, once more good day to you., sweet kate, embrace her for her beauty.
make way. keep walking.
very serious, and i'm sure it's because of beatrice.
(speaking so that only the audience can hear) he will drive the man mad pretending he thinks he's a woman.
(to volumnia and virgilia) give me your hands. before i can go home and rest, i must visit the nobles because they haven't only welcomed me back but have also honored me with this new name.
and he challenged you to a duel?
young budding virgin, fair and pure and sweet, where are you off to? or where do you live? your parents are lucky to have such a lovely child. and luckier still is the man who gets to be your husband and share your bed.
i've lived to see all my wishes come true and to possess all the things i wanted. now there's only one thing left, which i'm sure that rome will give you.
he did, very sincerely.
why, dear me, kate! i hope you haven't lost your mind. this is not a maiden, as you say, but an old man, wrinkled, faded, and withered.
mother, you know i'd prefer to serve the senators as a soldier than to be a public servant myself.
what a strange sight, a man who has put on all his fancy clothes but forgotten his brain at home!
sir, pardon my imperfect eyes, which have been so blinded by the sun that everything i look at appears green "green" here means "young.". green . now i can see that you're an elderly gentleman. do forgive me for my crazy error.
let's go the capitol!
a guy like that is bigger than an ape, but the ape could be his doctor, it's so much smarter.
do, good old grandfather, and while you're at it, tell us which way you're traveling. if we're all headed in the same direction, we'd love your company.
everyone is talking about him. people who are nearly blind wear glasses just to see him. babbling nurses let babies cry in a tantrum while they talk about him. the kitchen maid pins her best linen around her dirty neck and climbs up the wall to see him. storefronts are boarded up, leaden roofs covered over and all different types of people are riding their horses on top of the roofs, all trying to see him. priests who rarely come out in public are mixed in with the common people and struggle to find a place in the crowd. women who usually wear veils are letting their pale cheeks get sunburned. there is such mayhem that it seems like whichever god is guiding martius has taken over his very body and given him a godly way of being.
but wait a minute. let me gather my wits and get serious here. didn't he say my brother has run away?
well, sir, and you, witty lady, who gave me quite a turn with your strange talk, my name is vincentio, my hometown pisa, and i am traveling to padua to visit a son of mine whom i haven't seen in a long while.
it seems like he may become a member of the consul.
come on, you. if they let you off, then we'll have to assume that lady justice has lost all her power. since you are a lying hypocrite, we must look after you.
what is his name?
we'd lose power if he were admitted to the consul.
what's this? two of my brother's men, all tied up! and borachio is one of them!
lucentio, sir.
he won't be able to translate his fame in battle into some other kind of victory. if he tries, he'll lose the honor he has won.
find out what they're being held for.
a fortunate coincidence, more fortunate for your son. i can now call you "father" in a legal sense, not just out of respect for your age. the sister of my wife, this lady here, is married to your son. and there's no need for wonder or worry. his bride is well thought of, with a rich dowry and noble birth, a fit wife for any nobleman.
that's comforting.
officers, what crime have these men committed?
let me embrace the father of lucentio, and then we'll journey on to see your son, who will rejoice at your arrival.
don't doubt the common people we represent. their longstanding hatred for him will cause them to overlook his new honors with only the slightest provocation. and given his pride, he'll undoubtedly provoke them.
well sir, they've lied; moreover, they have said things that were not true; secondarily, they are slanderers; sixth and lastly, they have falsely accused a lady; thirdly, they have confirmed things that did not in fact happen; and, in conclusion, they are lying scoundrels.
is all this true? or is this your way of livening up your travels, playing jokes on people you meet on the way?
i heard him declare that if he were to seek nomination to the consul, he would never appear in the marketplace wearing the traditional poor man's gown to show his humility. nor would he show off his wounds to the people to win their approval.
first, i ask you what they've done; thirdly, i ask you what offense they're charged with; sixth and lastly, i ask you why they've been committed here; and, in conclusion, i ask what they're accused of.
i assure you, sir, it's true.
is that so?
nicely done, and organized in just the way he'll understand. my god, he manages to say the same thing six different ways.
look, come along with us and see the truth for yourself. our earlier joke has made you understandably suspicious.
he said he'd rather not be in the consul if he couldn't be admitted simply by the wishes of the middle class and the nobles.
(to borachio and conrade) what have you done, gentlemen? this educated constable is too brilliant for me to understand. what is your crime?
well, petruchio, all this is very encouraging. i'll visit my widow now, and if she proves difficult to manage, i'll know how to make myself impossible.
i hope he stays with that plan.
prince, i won't wait for my trial: listen to my story, and let the count kill me now. i tricked your own eyes. these stupid fools have uncovered what you in all your wisdom could not. they heard me confess to conrade how don john, your brother, prompted me to slander hero, how you came to the orchard and saw me making sexual advances toward margaret, who was disguised as hero; how you disgraced hero when you should have married her. they've recorded my crimes, and i would rather die than have to retell this shameful story. the lady has died because of the false accusations of me and my master. i desire nothing now but a criminal's punishment.
quickly and quietly, sir. the priest is already there.
most likely, he will.
(to claudio) doesn't this make your blood run cold?
we're off, biondello. but they may need you at home, so you go on back.
what will happen to him then will be as we wish: he'll surely lose.
his words are like poison to me.
i'll see them safely married first and then hurry back to my master's.
he must lose, or else our power will be over. we must remind the people of how much he still hates them, that if he were in charge, he'd make them work like mules, he would never listen to their requests and he'd take away their freedoms. he wouldn't recognize their humanity or their souls. he'd hold them captive like the camels who only get fed so that they can carry heavy loads in service of the war and develop sores in the process.
(to borachio) but did my brother prompt you to do all this?
i wonder why cambio hasn't shown up in all this time.
we need to suggest this possibility to the people at a time when they're already irritated by his arrogance. there will be many occasions for this. it's as easy to get him to show off his pride as it is to get dogs to chase sheep. his pride will be like fire to their kindling wood, and their blaze will ruin him forever.
yes, and paid me well for doing it.
here is the door, sir. this is lucentio's house. my father-in-law lives closer to the marketplace. that's where i'm going now, so i'll leave you here.
what's going on?
he is made of treachery, and has run away to avoid his crimes.
you must not go without having a drink first. i think i may presume to welcome you, and they're probably preparing some kind of feast to welcome me.
the capitol sends for you. it's thought that martius will be admitted to the consul. i saw mute people form crowds to see him and blind people to hear him speak. married women threw their gloves to him and ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchiefs. as he passed by, the nobles bowed to him as they would to jupiter's statue. the common people made a shower with their caps and thunder with their shouts. i've never seen anything like it.
sweet hero; when i imagine you now, you seem as beautiful as you did when i first loved you.
they're pretty busy in there. you'd better knock louder.
let's go to the capitol and keep our eyes and ears open for the time being, while our heart remains set on our plan.
come, take away the plaintiffs "plaintiffs" is a mistake for "defendant"; "reformed" is a mistake for "informed." plaintiffs . by now the sexton will have reformed signior leonato of the matter. (to claudio and don pedro) and, gentlemen, please do not forget to specify, whenever it is convenient, that i am an ass.
(as vincentio) who's that breaking down the door?
i'm with you.
here comes master signior leonato with the sexton.
is signior lucentio at home, sir?
hurry up. they're almost here. how many are being considered for the consul?
which one of them did it? let me see what he looks like, so when i see another man who resembles him, i'll know to avoid him. which one is it?
(as vincentio) yes, he's at home, but he can't be disturbed.
three, they say. but everyone thinks coriolanus will get it.
if you want to see your deceiver, then look at me.
what if a fellow were bringing him a couple of hundred pounds to toss around?
he's a brave man, but he's too proud, and he doesn't care about the common people.
are you the slave who, with your slanderous words, killed my innocent child?
(as vincentio) keep your hundreds. he won't need them as long as i'm living.
there have been many great men who have flattered the people but whom the people never liked, and there have been many that the people liked for unknown reasons. since they can like someone without knowing why, at least when they dislike someone, it's for an equally vague reason. so for coriolanus not to care whether they like him or not shows that he actually knows them quite well, and out of his own indifference to public opinion, he lets them know that he doesn't care.
yes, i am the one.
(to vincentio) i told you your son was popular in padua. hear that, sir? (to merchant) games aside, though, would you be good enough to tell signior lucentio that his father has arrived from pisa and stands at the door waiting to speak with him?
if he didn't care whether or not he had their support, he would be indifferent to either doing them good or harm. but he provokes their hatred with more intensity than they can they can hate him with in return. he has done everything possible for them to see him as their enemy. however, to pretend to desire the ill will of the people is as bad as flattering them for their approval, something he would never do.
no, villain, but you didn't work alone. (indicating claudio and don pedro) for here are two noblemen , the third has run away, who helped you. (to claudio and don pedro) thank you, gentlemen, for my daughter's death. make a note of it on your long lists of righteous and worthy deeds. it was very brave of you.
(as vincentio) you lie. his father is already in padua. in fact, he's standing right here looking out the window.
he has served his country honorably and his route to prominence has not been nearly as easy as those who, having been lenient and kind to the people, only tipped their hats to get ahead. but he has boasted in their faces so much about his fame and his actions, that if they don't pay attention to this, they would be harming themselves. if they lie about his prideful behavior, no one would believe them. everyone would say otherwise.
i don't know how to ask you for forgiveness, but i have to say something. choose your revenge. punish me through any means you can devise, though i sinned by mistake.
you're his father?
stop talking about him. he's a worthy man. make way. they're coming.
me too, but to satisfy this good old man, i too will bear any punishment he gives me.
(as vincentio) yes, sir, according to his mother, if i can believe her.
once we decide what to do about the volsces and send for titus lartius, the main point of this meeting is still to reward his noble service in defending his country. therefore, most respected and honorable elders, the present consul and the general in our victorious battles desires to report a little of the worthy work performed by caius martius coriolanus, whom we have invited here both to thank and to honor. (coriolanus sits)
i can't ask you to make my daughter live, that's impossible, but i beg you both to tell the people of messina that she was innocent when she died. and if your love can produce something from its sadness, write a poem for her; hang it on her grave and sing it to her bones. sing it tonight. then come to my house tomorrow morning, and since you couldn't be my son-in-law, be my nephew instead. my brother has a daughter who looks exactly like hero; this girl is heir to both our estates. marry her as you should have married her cousin, and i will let my revenge die.
(to vincentio) what? why this is out and out robbery! to appropriate another man's name.
speak as long as you need, good cominius. leave nothing out. better that he think we don't have the resources to reward to him than that we don't have the patience to listen to the full report. (to the tribunes) representatives of the people, we request you to listen kindly, and afterward to convince the people to agree to what we suggest.
oh, noble sir! your overwhelming kindness makes me weep. i willingly accept your offer and put my future in your hands.
(as vincentio) arrest the wretch. i think he means to bamboozle someone in this city while pretending to be me.
we've come here to consider this question, and we're inclined to honor and advance the cause of our constituents.
i will see you tomorrow, then. now i have to leave. this wicked man will be brought face to face with margaret, who i believe was hired by don john to take part in this plot.
(to himself) well, i've seen them married. good luck to them! uh-oh. what's this? it's my master's father, vincentio! now we're in trouble. everything's ruined.
which we'll happily do, and soon, if he can remember to value the people more highly than he has previously.
no, she wasn't, and she didn't know anything about it. she has always been honest and good.
(to biondello) come here, you scoundrel.
that's not the point. i wish you had been silent. please, will you let cominius speak?
(to leonato) also, sir, this hasn't been put down in writing, but i should let you know that this plaintiff "plaintiff" is a mistake for "defendant." plaintiff here, the criminal, did in fact call me an ass. please remember that when you're punishing him. plus, the watchmen heard the criminals talking about some man named deformed dogberry garbles the events of act , scene . deformed . they say that he has an earring made out of a key, with a lock hanging from it. apparently, he borrows money from people in the name of god and then never pays it back, which angers everyone so much that they now refuse to fund anything in the name of god. make sure you ask him about this.
i believe i have some choice in the matter, sir.
most willingly. but my caution was more important than you realize.
thank you for all your efforts.
come here, you wretch! what, have you forgotten me?
he cares about the common people. just don't expect him to be closely involved with them. worthy cominius, speak.
you speak like a very thankful and respectful boy, and may god bless you.
forgotten you! no, sir. i could not forget you, since i never saw you before in my life.
no, stay where you are.
(giving dogberry money) this is for your trouble.
despicable brute! never seen your master's father, vincentio?
sit, coriolanus. never be embarrassed to hear of your noble deeds.
god save the charitable organization!
my honorable, reverend master? yes, of course. there he is at the window.
i'm sorry, your honor. i'd rather let my wounds heal than hear how i got them.
go, you're relieved of your duty. thank you.
is that so?
sir, i hope my words didn't cause you to get up.
i leave a slimy bastard with you, your worship, for you to punish and make an example of. god bless your worship! i wish you well. i hope that god restores you to health. i will humbly let you go now, god prohibiting "prohibiting" is a mistake for "permitting." prohibiting we will meet again in the future., come on, man.
help, help, help! this madman will murder me.
no, sir. while i don't run from fights, i do often run from praise. but you didn't flatter me, so i wasn't offended. but the people you represent are worth so little, so i care so little about them.
i'll see you tomorrow morning, gentlemen.
(as vincentio) help, son! help, signior baptista!
please, sit down.
goodbye, gentlemen. we'll see you tomorrow.
what do you think, kate, shall we hang back and see how this conflict finishes?
i'd rather let someone scratch my head in the sun when the trumpet summons me to battle than sit here and listen to my small deeds be over-embellished.
we'll be there.
(as lucentio) how dare you beat my servant, sir?
representatives of the people, your constituents reproduce all the time, and there's only one good man among every thousand of them, how can he flatter them? you see now he'd rather risk his whole life for honor than risk one of his ears to hear about it. go on, cominius.
i will mourn hero tonight.
how dare i? how dare you, sir? oh, cruel gods! oh, clever villain! a silk doublet, velvet hose, a scarlet cloak, and a high-brimmed hat! oh, i am destroyed, i am destroyed! while i sat counting my pennies at home, my son and my servant have squandered all my money at the university.
i won't say much. the deeds of coriolanus shouldn't be spoken of lightly. it's well known that courage is the highest virtue and brings the highest dignity to whoever has it. and if that's true, there's no one in the world who is more dignified than the man i speak of. at age sixteen, when tarquin attacked rome, his fighting exceeded everyone else's. our former leader, whom i reference with all praise, saw him fight victoriously against adults when he was still young and had a beardless chin. he protected the overwhelmed romans and as the consul watched, he defeated three enemies. he fought tarquin himself and brought him to his knees. in that day of fighting, when he was young enough to play a woman on stage, he proved to be the best man in the field, and he was rewarded with a garland of oak. he entered into manhood, though he was still a boy, with the force of a rising tide. he has led the attack in seventeen battles since then, and he has won the garland over his fellow soldiers every time. as for this last battle, outside of and within corioles, i have no words to describe what he did. he stopped the roman deserters and by his rare example made these cowards overcome their fear and become warriors. the men obeyed and fell beneath his prow like waves beneath a sailboat. wherever he swung his sword, he marked the sign of death. from head to toe he was covered in blood, and his every motion was followed by dying cries. he entered the deadly gate of the city alone, and he painted it with the blood of their inevitable destiny. without help, he retreated, but with a sudden burst of energy he attacked corioles with the force of a planet. then the city was all his. after a while, as the noise of war began to wear him down, his spirit reinvigorated his tired body, and he came back to the battle and ran furiously at the enemy, as if it were an endless slaughter. he never stopped to catch his breath until both the field and city were ours.
(to the watchmen) bring these criminals with us. we'll go talk to margaret, to see how she got involved with this worthless man.
(as lucentio) heavens, what's the matter?
worthy man!
please margaret, help me write this poem for beatrice.
what, is the man crazy?
he definitely measures up to the honors we have for him.
afterward, will you write a sonnet for me, praising my beauty?
(as lucentio) sir, you seem from your clothes to be a sober, respectable old gentleman, but your words show you to be a madman. what do you care if i wear pearls and gold? thanks to my father, i can afford to.
he rejected our spoils and looked at precious things as if they were the common muck of the world. he doesn't desire anything. to him, doing his deeds is its own reward, and he's happy to spend the time to do the job well.
i'll write you such a glorious sonnet, margaret, that no man will ever be able to come over it. you certainly deserve it. benedick means that no man will ever improve on his sonnet;
your father! why, you scoundrel! your father is a sailmaker in bergamo.
he's very noble. let's call him here.
no man will come over me margaret interprets "come over" in a sexual way over me ! what a life that would be!
you're wrong, sir, very wrong. why, what do you imagine his name to be?
call coriolanus.
your wit is as quick as a greyhound's jaws, it catches whatever it goes after.
his name! as if i wouldn't know his name, i who brought him up ever since he was three years old. his name is tranio.
here he is.
and your wit is as blunt as a practice sword, with its dull tip; it hits people but doesn't hurt them.
(as vincentio) get rid of this mad fool! this is lucentio, my only son and heir to all my lands.
coriolanus, the senate is very happy to admit you to the consul.
it's just that my wit is very gentlemanly, margaret, and refuses to hurt a woman. now please, tell beatrice to come out. i admit defeat; i give you the bucklers a "buckler" is a shield with a spike in the middle of it. bucklers .
lucentio! oh god, he's murdered his master! restrain him! i charge you in the duke's name. oh, my son, my son! tell me, you monster, where is my son lucentio?
i'll always owe them my life and services.
no, you should give a woman your sword, we have our own bucklers margaret interprets "buckler" as the vagina (and the sword as the penis). bucklers !
(as lucentio) call forth an officer.
all that remains is for you to speak to the people.
watch out, though, margaret, virgins shouldn't be brandishing their bucklers around.
take this mad wretch to jail., father-in-law baptista, will you see that he's available to appear in court?
i beg you, let me skip that custom. i can't put on the gown, stand without an undershirt, and show off my wounds just so they'll vote for me. please let me pass on doing this.
i'll go get beatrice for you, who can walk here by herself, she has legs.
take me off to jail?
sir, the people must have their say, and they won't leave out one bit of the ceremony.
so that means she'll come.
wait, officer. he mustn't go to prison.
don't fight them on this. go through with this custom and stand honorably as your predecessors have.
(singing) the god of love he sits in heaven above and he knows me, he knows me he knows how much pity i deserve, i'm really a pitiful singer. but as a lover, well, that's another story. take leander, troilus leander and troilus are figures from two separate love stories, both well-known to shakespeare's audience. leander, troilus , or an entire book's worth of those legendary lover, boys, whose names sound so smooth and nice in a line of verse, not one of them has been driven as crazy by love as i have been. but i can't prove it in a poem. i have tried. i can't think of any rhyme for "lady" but "baby," which is a childish rhyme. the only rhyme for "scorn" i can come up with is "horn" in shakespeare's time, "horns" were associated with adultery. "horn" , a bit off for a love poem. nothing rhymes with "school" but "fool," and that's a ridiculous jingle. these are all very unpromising line endings. no, i wasn't destined to be a poet, and i can't woo a lady with pretty words.
be quiet, signior gremio. i say he shall go to prison.
i'll blush as i play this part. the people will be deceived.
beatrice, have you come because i called for you?
be careful, signior baptista, lest you be made the dupe in this business. i could swear this is the real vincentio.
(to sicinius) did you hear that?
yes, sir, and i'll leave when you ask me to.
(as vincentio) can you swear to it?
to brag of the things i've done and show them my old scars, which i should hide, as if i'd received them only for the people to gasp at!
oh, well, stay till then!
well, no, not literally.
don't insist on this. tribunes of the people, we ask that you recommend our proposal to the people. and to our noble consul wish we all joy and honor.
there, you said "then." so i'll leave now. but before i go, let me get what i came for. what happened between you and claudio?
(as lucentio) then you'd better say that i'm not lucentio.
may all joy and honor come to coriolanus!
i spoke angry, foul words to him, and with that i will kiss you.
no, i know that you're signior lucentio.
you see how he intends to use the people.
if you had foul words in your mouth, then your breath must be foul, and foul breath is nauseating. thus, i'll leave without being kissed.
away with the doddering fool! take him off to jail!
may they know his intentions! he'll ask for their support even though he hates that it's in their power to give it.
your wit is so forceful, it frightens the very meaning out of your words. but i will tell you this very plainly: i have challenged claudio, and either he'll accept the challenge or admit he's a coward. now, tell me, which of my bad qualities did you fall in love with first?
is this how strangers are treated here? you harass and abuse them?, this is unbelievable!
let's go inform them of what's happened here. i know they're waiting for us in the marketplace.
with all of them at once: they work together to create such an entirely evil person that no good ever manages to enter the mix. but tell me, which of my good qualities first made you suffer love for me?
we're ruined! there he is! renounce him! deny you know him or we're sunk.
if and when he asks for our votes, we shouldn't deny him.
suffer love! that's a good way of putting it. i do suffer love, because i love you against my will.
pardon, dear father.
we can deny him, sir, if we want to.
you love me in spite of your heart, i think. if you spite your heart for my sake, then i will spite it for yours. i will never love the thing my friend hates.
dear son, you're alive!
we have the right to deny him, but it wouldn't be the right thing to do. if he shows us his wounds and tells us of his deeds, we must honor those wounds with our votes. and if he tells us of his noble deeds, we must then tell him of our gratitude. ingratitude is monstrous, and for the people to be seen as ungrateful would make us into monsters.
you and i are too wise to woo each other peacefully.
pardon us, dear father.
and it wouldn't take much to make us worse thought of. when we complained about the corn, he didn't hesitate to call us an unstable mass of people.
it's said that no truly wise man will praise himself. if you say that you are wise, it's likely you're not.
why? what have you done? where is lucentio?
many people have called us that. not because some of us have brown hair, some black, some blond and some bald, but because our opinions are so diverse. i truly think that if all our opinions were to come from one mind, they would go east, west, north, and south. all they could agree on would be to go in different directions.
that's an old proverb, beatrice, from the time when neighbors praised each other. in this day and age, if a man doesn't erect his own monument before he dies, he won't be remembered past the funeral bell's ringing and his widow's crying.
here is lucentio, true son to the true vincentio. i have made your daughter mine by marriage while false impressions blinded your eyes.
do you think so? which way do you think my opinion would go?
exactly how long is that, do you think?
quite the conspiracy! we've all been duped.
you're stubborn, so your opinion will stay stuck inside you until another man's will expresses itself first. if yours could come out, though, it would surely go south.
about an hour for the ringing and fifteen minutes for the crying. that's why it's better for wise men to trumpet their own virtues, like i do. that's why i praise myself, who, if i do say so myself, is quite praiseworthy. but tell me, how is your cousin?
where is that damned wretch, tranio, who defied me in such a disgraceful manner?
why that way?
she's very sick.
say, isn't this the latin master cambio?
to lose itself in the plague-ridden air. three-quarters of it would melt away in the contagious dew, and the remaining quarter would have a conscience and return to help you get a wife.
and how are you?
cambio is transformed into lucentio.
you're never without your jokes. it's okay, you can laugh at me.
i'm very sick, too.
it was love that performed these miracles. bianca's love made me trade places with tranio while he masqueraded as me around town. and now, finally, i've arrived happily at the blissful haven where i longed to be. what tranio did, he did at my command. so pardon him, dear father, for my sake.
are you all ready to vote? it doesn't actually matter, since the majority vote wins. if only he cared about the people, he would be the most deserving man there ever was.
have faith, love me, and you will get better. and that's where i'll end, because someone is hurrying this way.
no, i'll slit the nose of the villain who would have sent me to jail.
here he comes, wearing the gown of humility. watch his behavior. we're not supposed to all stay together but rather go up to him where he's standing, either alone or in groups of two or three. he's supposed to make his request to us individually, and each of us has the separate honor of giving him our own vote in our voice. follow me. i'll show you how to go up to him. all okay, okay.
madam, you have to go to your uncle's. there's a huge racket going on there. it's been proven that lady hero is innocent, that the prince and claudio have been utterly deceived, and that don john, who has run away, is the source of all the trouble. will you come immediately?
but sir, have you married my daughter without my consent?
oh, sir, you don't understand. don't you know that the most honorable men have done this?
will you come with me to hear this news, sir?
don't worry, baptista, you'll be perfectly satisfied. you'll see. now i'm going inside to see that someone pays for this mischief.
what am i supposed to say? "please, sir", curse that! i can't force myself to say such a thing. "look at my wounds, sir. i got them while serving my country, while men who were undoubtedly your brothers cried and ran away from the battle."
i will live in your heart, die in your lap, and be buried in your eyes, and, what's more, i will go with you to your uncle's.
me too, to see how far the mischief went.
oh, gods! you can't talk about that. you need to get them to think well of you.
is this the family tomb of leonato?
don't worry, bianca. your father won't be angry.
think well of me! hang them! i wish they would forget me, like they have forgotten the virtues that the gods didn't sufficiently instill in them.
it is, my lord.
so much for my hopes! well, i'll go in and join the others. all i can hope for now is a share of the feast.
you'll ruin everything. i'm leaving now. please, keep it clean with them.
(reading an epitaph) here lies hero, the heroic maiden killed by slanderous words. to repay her for her troubles, death gives her undying fame. so the life that died with shame lives on with fame.
let's follow them to see how this turns out.
i'll ask them to wash their faces and brush their teeth.
this epitaph will hang here forever, continuing to praise hero after i die. now start the music, and sing the solemn hymn. (singing) please pardon, goddess of the night, the men who killed your virgin knight diana was the roman goddess associated with the moon, and her "knights" were virgin women. virgin knight . these men now walk around her tomb, singing songs of woe. oh, midnight, join our moaning help us with our sighs and groaning heavily, heavily. graves, open up and release your corpses until hero's death is fully mourned the meaning of this final line is unclear; it may also be interpreted as, "until death itself is beaten," or "until we have fully realized what his death means." heavily, heavily.
first kiss me, kate, and then we will.
so, here comes a pair.
now i say good night to your bones, hero. i will perform this ceremony every year.
what, here in the middle of the street?
you know why i'm standing here.
good morning, gentlemen. put out your torches. the wolves have finished preying for the night, and look, the gentle dawn is rising, dappling the sleepy eastern sky with spots of light.
why not? are you ashamed of me?
we do, sir. tell us what brought you here.
good morning, gentlemen. we go our separate ways.
certainly not! but i'm ashamed to kiss, sir.
it's what i deserve.
come, let's go and change our clothes. then we'll visit leonato's.
all right then, back home we go. (to grumio) come, fellow, let's be off.
it's what you deserve!
and i hope hymen hymen was the god of marriage. hymen will give us better luck than hero got.
no, wait. i will kiss you. (kisses him) now please, love, stay.
yes, but it's not what i desire.
didn't i tell you she was innocent?
isn't this good? come, my sweet kate. better late than never, and it's never too late to change.
you don't desire it?
and the prince and claudio, who accused her, are innocent as well, because they were deceived by don john. margaret is partially guilty, although our investigation shows that she acted unintentionally.
finally, at long last, we've reconciled our differences. now is the time, when war is safely over, to laugh at past dangers and adventures. my fair bianca, bid my father welcome, while i with equal affection welcome yours. brother petruchio, sister katherina, and you, hortensio, with your loving widow, you'll find no better entertainment anywhere. all of you are welcome in my house. this last course here is for closing up the stomach after great feasting. now everyone be seated, as this is the part where we sit and chat as well as eat.
no, sir, i never desired to trouble the poor with begging.
well, i'm glad that everything has been sorted out.
all we do is sit and sit and eat and eat.
you must think that if we give you something, we hope to get something from you.
me too, otherwise i would have had to duel with claudio.
yes, padua is famous for this pleasant life, petruchio, my son.
well then, tell me: what will it cost for you to give me the consulship?
hero, you and the other women should all retreat to a room. when i send for you, come out wearing masks. the prince and claudio are supposed to be here by now., you know your job, brother. you have to pretend to be your niece's father, and give her away to claudio.
padua contains nothing that isn't pleasant.
the price is to ask for it kindly.
i'll do that, without giving away our secret.
i wish that were true for both our sakes!
please, sir, kindly let me have it. i have wounds to show you, which i'll show you in private. your vote, sir, what do you say?
friar, i think i need a favor from you.
well what do you know! hortensio fears "fears" here can mean both"is afraid of," which is how petruchio means it, and "frightens," which is how the widow takes it. fears his widow.
you'll get my vote, worthy sir.
what do you need me to do?
me afraid of him? i don't think so.
it's a deal, sir. that's two deserving votes i've secured. thank you your charity. goodbye.
to tie me up, or to undo me: one or the other. signior leonato, the truth is, your niece likes me.
that's very sensible, but you missed my sense: i meant hortensio is afraid of you.
(to the other citizens) this is strange.
she sees you with the eyes my daughter lent her, it's true.
he who is dizzy thinks the world is spinning.
if i could vote again, but never mind.
and i see her also through the eyes of love.
a very candid reply.
i ask if you would please vote for me, since i am wearing the customary gown.
and those eyes were endowed with sight by claudio, the prince, and me. but what did you want?
what's that supposed to mean?
you've served your country nobly, but you aren't deserving.
sir, i'm puzzled by what you just said. but as far as what i want, i want you to give beatrice and me your blessing to be married. that, good friar, is where you come in.
that's what i conceive of him.
what do you mean?
our wishes are aligned, then: i give you my blessing.
conceives by me "conceives by me" = becomes pregnant by me. conceives by me ? how does that sit with you, hortensio?
you've defeated her enemies and you've protected her friends, but you haven't loved the common people.
and i'll help you. here comes the prince and claudio.
my widow means that her remark expressed the way she understood him.
you should consider me virtuous because i don't give my love away easily. sir, i'll flatter my sworn brothers, the people, so they'll think well of me. it's a custom they consider noble. and since they'd rather decide based on what hat i'm wearing than on who i am, i'll practice taking off my hat and bowing insincerely. that is to say, sir, i'll pretend to be enchanted by them, as some popular men do, and give my false admiration plentifully to those who desire it. so i ask you, may i be consul?
good morning to all these lovely people.
nice save! kiss him for that, good widow.
we hope you'll be our ally, so we happily vote for you.
good morning, prince; good morning, claudio. we're waiting here for you. are you still set on marrying my brother's daughter?
"he who is dizzy thinks the world is spinning", please, tell me what you meant by that.
you've been wounded many times serving your country.
i wouldn't change my mind even if she were black-skinned maidens in shakespeare's time were valued for fair skin. ("ethiopian" referred to black africans generally, not to a specific country.) black-skinned .
your husband, being saddled with a shrew, projects his own suffering onto my husband. and now you know my meaning.
i won't confirm what you already know by showing my wounds to you. i'll just take your votes and not trouble you further.
bring her out, brother. the friar's ready.
a very nasty meaning.
may the gods give you much joy, sir!
good morning, benedick. what's the matter? your face looks like the month of february, full of frost, storms, and cloudiness.
my meaning is nasty, for it's you i mean.
most sweet voters! it's better to die, better to starve, than to beg to be chosen for a position you already deserve. why must i stand here in this hypocritical toga and beg the commoners for their meaningless approval, which i shouldn't need? custom forces me to do it, and what custom requires, we must do. it's an ancient tradition that has gone on for so long that no one can see that it's a huge mistake. i wish i didn't have to play the fool, but the honor of the consulship goes to he who will. i'm halfway done. i'll do the other half.
i think he's nervous, he's about to become the savage bull who got domesticated. oh, don't worry about it, we'll dip your horns claudio continues the jokes of act , scene , about husbands and cuckolds' horns. horns in gold and make you pretty, and you'll delight all of europe, just like jove delighted europa when he was a bull.
and i am nasty when it comes to you.
here come more votes. your votes: i have fought for your votes and stayed out on watch for your votes. for your votes i have been wounded more than two dozen times and been in thirty-six battles. for your votes, i have seen and heard many things and done some things less and some things more, all for your votes, so i can be in the consul.
jove the god jove came to earth in the shape of a bull and carried off the woman europa. jove came to earth lowing for love. a strange bull just like him mated with one of your father's cows and, voil, gave birth to a calf like you, you bleat the same as him.
you tell her, kate!
he has served nobly and must win any honest man's vote.
i'll get you for that one. but here are other matters to be dealt with.
you tell her, widow!
therefore let him be the consul. may the gods give him joy and make him be good to the people!
which is the lady i'm supposed to marry?
i'll bet you a hundred marks, my kate puts her flat on her back.
amen, amen. god save thee, noble consul
this one, and i will give her to you.
well, that's really my job.
worthy voters!
well, then she's the one for me. sweetheart, let me see your face.
well said! here's to you!
you've stood here for the time required, and the tribunes approve you with the people's endorsement. all that remains is to make it official. we must go now to the senators.
no, you can't do that until you take her hand and, in front of this friar, swear to marry her.
what do you think of these quick-witted folks, gremio?
it's over?
(to hero) give me your hand. with the friar as my witness, i am your husband, if you want me.
they certainly do like to butt heads!
you've done the required custom, and the people admit you to the consul. go meet the senators so they can approve your election.
and when i lived, i was your other wife. and when you loved me, you were my other husband.(she removes her mask)
a clever person would say their butting heads had horns men whose wives cheat on them were supposed to have horns. horns on them.
where? at the senate house?
it's another hero!
ah, our bride has woken up!
yes, coriolanus.
exactly right. one hero died when she was slandered, but i am alive. and as surely as i am alive, i am a virgin.
yes, but not out of fear. i'll go back to sleep now.
may i change out of these clothes?
it's the former hero! the hero that died!
no, you shall not. since you chimed in, let's see if we can trade a caustic joke or two.
you may, sir.
she was only dead, my lord, as long as her slander lived.
am i the bird you're going to shoot at now? i'll move my bush "move my bush" = move to another bush (also with a sexual double entendre). move my bush , so you'll have to aim at a moving target. thank you all for coming.
i'll do that first, and once i feel like myself again, i'll go to the senate house.
i can confirm that all these shocking things are true. after the wedding ceremony, i'll tell you all about beautiful hero's "death." in the meantime, just accept all these wonderful things, and let's head to the chapel.
well, she got away. signior tranio, you also took aim at that bird, though you didn't hit her., so here's a health to all who've shot and missed.
i'll keep you company. will you come, too?
wait a moment, friar. which one of you is beatrice?
oh well, sir, i was really just like a greyhound that lucentio let off the leash: i did the running, but the catch was his.
we'll stay here with the people.
(taking off her mask) that's my name. what do you want?
a witty if a cynical reply.
good luck.
do you love me?
it's good you hunted for yourself, sir. it's rumored that your deer holds you at bay when a deer turns and faces the pursuing hounds, it is said to be "at bay." bay .
he has the consulship now, and he looks happy about it.
no, no more than is reasonable.
oh-ho, petruchio! tranio got you that time.
he wore the gown of humility, but his heart was still proud. will you let the people's vote stand?
well then, your uncle and the prince and claudio have been deceived. they swore you did.
i thank you for that quip, good tranio.
how are you, good people? have you chosen this man?
do you love me?
fess up, fess up, didn't that one strike home?
he has our votes, sir.
truly, no, no more than is reasonable.
he's made me a little sore, i'll admit. but since the gibe glanced off me, ten to one it hit you both straight on.
we pray to the gods that he deserves your favor.
well then, margaret, ursula, and my cousin have been very much deceived, for they swore you did.
seriously, though, son petruchio, i think you have the most thoroughgoing shrew of us all.
amen, sir. i'm not certain, but i think he mocked us while asking for our votes.
they swore that you were sick with love for me.
well, i disagree. but why not put it to the test? let's each one send for his wife. whichever's is most obedient and comes most readily shall win the bet that we'll propose.
he expressed his contempt for us in no uncertain terms.
they swore that you were nearly dead with love for me.
agreed. what's the bet?
no, that's just the way he speaks. he didn't mock us.
oh, well. so you don't love me?
twenty crowns.
all of us, except you, say he used us scornfully. he should have showed us his marks of merit, the wounds he received for his country.
no, i don't, except as a friend.
twenty crowns? that's a bet i'd make on my hawk or my hound. i'd wager twenty times as much on my wife.
i'm sure he showed you.
come on, niece, i'm sure you love him.
a hundred then.
no, no. no one saw them.
and i'll swear that he loves her. here's a clumsy sonnet, in benedick's handwriting, dedicated to beatrice. (holding up a piece of paper)
agreed.
he said he had wounds he could show in private. he waved his hat scornfully and said, "i should be the consul but because of this ancient custom, i can't be without your votes, so give me your votes." when we gave them to him, he said, "i thank you for your votes. thank you. your most sweet votes, now that you've given me your votes, i have no further use for you." isn't that mockery?
and here's another poem, which i stole from my cousin's pocket, in her handwriting and all about her adoration for benedick. (holding up a piece of paper)
good! it's a bet.
you were either too ignorant to see it, or if you did see it, you were too childish and accommodating to deny him your vote.
what a miracle! our handwriting gives away our hearts. come on, i'll take you, but honestly i'm only doing it out of pity.
who should begin?
couldn't you have told him as you were instructed? when he had no power and was only a petty servant of the state, he was your enemy. he has always spoken against your freedom and the legal privileges you have. now that he's arriving in a position of power and influence on the state, if he remains such an evil enemy to the people, you might have cause to curse yourself for giving him your votes. you should have said that while his acts of bravery do entitle him to the consulship, he should also be gracious and think well of you for giving him your approval. he should transform his hatred toward you into love and become your political advocate.
i won't say no to you, but let it be known that i'm only doing this after a lot of persuasion and to save your life , i hear you were quickly wasting away without me.
i will. biondello, go and tell your mistress to come to me.
if you'd said that, as you were advised ahead of time, it would have touched his spirit and changed his inclination. you might have gotten a gracious promise from him, which you could have held him to when you needed it. or else it would have provoked his angry nature, which is easily done, and he would have gone into a rage. you could have used his anger as reason not to vote for him.
oh, shut up! i'll stop your mouth with a kiss.
here i go.
didn't you notice that he asked for your vote in blatant contempt even when he needed your approval? so don't you think that his contempt will harm you when he has power to exercise? didn't you have any courage? couldn't you cry out against the status quo?
how does it feel to be benedick the married man?
son, i'll stake you half that bianca comes.
haven't you ever refused to vote for someone? and now you give your vote to someone who didn't even ask for it but mocked you instead?
i'll tell you what, prince: a whole university full of wisecrackers couldn't change my mood today. you think i care what i'm called? well, i don't. if a man is always afraid of what others think, he won't even dare to dress nicely, because he'll be afraid people will talk about him. in short, since i intend to get married, i won't hear anyone say a bad thing about it. so don't go making fun of me for what i said before. man is a giddy, flighty thing: that's my conclusion. and claudio, though i'm sure i would have beaten you in our duel, since you're likely to become my relative, i'll let you go, unbruised, and love my cousin hero.
i'll have no halves. i'll shoulder the whole bet
he's not confirmed. he can still deny him.
i was sort of hoping you would say no to beatrice, so that i could have smacked you out of your single life and made you a double dealer here, "double-dealer" means both married man and adulterer. double dealer . which you'll probably turn into anyway, if my cousin beatrice doesn't keep you on a short leash.
well, what happened
and we will deny him. i'll get five hundred people to vote against him.
come on, we're all friends. let's do a dance, and have some fun, before we're wed.
sir, my mistress sends you word that she is busy and cannot come.
i'll get a thousand people and their friends, too.
we'll dance after the wedding.
what! "she's busy and cannot come!" is that an answer?
go do it immediately, and tell those friends that they've chosen someone for the consul who will take away their freedoms and give them no more voice than dogs have that are repeatedly beaten for barking even though their job is to bark.
no, before! musicians, play us a song., prince, you look sad. you should get a wife! your royal staff would be so much more impressive if it were topped off by a horn again, benedick plays with the idea of the married man as a "horned" cuckold. horn .
yes, and a nice one at that. pray god your wife doesn't send you a worse one.
let them come together and make a wiser judgment to revoke your ignorant election. emphasize his pride and his longstanding hatred of you. and don't forget the contempt with which he wore the gown of humility and how in his quest for your votes, he scorned you. your admiration of his past service kept you from noticing of his present way of being, which was insulting and inappropriate and reflective of the hatred he feels for you.
(to don pedro) my lord, your brother john was caught by armed soldiers as he fled. he's been brought back to messina.
i'm hoping for better.
blame us, your tribunes. say that we pushed you not to let these obstacles stop you from voting for him, but that you must repeal your election of him.
(to don pedro) leave him till tomorrow. i'll think of some awful punishment for him. play on, musicians!
you there, biondello, go and request that my wife come to me straight away.
say that you chose him based more on our instructions than on your own true feelings, and that because you were preoccupied with what you thought was expected of you, you went against your own interest by voting him consul. lay the fault on us.
oh-ho, he requests! why, then she'll have to come.
indeed, don't spare us. say we told you all about him, about how young he was when he began to serve his country and how long he has done so, about the noble family he comes from, the same family as ancus martius, numa's daughter's son, who was king after great hostilius. he's from the same family as publius and quintus, the ones who built our best water conduits. and his great ancestor, suitably named censorinus, was chosen twice as censor by the people.
escalus.
i rather think, sir, that yours will not grant a request in any case.
we asked you to remember that he's a man descended from a famous family, who also has earned his own high praise. but you have found, weighing his present behavior against his past, that he's definitely your enemy, and you repeal your hasty approval.
yes, my lord?
so, where's my wife?
say that you never would have done it, emphasize that, if we hadn't put you up to it. and then, when you have enough people on your side, go to the capitol. all we will. almost everyone regrets the vote they gave.
explaining government affairs always makes me talk excitedly. but since you know more about matters of government than i can ever tell you, the only thing left for me to say is this: rely on your natural ability, and let it work with your knowledge. you know as much, from both learning and experience, about the nature of our people, our city's laws and procedures, and our legal system as anyone i can think of. here are your written orders; do not deviate from them. [to attendants.] go and order angelo to come to me.
she says she thinks this is a prank. she will not come. she says that you should come to her.
let them go on their own. better to risk this mutiny than wait for the undoubtedly bigger one that would come later. if, his nature being what it is, he goes into a rage over their refusal, both watch for and take advantage of his anger.
how do you think he'll represent me? for you must know, after careful consideration, i've chosen him to rule in my absence, deputizing him with the dread and love my presence inspires, and transferring to him all the tools in my power. what do you think?
worse and worse! she will not come! it's vile, intolerable, not to be endured!, you there, grumio, go to your mistress. say that i command her to come to me.
let's go to the capitol. we'll be there before the uprising of the people. and it will appear to be their own initiative, which it partially is, although we urged them into action.
if anyone in vienna deserves such an honor, it's lord angelo.
i can guess her answer.
tullus aufidius had assembled a new army?
here he comes.
what?
he had, my lord, and that was why we needed to reach an agreement sooner than expected.
here i am, obedient as always; what can i do for you?
she will not.
so then, the volsces will be able to attack us again when the time is right.
angelo, there is a distinctive pattern to your life that tells people what sort of man you are. but your talents don't belong to you alone, and you mustn't waste them by keeping them to yourself. heaven uses us the way we use a torch, not to shine for itself, but to shed light onto the world. if we don't use our talents in the world, it would be the same as if we didn't have those talents at all. people are given certain natures to accomplish certain things. mother nature doesn't lend you even a smidgen of talent without expecting you to pay her back, with interest and gratitude. but here i am talking to someone who could instruct me! so, stand firm, angelo, in my absence, you'll stand in for me completely. vienna's criminals will be executed or pardoned based on what you feel and say. although old escalus is senior to you, he'll be your second-in-command. take your written orders.
the worse for me, no doubt about it.
they're worn out, lord consul, so we won't likely see their banners wave again in our lifetime.
my good lord, please test me further before you raise me to such a high, prominent position.
by all that's holy, here comes katherina!
did you see aufidius?
no more procrastinating. i've chosen you after careful consideration, so accept the honor. it's imperative that i leave now, even if it means leaving some important matters undiscussed. i'll write to you when i have the time and feel the need, telling you how i am, and i'll expect to hear how you're doing. so, goodbye; i'll leave you to carry out your orders, successfully, no doubt.
you sent for me, sir? is there something you'd like me to do for you?
he came to me, under high security, and cursed the volsces because they had failed so miserably by letting the town be captured. he has retreated to antium.
my lord, will you allow us to escort you part of the way?
where are your sister and hortensio's wife?
did he talk about me?
sorry, i'm in too big a rush. but please don't have any doubts, you have all my authority to enforce or change the laws in any way that seems good to you. let's shake hands, and i'll sneak off. i love the people but don't like to parade before them. i don't like their loud applause and emphatic cheering, though they can be politically useful; nor do i trust the judgment of any man who does desire such cheers and applause. once again, goodbye.
they sit chatting by the parlor fire.
he did, my lord.
may heaven grant you a safe trip!
go bring them here. if they refuse to come, get physical, use a whip if you have to, but get them out here to their husbands. go on, i said. bring them here straight away.
what did he say?
a happy departure, and a happy homecoming as well!
this is a miracle, if you talk of miracles.
he spoke of how often you and he had met in battle. he said that of all things on earth, he hated you the most and that he would pawn his fortunes until he was hopelessly broke in order to defeat you.
thank you. goodbye.
it is. i wonder what it means.
he's living in antium?
sir, i'd like to have a frank talk with you because i want to figure out the exact nature of my new job. i know i've got some authority, but how much, and what kind, i'm not clear on.
i'll tell you what it means. it means peace and love and a quiet life, supremacy based on reverence and profound respect, and, not to go on and on about it, everything that's sweet and happy.
in antium.
same with me. let's leave together and we'll go figure it out.
may good fortune come to you, good petruchio! you've won the wager, and i will add twenty thousand crowns to what they owe you. another dowry for another wife, for, truly, she is so transformed she's like a completely new woman.
i wish i had a reason to go there and show him how much i hate him, too. welcome home.
i'll accompany you.
wait, i will win the wager more spectacularly, going even further to demonstrate her obedience, her newly created virtue and obedience.
look, here are the tribunes. i hate them because their authority is an insult to the power of the nobility.
if our duke, along with the other dukes, can't reach an agreement with the king of hungary, they're all going to attack him.
look, here she comes, with your ungovernable wives in tow, like prisoners of her womanly persuasion., katherine, that cap of yours doesn't look good on you. take it off and throw it on the ground.
go no further.
may god give us peace, except not with hungary.
lord, may i never see a day of trouble until the day i let someone treat me like that.
ha! what did you say?
amen.
for shame! what kind of loyalty is this?
it will be dangerous for you to go any further.
you talk like the self-righteous pirate who went to sea with the ten commandments but cut out one of the commandments.
i wish your loyalty were as foolish. the wisdom of your loyalty, fair bianca, has cost me a hundred crowns since dinner.
what's changed?
was it "thou shalt not steal"?
the more fool you for betting on my loyalty.
what's the matter?
yep, that's the one.
katherine, i'd like you to lecture these headstrong women on the nature of the loyalty they owe their lords and husbands.
hasn't he been approved by the nobility and the common people?
right, because that commandment would've put the captain and his pirate crew out of business, they went to sea to steal. when grace is being said before a meal, there's not a soldier among us who likes a prayer for peace.
you must be joking. there will be no lecture.
no, cominius.
i never heard any soldier say he dislikes it.
do it, i say. you can begin with her.
have they broken their promise like children?
i believe you, i don't think you've ever been at a table where they said grace.
she shall not.
tribunes, let us through. he's going to the marketplace.
no? i've heard it a dozen times at least.
i say she shall., and first begin with her.
the people are furious with him.
what, in verse?
girls, girls! wipe those frowns off your faces and stop rolling your eyes. this disrespectful stance toward the man who is your lord, your king, your governor tarnishes your beauty the way the frosts of winter blights the land. it mars your reputations as whirlwinds shake fair buds. and in no sense is it fitting or attractive. an angry woman is like an agitated fountain, muddy, unpleasant, lacking in beauty. and in this condition, no one, however dry or thirsty he may be, will stoop to sip or touch one drop of it. your husband is your lord, your life, your keeper, your head, your sovereign, one who cares for you and who, for your ease and comfort, commits his body to harsh labor both on land and sea. long, stormy nights at seas he stays awake, by day he endures cold while you lie safe and warm, secure in your beds at home. and in exchange he seeks no more from you but love, kind looks, and true obedience, too little payment for so great a debt. a woman owes her husband the same loyalty a subject owes his king. and when she is peevish and perverse, sullen, sour, and disobedient to his honest wishes, what is she but a loathsome, warlike rebel and an ungrateful traitor to her loving lord? i am ashamed that women are so foolish as to declare war when they should plead on their knees for peace, that they seek authority, supremacy, and power when they are under an obligation to serve, love, and obey. why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth, unfit for toil and trouble in the world, if not so that our soft qualities and our hearts should agree with our external parts? come, come, you weak, ungovernable worms!
stop, or a riot will break out.
in any form or in any language.
my spirit has been as proud as each of yours, my courage as great, and my reason perhaps even better suited to bandy words back and forth and exchange frown for frown. but now i see our weapons are like straws, our strength like a straw's weakness, and our weakness past comparison, so that we seem to be the thing we most are not. humble your pride, then, since it's useless, and place your hand beneath your husband's foot. as a gesture of my loyalty, my hand is ready if he cares to use it. may it bring him comfort.
is this your herd? why do these people have the right to vote, if they can vote one way and then immediately change their mind? what's your job? if you control what they think and say, can't you control what they do? have you incited them against us?
or in any religion.
there, that's my girl! come on and kiss me, kate.
be calm, be calm.
well, why not? grace is grace, no matter what your religious beliefs are, just like you're a scoundrel, no matter how much grace you have.
congratulations, old pal, you've won the bet.
it's a deliberate plot to undercut the authority of the nobility. if we succumb to it, we'll have to live alongside these uncontrollable people who themselves are incapable of governing.
hey, you and me are cut from the same cloth.
it's nice to see children playing well together.
don't call it a plot. the people say you mocked them, and recently when corn was given to them for free, you complained and slandered us, the representatives of the people, calling us opportunists, flatterers, and enemies to nobility.
right, the way a piece of velvet and the scrap ends are from the same cloth. you're the scrap.
but not so nice when women misbehave.
you were already known as such.
and you're the velvet: a nice, thick piece of piled velvet. i swear, i'd rather be a piece of plain, english cloth than be like you, a french velvet that's full of piles shakespeare plays on the word "piles" here. piled velvet was plush, but "piles" refers also to the std syphilis, commonly called the french disease. syphilis leaves sores that at the time were often covered with velvet patches. piles and stds. got you there, didn't i?
come, kate, let's go to bed. we three are married, but you two are defeated. (to lucentio) i was the one who won the wager, though you hit the white petruchio means the white circle at the center of an archery target, with a pun on bianca's name, which means white. hit the white . and as the winner here i say good night.
not all of them thought so.
i think you did, and from the painful way you talk, i think something's got you down there. i'd be glad to toast your health; just remind me never to drink from your glass after you.
well, congratulations. you've tamed a terrible shrew.
have you informed them since?
i guess i set myself up, didn't i?
it's amazing, if i may say so, that she let herself be tamed.
how would i inform them?
yeah, you did, whether you've got something or not.
by the way you do business.
oh, look, here comes madam satisfaction. the number of venereal diseases i've caught under her roof comes to, 
who's there?
possibly, but whatever i do, i do it better than you would do as consul.
to what?
no, who are you? stop and identify yourself.
why then should i be consul? if i am as bad as you, make me your fellow tribune.
guess.
long live the king!
you cause too much disturbance among the people. if you want to get where you want to go, you must ask kindly to get there. you're a long way off from doing that. and without doing so, you'll never be noble enough to be consul or even be his equal as a tribune.
three thousand dollars' worth.
is that barnardo?
let's stay calm.
yeah, and more.
yes, it's me.
the people have been deceived and now incited. trickery like this is not how romans behave. coriolanus shouldn't be dishonored by these false accusations because his bravery makes him so clearly deserving.
a syphilis sore more.
you've come right on time.
talk to me about corn! this was my speech, and i will speak it again, 
you're always suggesting i'm diseased, but you're wrong. i'm sound and healthy.
the clock's just striking twelve. go home to bed, francisco.
not now, not now.
you may be sound, but you're not healthy. your bones sound hollow. loose living has eaten out your insides.
thanks for letting me go. it's bitterly cold out, and i'm depressed.
not when the people are so agitated, sir, not now.
hey, there! in which hip is the pain of your sciatica worse?
has it been a quiet night?
as sure as i'm alive, i will speak now. my nobler friends, i beg your pardon. as for the two-faced, stinking masses, let them see themselves clearly because i will not flatter them. i say again, by flattering them, we encourage the seeds of rebellion, disobedience, treason against our senate, seeds that we ourselves have plowed for, sowed, and scattered by mingling them with us, the honorable ones. the only virtue or power that we lack is that which we have given to these beggars.
well, well. there's someone over there who's been arrested and hauled off to prison who was worth five thousand of you all.
i haven't even heard a mouse squeak.
that's enough, no more.
who's that?
well, good night. if you happen to see horatio and marcellus, who are supposed to stand guard with me tonight, tell them to hurry.
no more words, we beg you.
that's claudio, signior claudio.
i think i hear them. , stop! who's there?
what? no more? i have shed my blood for my country without fearing opposing forces, so my lungs will speak until the hated measles, that we caught by trying to help the people, cause us to become infected and die.
claudio in prison? it can't be true.
friends of this country.
you speak of the people as if you were a god to punish them, not a mortal man just like them.
i know it's true: i saw him arrested and saw him carried away, and what's more, they're chopping his head off in three days.
and servants of the danish king.
it would be a good idea for us to let the people know this.
all kidding aside, i'd hate for this to be true. are you sure?
good night to you both.
know what? about his anger?
i'm all too sure. it's for getting miss julietta pregnant.
good-bye. who's taken over the watch for you?
anger! if i were as calm as in midnight sleep, by jove, this would still be my opinion!
she might be right about this. he promised to meet me two hours ago, and he always keeps his promises.
barnardo's taken my place. good night.
it's a poisonous opinion that shall remain where it is and not poison any further.
you know, this is exactly the sort of thing we were just talking about.
hello, barnardo.
"shall remain"? do you hear this, triton of the minnows? do you hear his absolute "shall"?
most of all it fits with the public proclamation that was made.
hello. is horatio here too?
it was inappropriate.
let's go see if we can get to the bottom of this.
more or less.
"shall"! oh, good but most unwise nobleman! you dignified but reckless senators, why have you permitted this many-headed monster to choose a representative whose arrogant "shall" is just the monster's noisy horn and who has the nerve to say he'll take advantage of your power and use your resources for his own purposes? if he's in power, then it's your mistake that has you bowing to him. if not, then wake up from your dangerous tolerance of him. if you're good leaders, don't be common fools. if you're not, let them have seats with you in the senate. if they were senators, that would make you into commoners. and if you had equal say, the interests of the common people would outweigh yours. the people chose as their representative someone who addresses his "shall," his common man's command of "shall" to the most dignified legislature since the greeks. by jove himself! it lowers the position of the consuls and my soul aches to know, when there are two authorities and neither is supreme, how quickly chaos will arise in the space between them and use one to overthrow the other.
what with the war, plague, executions, and general poverty, i'm losing business.
welcome, horatio. welcome, marcellus.
let's go on to the marketplace.
hi! what's new with you?
so, tell us, did you see that thing again tonight?
whoever gave the advice to give out corn from the storehouse for free, as they used to do in greece, 
that man over there is being hauled off to prison.
i haven't seen anything.
that's enough. no more talk of that.
what did he do?
horatio says we're imagining it, and won't let himself believe anything about this horrible thing that we've seen twice now. that's why i've begged him to come on our shift tonight, so that if the ghost appears he can see what we see and speak to it.
even though the people had more absolute power in greece, i think whoever gave that advice invited disobedience and caused the ruin of the state.
a woman.
oh, nonsense. it's not going to appear.
should the people give up someone who speaks for them?
but what's his crime?
sit down for a while, and we'll tell you again the story you don't want to believe, about what we've seen two nights now.
i'll give my reasons, which are worthier than their wishes. they know they didn't earn the corn, as they certainly never did any service for it. even when they were drafted to fight the war when the center of the state was threatened, they wouldn't leave the city gates. this kind of service doesn't deserve free corn. when they were in the war, their mutinies and revolts, which were the only times they showed any courage, didn't speak well for them. their frequent accusation that the senate was hoarding corn had no basis, so it could never be the reason for our generous gift. well, what then? how will this many-headed monster repay the senate's kindness? let their actions express what their words should be: "we asked for it, we are the majority of the population, and out of fear they gave in to our demands." in doing this we degrade the nature of our position and make the rabble think that our sympathy is fear. in time this will break open the locks of the senate, and the scavengers will devour us.
fishing in the "private part" of a river.
well, let's sit down and listen to barnardo tell us.
okay, that's enough.
what, a virgin is pregnant because of him?
last night, when that star to the west of the north star had traveled across the night sky to that point where it's shining now, at one o'clock, marcellus and i, 
enough overstatement.
no, but a woman's having a child because of him. you haven't heard about the proclamation, have you?
quiet, shut up! it's come again.
no, there's more! i swear there's both divine and human confirmation of what i have to say. a divided government, in which one part rightfully despises the other and the other part makes insulting accusations without any reason, and in which people of class, title, and wisdom are reduced to deciding things just by voting yes or no, will be unable to focus on important matters and so instead will deal only with trivial concerns. when governing becomes so difficult, it makes sense that nothing will get done well. so i beg you, you who won't be afraid to take action because you care more about preserving our government than you fear the consequences of doing so, you who prefer a noble life over a long one and are willing to use a dangerous medicine to help someone who would otherwise surely die, you must immediately remove the representatives of the common people. don't let the tribunes use their poisonous flattery. when they dishonor you, it's an impediment to justice. it robs the state of your much-needed integrity and leaves the state without the power to do the good it would because evil forces are controlling it.
what proclamation, man?
looking just like the dead king.
he has said enough.
all the brothels in the suburbs of vienna must be torn down.
(to horatio) you're well-educated, horatio. say something to it.
he has spoken like a traitor and must be punished as a traitor.
and what about those in the city?
doesn't he look like the king, horatio?
you wretch. i feel overwhelming contempt for you! why should the people have these stupid tribunes? by depending on you, they fail to obey the senate's higher authority. in a rebellion, actions that are wrong but unavoidable are sanctioned because of the circumstances under which they are chosen. but when times are better, it must be said that what is right must be done. so throw the tribunes' power in the garbage.
they'll be left standing. they would've been destroyed, too, but a savvy businessman bought them.
very much so. it's terrifying.
that's blatantly treason!
but all our brothels in the suburbs are going to be demolished?
it wants us to speak to it.
this man is consul? no.
down to the ground, ma'am.
ask it something, horatio.
aediles a tribune's assistant aediles , come here!
wow, that's a change for the country. what's going to happen to me?
what are you, that you walk out so late at night, looking like the dead king of denmark when he dressed for battle? by god, i order you to speak.
seize him.
come on, don't worry. good lawyers never lack for clients. though you change locations, you don't need to change professions. i'll still be your pimp. courage! they'll take pity on you; all of you that have grown old and gray servicing people will be repaid.
it looks like you've offended it.
go, call the people.
what's all this fuss, thomas tapster? let's get out of here.
look, it's going away.
(to coriolanus) in the people's name i call you a traitorous rebel, an enemy to the people. obey, i command you, and follow me to your interrogation. [sicinius tries to seize coriolanus]
here comes signior claudio, led to prison by the provost. and there's miss juliet.
stay! speak! speak! i order you, speak!
get off me, old goat!
man, why are you parading me like this in front of everyone? take me off to prison already.
it's gone. it won't answer now.
we stand behind him.
i'm not being cruel. it's lord angelo's special order.
what's going on, horatio? you're pale and trembling. you agree now that we're not imagining this, don't you? what do you think about it?
old man, take your hands off him.
this is how the authorities, like gods, make us pay for our crimes. as the bible says, god has mercy on those he chooses to have mercy on, and doesn't have mercy on those he chooses not to, and so on. i suppose that's fair.
i swear to god, if i hadn't seen this with my own eyes i'd never believe it.
get off me, you rotten thing! or i'll shake your bones out of your clothes.
claudio! why are you being arrested?
doesn't it look like the king?
help, you citizens!
for being too promiscuous, lucio, too promiscuous. the same way overeating leads to fasting, and overdoing anything leads to being restricted. like rats gobbling up rat poison, we have a thirst for harmful things, and when we drink them we die.
yes, as much as you look like yourself. the king was wearing exactly this armor when he fought the king of norway. and the ghost frowned just like the king did once when he attacked the poles, traveling on the ice in sleds. it's weird.
both of you, show more respect.
if i could speak so well while under arrest, i'd ask a few creditors i know to come and lock me up. though frankly, i'd rather be foolish and free than wise and a prisoner. what's your crime, claudio?
it's happened like this twice before, always at this exact time. he stalks by us at our post like a warrior.
here's the man who would take all your power away from you.
to speak of it would be another crime.
i don't know exactly how to explain this, but i have a general feeling this means bad news for our country.
seize him, aediles!
what, is it murder?
all right, let's sit down and discuss that question. somebody tell me why this strict schedule of guards has been imposed, and why so many bronze cannons are being manufactured in denmark, and so many weapons bought from abroad, and why the shipbuilders are so busy they don't even rest on sunday. is something about to happen that warrants working this night and day? who can explain this to me?
down with him! down with him!
no.
i can. or at least i can describe the rumors. as you know, our late king, whom we just now saw as a ghost, was the great rival of fortinbras, king of norway. fortinbras dared him to battle. in that fight, our courageous hamlet (or at least that's how we thought of him) killed old king fortinbras, who, on the basis of a valid legal document, surrendered all his territories, along with his life, to his conqueror. if our king had lost, he would have had to do the same. but now old fortinbras's young son, also called fortinbras, he is bold, but unproven, has gathered a bunch of thugs from the lawless outskirts of the country. for some food, they're eager to take on the tough enterprise of securing the lands the elder fortinbras lost.
weapons, weapons, weapons!
lechery?
as far as i understand, that's why we're posted here tonight and why there's such a commotion in denmark lately.
tribunes! noblemen! citizens! what's happening! sicinius! brutus! coriolanus! citizens! peace, peace, peace! stay, wait, peace!
you could call it that.
i think that's exactly right, that explains why the ghost of the late king would haunt us now, since he caused these wars.
what's going to happen? i'm out of breath. chaos is near. i can't speak. you tribunes, talk to the people! coriolanus, be patient! speak, good sicinius.
sir, you have to go.
the ghost is definitely something to worry about. in the high and mighty roman empire, just before the emperor julius caesar was assassinated, corpses rose out of their graves and ran through the streets of rome speaking gibberish. there were shooting stars, and blood mixed in with the morning dew, and threatening signs on the face of the sun. the moon, which controls the tides of the sea, was so eclipsed it almost went completely out. and we've had similar omens of terrible things to come, as if heaven and earth have joined together to warn us what's going to happen.
hear me, people. be calm!
(to the provost) just a minute, good friend. lucio, let me have a word with you.
wait, look! it has come again. i'll meet it if it's the last thing i do. , stay here, you hallucination!
let's hear our tribune. please speak, speak, speak.
a hundred, if they'll do you any good. is lechery regulated now?
if you have a voice or can make sounds, speak to me.
you're about to lose your freedom. martius will take everything from you. martius, who you have just selected for consul.
here's what happened: i slept with julietta after we got engaged. you know her, she's practically my wife, except that we haven't had an official ceremony. the only reason we didn't was to increase the amount of the dowry she might receive from her friends and relatives. we thought we'd hide our love until we had a chance to win them over. but it turned out our secret intimacy had an all-too-obvious effect on juliet.
if there's any good deed i can do that will bring you peace and me honor, speak to me. if you have some secret knowledge of your country's sad fate, which might be avoided if we knew about it, then, please, speak. or if you've got some buried treasure somewhere, which they say often makes ghosts restless, then tell us about it. stay and speak!
no, no, no! that's the way to incite them further, not calm them down.
pregnant, huh?
keep it from leaving, marcellus.
to destroy the city and tear all the buildings down.
unfortunately, yes. and this new deputy of the duke's, i can't say whether he's been blinded by his new power or if he sees the public like a horse to be broken in, so he digs his spurs in right away to show it who's boss; or if he's just a bully; or if being a bully is part of the job. but this new governor is taking all these old penalties that, like rusty armor hanging on the wall, haven't been used in years and is applying them to me. he's imposing all these unenforced, long-ignored laws on me to make a name for himself. that has to be it, to make his name.
should i strike it with my spear?
what is the city if not the people?
i bet it is; and your head sits so precariously on your shoulders right now that the sigh of a lovesick milkmaid could knock it off. get in touch with the duke and appeal to him.
yes, if it doesn't stand still.
true, the people make the city.
i tried, but he can't be found. please, lucio, do this favor for me: my sister's entering a nunnery and starting her training period today. tell her the danger i'm in, and implore her, in my name, to befriend this strict deputy and try to change his mind. i've got a lot of hope in her. her youthful sweetness alone would move a man. besides, she has a gift for rhetoric, and she can really persuade people.
it's over here.
by everyone's agreement, we were selected to speak for the people.
i pray she can, for the lives of everyone like you who could now be punished, as well as for your own life, which i'd be sad to see lost so stupidly for playing with you. i'll go to her.
there it is.
you still do.
thank you, lucio. you're a good friend.
it's gone. we were wrong to threaten it with violence, since it looks so much like a king. besides, we can't hurt it anymore than we can hurt the air. our attack was stupid, futile, and wicked.
and most likely, you're about to speak.
i'll be there in two hours.
it was about to say something when the rooster crowed.
that's the way to destroy the city, to bring the roof to the foundation and bury it all, and yet the heaps and piles of ruin have a distinct hierarchy.
ok, officer, let's go.
and then it acted startled, like a guilty person caught by the law. i've heard that the rooster awakens the god of day with its trumpetlike crowing, and makes all wandering ghosts, wherever they are, hurry back to their hiding places. we've just seen proof of that.
this deserves death.
no, holy father, forget that idea. don't think that cupid's feeble arrow can pierce this invulnerable bosom. i want you to shelter me secretly for a reason more ageless and serious than any youthful, burning desire.
yes, it faded away when the rooster crowed. some people say that just before christmas the rooster crows all night long, so that no ghost dares go wandering, and the night is safe. the planets have no sway over us, fairies' spells don't work, and witches can't bewitch us. that's how holy that night is.
either let us exercise our authority, or let us lose it. on behalf of the people who we were elected to represent, we declare that martius deserves to die immediately.
can you talk about it?
yes, i've heard the same thing and sort of believe it. but look, morning is breaking beyond that hill in the east, turning the sky red. let's interrupt our watch and go tell young hamlet what we've seen tonight. i'm sure this ghost that's so silent with us will speak to him. don't you agree that we owe it to him to tell him about this, out of duty and love?
so grab him, take him to the tarpeian rock, and throw him off the edge.
reverend sir, no one knows better than you how i've always loved the quiet life and never cared much for the social scene where young people brag and throw their money around. i've given lord angelo, a man of strict self-discipline and self-denial, my absolute power and position here in vienna. he thinks i've gone to poland, since i've spread that rumor among the general public, and everybody believes it. now, religious sir, do you want to know why i did this?
let's do it. i know where we'll find him this morning.
brutus aediles, seize him!
yes, my lord.
although i still have fresh memories of my brother the elder hamlet's death, and though it was proper to mourn him throughout our kingdom, life still goes on, i think it's wise to mourn him while also thinking about my own well being. therefore, i've married my former sister-in-law, the queen, with mixed feelings of happiness and sadness. i know that in marrying gertrude i'm only doing what all of you have wisely advised all along, for which i thank you. now, down to business. you all know what's happening. young fortinbras, underestimating my strength or imagining that the death of the king has thrown my country into turmoil, dreams of getting the better of me, and never stops pestering me with demands that i surrender the territory his father lost to the elder hamlet, my dead brother-in-law. so much for fortinbras.
surrender, martius, surrender!
i instituted strict statutes and firm laws, necessary controls for headstrong human natures, but for nineteen years i've let them grow lax, like an old, fat lion that lies in his cave and never leaves to hunt. now, a doting father can make a birch whipping rod and wave it in his children's faces, but if he only threatens and never uses it, eventually they'll laugh at it and not fear it. similarly, our regulations have gone unenforced, and so they're as good as dead. people are flouting the law with their loose living. the proper order of things is turned upside down, as if babies were spanking their nannies.
now, here's what needs to be done.
let me say one thing. please, tribunes, let me say just one thing.
it was in your lordship's ability to get the justice system working again whenever you wanted. and it would've been taken more seriously if you'd done it, rather than lord angelo.
i've written to fortinbras's uncle, the present head of norway, an old bedridden man who knows next to nothing about his nephew's plans. i've told the uncle to stop those plans, which he has the power to do, since all the troops assembled by young fortinbras are norwegian, and thus under the uncle's control. i'm giving the job of delivering this letter to you, good cornelius, and you, voltemand. your business in norway will be limited to this task. (he gives them a paper) now good-bye. show your loyalty by leaving quickly, rather than with elaborate speeches.
peace, peace!
too seriously, i'm afraid. since it was my fault to give the people so much freedom, i'd seem like a real tyrant now to whip them for things i allowed them to do. we essentially tell people to misbehave when we give evil deeds a pass and don't punish them. so, friar, i've given the job to angelo. he can effectively deal with this, in my name, but since i'm not personally involved, i won't look bad. to see how he rules, i'd like to visit him and the people disguised as one of your order's monks. so please furnish me with a robe and teach me how to behave like a real friar. when there's more time, i'll give you additional reasons for my actions. for now, i'll tell you this one: lord angelo is a puritanical man, constantly guarding himself against desire, the type who barely admits blood flows in his veins. so if power changes a person's principles, we'll see how he really is.
we'll do our duty to you in that and everything else.
(to brutus) act as you should if you're a true servant of your country. proceed moderately, not with the violent solution you have in mind.
and so you nuns have no other privileges?
i have no doubt you will. good-bye.
sir, those moderate ways that seem prudent are actually poisonous when the problem is serious. grab him and take him to the rock.
aren't these enough?
and now, laertes, what do you have to tell me? you have a favor you to ask of me. what is it, laertes? you'll never waste your words when talking to the king of denmark. what could you ever ask for that i wouldn't give you? your father and the danish throne are as close as the mind and the heart, or the hand and the mouth. what would you like, laertes?
no, i'll die here.
oh, yes. i didn't mean i wanted more freedom. actually, i wish there were even more restrictions on the saint claire sisterhood.
my lord, i want your permission to go back to france, which i left to come to denmark for your coronation. i confess, my thoughts are on france, now that my duty is done. please, let me go.
there's some among you who have seen me fight. come, try for yourselves to do what you've seen me do in battle.
(offstage) hello! peace to this place!
do you have your father's permission? what does polonius say?
put that sword down! tribunes, go away for a while.
who's that?
my son has worn me down by asking me so many times. in the end i grudgingly consented. i beg you, let him go.
grab him.
it's a man's voice. isabella, unlock the door and ask him what he wants. i can't, but you can, since you haven't taken your vows yet. once you have, you'll only be able to speak with men in the presence of the mother superior. then, if you speak, you mustn't show your face. or if you show your face, you mustn't speak. he's calling again. please answer him.
in that case, leave when you like, laertes, and spend your time however you wish. i hereby grant your request, and hope you have a good time. and now, hamlet, my nephew and my son, 
help martius, help him, you who are noble. help him, whether you're young or old!
peace and prosperity! who's there?
(speaking so no one else can hear) too many family ties there for me.
down with him, down with him!
well, hello, virgin, if you are one, as your rosy cheeks proclaim you to be. can you help me to find isabella, a novice here and the pretty sister to claudio, her unlucky brother?
why are you still so gloomy, with a cloud hanging over you?
(to coriolanus) go home, be gone, go away! all will be lost otherwise.
why "her unlucky brother"? i ask, because i'm isabella, his sister.
it's not true, sir. your son is out in the sun.
(to coriolanus) get out of here.
your brother sends you his love, sweet, pretty one. to get right to the point, he's in prison.
my dear hamlet, stop wearing these black clothes, and be friendly to the king. you can't spend your whole life with your eyes to the ground remembering your noble father. it happens all the time, what lives must die eventually, passing to eternity.
stay where you are. we have as many allies as enemies.
how awful! for what?
yes, mother, it happens all the time.
will it come to that?
for something which, if you ask me, he should be thanked rather than punished. he's gotten his lover pregnant.
so why does it seem so particular to you?
(to coriolanus) the gods forbid! i beg you, noble friend, go home. leave us to handle this situation.
sir, don't make things up.
"seem," mother? no, it is. i don't know what you mean by "seem." neither my black clothes, my dear mother, nor my heavy sighs, nor my weeping, nor my downcast eyes, nor any other display of grief can show what i really feel. it's true that all these things "seem" like grief, since a person could use them to fake grief if he wanted to. but i've got more real grief inside me that you could ever see on the surface. these clothes are just a hint of it.
it's dangerous for all of us now, and you can't fix it yourself. go now, i beg you.
it's true. i admit, i often play the deceiver and joker with young virgins and say things i don't mean. but because of your religious vocation, i see you as a heavenly, spiritual being, and someone to speak to with sincerely, as i would a saint.
hamlet, you are so sweet and such a good son to mourn your father like this. but you have to remember, that your father lost his father, who lost his father before him, and every time, each son has had to mourn his father for a certain period. but overdoing it is just stubborn. it's not manly. it's not what god wants, and it betrays a vulnerable heart and an ignorant and weak mind. since we know that everyone must die sooner or later, why should we take it to heart? you're committing a crime against heaven, against the dead, and against nature. and it's irration-al, since the truth is that all fathers must die. please give up this useless mourning of yours and start thinking of me as your new father.
please, sir, come with us.
you mock real saints by calling me one.
because everyone knows that you are the man closest to this throne, and i love you just as much as any father loves his son. and your plans for going back to wittenberg are not what i want. i'm asking you now to stay here in my company as the number-one member of my court, my nephew and now my son too.
i wish they were barbarians, which they are, even though they were born in rome, and not romans, which they aren't even though they born on the steps of the capitol, 
don't think that. in brief: your brother and his girl have slept together. and the same way your stomach gets full when you eat, and as a bare field, when you plant it, yields a rich harvest, her body shows the results of his plowing.
please answer my prayers, hamlet, and stay with us. don't go back to wittenberg.
go away. you're understandably angry, but stop speaking your anger. there will be time for that in the future.
he's made someone pregnant? my cousin juliet?
i'll obey you as well as i can, ma'am.
i could easily beat a large number of them.
is she your cousin?
that's the right answer, it shows your love. stay in denmark like us., my dear wife, come. hamlet's agreeing to stay makes me happy, and every merry toast i'll drink today will be heard as far as the clouds overhead. my drinking will be echoed in the heavens. let's go.
i myself could fight a pair of the best of them, indeed, the two tribunes! but now the odds are beyond calculation, and courage becomes foolishness when it stands beneath a falling building. (to coriolanus) will you go now, before the mob returns? their rage is like dammed up water that will overflow its banks.
unofficially, in the silly but sweet way schoolgirls swear to be sisters.
ah, i wish my dirty flesh could melt away into a vapor, or that god had not made a law against suicide. oh god, god! how tired, stale, and pointless life is to me. damn it! it's like a garden that no one's taking care of, and that's growing wild. only nasty weeds grow in it now. i can't believe it's come to this. my father's only been dead for two months, no, not even two. such an excellent king, as superior to my uncle as a god is to a beast, and so loving toward my mother that he kept the wind from blowing too hard on her face.
(to coriolanus) please, go now. i'll try to reason with them, even though they're unreasonable. we must try every possible solution to fix this problem.
she's the one.
oh god, do i have to remember that? she would hang on to him, and the more she was with him the more she wanted to be with him; she couldn't get enough of him. yet even so, within a month of my father's death (i don't even want to think about it. oh women! you are so weak!), even before she had broken in the shoes she wore to his funeral, crying like crazy, even an animal would have mourned its mate longer than she did!, there she was marrying my uncle, my father's brother, who's about as much like my father as i'm like hercules. less than a month after my father's death, even before the tears on her cheeks had dried, she remarried. oh, so quick to jump into a bed of incest! that's not good, and no good can come of it either. but my heart must break in silence, since i can't mention my feelings aloud.
let's go.
oh, let him marry her.
hello, sir.
he has ruined himself.
here's the problem. the duke has mysteriously left town. he deluded many men, myself included, with the hope of some military action. but now we hear from government insiders that his publicly announced reasons for leaving were far from his real plans. in his place, and with his full authority, lord angelo rules. this is a man whose blood is like melted snow, never warmed by uncontrolled lust, but who represses and dulls his natural appetites with exercises for the mind, studying and fasting. to scare folks who are habitually promiscuous and have evaded the law like mice running past a lion, he's found a severe act that, if taken literally, would cost your brother his life. he's arrested him under it and plans to make an example of him by strictly applying this law. all hope is gone, unless you can soften angelo with your pretty prayers. that's the essence of this errand between you and your poor brother.
nice to see you again, horatio, that is your name, right?
his nature is too noble for the world. he wouldn't flatter neptune for his trident or jove for his power to make thunder. he speaks his mind, and whatever he feels, he must express. and when he gets angry, he forgets that he can also be killed.
does he really intend to kill him?
that's me, sir. still your respectful servant.
that was fast! second nobleman i wish they'd gotten away!
he's already sentenced him to death, and i hear the provost has the warrant for his execution.
not my servant, but my friend. i'll change that name for you. but what are you doing so far from wittenberg, horatio? , oh, marcellus?
i wish they were in tiber! what the hell! couldn't he talk them out of it?
oh, dear! what can a poor girl like me do to help?
hello, sir.
where is this traitor that would drive the people from the city and considers himself to be every man?
test the power you have.
(to marcellus) so nice to see you., (to barnardo) hello, sir.(to horatio), but what are you doing away from wittenberg, horatio?
you worthy tribunes, 
my power? i doubt, 
i felt like skipping school, sir.
he'll be thrown without mercy from the tarpeian rock. he has resisted justice, so justice will deny him any trial other than the strength of public opinion, which to him is worthless.
our doubts work against us and make us lose the good things we often could win by making us scared to try. go to lord angelo, and show him that when girls plead, men give like gods. but when girls cry and kneel, their requests are granted even more freely, as if the girls were asking themselves for permission.
i wouldn't allow your enemies to say that, and i won't believe it from you. i know you'd never skip school. what are you doing here in elsinore? i'll teach you to drink hard by the time you leave.
he'll soon know that the noble tribunes speak for the people, and we, in turn, put their wishes into action.
i'll see what i can do.
sir, we came to see your father's funeral.
he will, i'm sure of it.
make it fast.
please, don't make fun of me. i think you came to see my mother's wedding instead.
sir, sir, 
i'll go straightaway, as soon as i give notice of my business to the mother superior. thank you so much. give my brother my love. i'll let him know how i made out early this evening.
well, sir, it's true it came soon after.
peace!
i'll go now.
it was all about saving a few bucks, horatio. the leftovers from the funeral dinner made a convenient wedding banquet. oh, i'd rather have met my fiercest enemy in heaven, horatio, than have lived through that terrible day! my father, i think i see my father.
don't call for his murder. seek a lesser punishment instead.
goodbye, sir.
where, sir?
sir, didn't you help him escape?
we mustn't let the law turn into a scarecrow, something you set up to scare away birds of prey but then never change, until the birds get so used to it that they sit on it rather than fear it.
in my imagination, horatio.
listen to me. because i know this consul's strengths, i can also tell you his weaknesses, 
yes, but we should also be precise. better to use a scalpel than a hatchet, cutting carefully instead of chopping to death. this gentleman whose life i'd like to save had such a noble father. i know you're a completely disciplined, virtuous man. but imagine you felt sexual stirrings for a woman, and you were in the right place at the right time, and by acting on that desire you could have her. if sometime in your life, you'd made the same mistake for which you now condemn him, you'd have brought the law down on yourself.
i saw him once. he was an admirable king.
consul! what consul?
it's one thing to be tempted, escalus, but another thing to give in. i don't deny that the twelve members of a jury might include a thief or two who are far guiltier than the prisoner they're passing sentence on. but justice takes the opportunities it has; who knows what laws thieves pass against other thieves? obviously, if we stumble across a jewel in the road, we'll bend down and take it, because we see it. but things we don't see, we step over and never think about. you can't excuse his crime on the grounds that i could have done the same thing. instead, if i, the man who's condemning him, commit the same offense, let this verdict of mine act as a precedent for my death, and let no allowances be made for me. sir, he must die.
he was a great human being. he was perfect in everything. i'll never see the likes of him again.
the consul coriolanus.
as you command.
sir, i think i saw him last night.
he's not consul!
where is the provost?
saw who?
no, no, no, no, no.
here, sir.
your father, sir. the dead king.
good people, if the you and the tribunes will permit me to be heard, i want to say a word or two that will cost you nothing other than the time it takes to listen.
see that claudio is executed by nine tomorrow morning. give him a priest to confess to, and let him prepare himself for death, for this is his journey's end.
the king my father?!
speak quickly then, for we've agreed to do away with this monstrous traitor. to banish him would still leave us in danger, and to keep him here would mean our certain death, so he must die tonight.
(to himself) well, heaven forgive him, and forgive us all! some people succeed by sinning, and some are brought down by virtue. some people run from dubious situations and so never suffer punishment, and some people get punished for a single mistake.
don't get too excited yet, sir. just listen carefully while i tell you the amazing thing i saw, with these gentlemen as witnesses.
the good gods forbid that our renowned rome, whose gratitude toward her deserving children is jove's law, should behave like an unnatural mother and eat her own child!
bring them this way. if these aren't the kind of people who do nothing but dirty things in whorehouses, then i don't know the law. bring them this way.
for god's sake, let me hear it.
he's a disease that must be cut out.
well, sir! what's your name? and what's the matter?
after midnight, for two nights running, these two guards, marcellus and barnardo, saw a figure that looked very much like your father, in full armor from head to toe. it just appeared before them and marched past them with slow dignity three times, a staff's distance from their amazed eyes, while they turned, quaking with fear and too shocked to speak. they told me all about this, so on the third night i agreed to come stand guard with them, to see for myself. it happened again, just as they had described. i knew your father. this ghost looked as much like him as my two hands are like each other.
no, he's just a limb that has a disease. it would be fatal to cut off the limb but easy to cure the disease. what has he done to rome that's worth killing him for? he's killed our enemies and lost more ounces of his own blood than his body still has. he shed it for his country. for his country to take from him the blood he has left would bring eternal shame to all of us who permit it.
if it pleases your honor, i am the duke's poor police officer, and my name is elbow. i rely on the law, sir, and bring in here before you two notorious benefactors (confusing the word benefactor with malefactor).
but where did this happen?
that's totally wrong.
benefactors? what benefactors are they? aren't they malefactors?
on the platform where we stand guard, sir.
that's missing the point. when he served his country, it rewarded him.
if it pleases your honor, i don't really know what they are. but they're definitely scoundrels, that i'm sure of, and lacking the universal piety that all good christians ought to have.
didn't you talk to it?
when a foot becomes infected with gangrene, is it no longer respected for the service it had done previously?
(to angelo, sarcastically) he's a good talker, and a real smart cop.
i did, sir, but it didn't answer me. it raised its head once as if it was about to speak, but just then the rooster started crowing, and the ghost vanished from sight.
we'll hear no more. go take him from his house, before his contagious infection spreads any further.
out with it. what's their rank? your name's elbow? why don't you speak, elbow?
that's very strange.
one word more, one word. when this fast-moving rage realizes the consequences of acting quickly without thinking, it will be too late to slow it down. let the legal system solve this dispute, otherwise factions will form, as there are those who support him, and rome will be destroyed by romans.
he can't, sir. he's been pushed out of the way.
i swear to god it's true, sir. we thought you ought to know about it.
if that were true, 
(to pompey) what do you do, sir?
yes, i should know, but it disturbs me. are you on duty again tonight?
what are you talking about? haven't we experienced his obedience? haven't our aediles been struck by him? haven't our own efforts been resisted? come.
him, sir! he's a bartender, sir, and a part-time pimp, one who works for a madam. her brothel in the suburbs, sir, was, as they say, torn down, and now she claims to run a bathhouse, and i think that's a bad house too.
yes, sir.
consider that he's been brought up in wars since he was old enough to draw a sword. he doesn't know how to use refined language. he can't tell the difference between meal and bran. let me go to him and try to convince him to answer your questions peacefully in court. legal judgment may still cost him his life.
how do you know that?
it was armed, you say?
let them shout their fury. they can put me to death on the wheel, let wild horses drag me, or pile ten hills on the tarpeian rock, making the fall so far that you can't see the bottom. it won't change who i am compared to them.
my wife sir, whom i detest with heaven and your honor as my witnesses, 
armed, sir.
you are nobler than they are.
what, you detest your wife?
from head to toe?
i wonder if my mother still sides with me. she used to call them slaves in rough wool clothes, traders of cheap items who were always taking their hats off to those of higher rank and whose jaws dropped in silent amazement when someone like me made speeches about peace or war.
yes, sir, whom, i thank heaven, is a morally upright woman, 
yes, from top to bottom, sir.
i'm talking about you. why did you want me to be more subdued? would you have me be untrue to my nature? would you rather i pretend to be someone else?
that's why you detest her?
so you couldn't see his face, then?
oh, sir, sir, sir, i wanted your power to be made official before you used it up.
i say, sir, i'll detest myself as well as her, if this house, if it's not a whorehouse, it's a great pity, for it's an immoral place.
oh, yes, we could, sir. he had his helmet visor up.
stop it.
how do you know that?
was he frowning?
you would've been enough of a man without fighting so hard to prove yourself. the people wouldn't have condemned you if you hadn't shown them your true disposition before they lost the power to stop you.
from my wife, who, if she had been a woman given to sin, might have been accused of fornication, adultery, and all sorts of dirty things there.
he looked more sad than angry.
let them hang.
because of the actions of the madam of the whorehouse?
was he pale or flushed and red-faced?
yes, and burn, too.
yes, sir, by mistress overdone's doing. but my wife spit in this man's face, defying him.
very pale, sir.
come, come, you've been a bit too rough. you must go back and fix things with the people.
please, sir, this is not true.
did he stare at you?
there's no remedy. unless you go, our good city will break in two and be ruined.
prove it before these rogues here, you honorable man. prove it.
the whole time.
please, listen to this advice. i'm as stubborn as you are, but i'm smart enough to use my anger to my advantage.
(to angelo) do you hear how he mixes up his words?
i wish i'd been there.
well said, noble woman. before he returns to the masses, given the current violent climate in the state, which demands a solution to this problem, i'd like to put my armor on, even though i am barely strong enough to wear it.
sir, this very pregnant woman came in, longing, i beg your honor's pardon, for stewed prunes a dish commonly served as a cure for syphilis in brothels, which were also called "stews" stewed prunes . sir, we had only two in the house, which at that very time were sitting, it so happened, in a fruit dish, a three-cent dish. your honors have seen such dishes; they're not fine china, but they're very good dishes, 
you would have been very shocked.
what should i do?
get on with it. never mind about the dish, sir.
i'm sure i would have. did it stay a long time?
return to the tribunes.
no, sir, you're right. it's not worth a pin, but back to the point. as i was saying, this mrs. elbow, was, as i say, very pregnant, and longing, as i said, for prunes. we had only two left in the dish, as i said, and this very man, mr. froth here, having eaten the rest and paid for them very generously. because as you know, mr. froth, i couldn't give you three cents' change.
about as long as it would take someone to count slowly to a hundred.
and then what?
no, indeed.
no, longer than that.
take back what you said.
very well. if you remember, you were talking about the previously mentioned prunes, 
not the time i saw it.
for them! i can't take back what i've said to the gods, but i must i take back what i've said to the people?
right, i was.
his beard was gray, right?
you're too rigid. you can never be too noble, except in extreme circumstances. i've heard you say that in war, honor and strategy go together. if that's the case, tell me, why wouldn't they also go together in times of peace?
ok, and i was telling you, if you remember, that so-and-so couldn't be cured of you-know-what syphilis you-know-what , unless they kept to a strict diet, 
it was just like in real life, dark brown with silver whiskers in it.
hush, hush!
all this is true.
i'll stand guard with you tonight. maybe it'll come again.
that's a good question.
why, very well, then, 
i bet it will.
if it's honorable in war to pretend to be other than how you are, if it serves your end goal, why is it less honorable to do so in times of peace?
you're a tedious fool. get to the point. what was done to elbow's wife that gave him a reason to complain? come and get to what was done to her.
if it looks like my good father, i'll speak to it, even if hell itself opens up and tells me to be quiet. i ask you, if you've kept this a secret, keep doing so. whatever happens tonight, don't talk about it. i'll return the favor. so good-bye for now. i'll see you on the guards' platform between eleven and twelve tonight.
why do you ask?
sir, your honor can't get to that yet.
we'll do our duty to you, sir.
because you have to speak to the people now, and not to give them instructions or to talk from your heart. what you say can't reflect the truth of what you really feel. however, this doesn't dishonor you any more than it would to capture a town with flattering words, a town that would otherwise take your fortune and spill your blood. i would feel it honorable to hide my real nature if my fortune and my friends were at risk. i speak for your wife, your son, these senators, and the nobles about this: you'd prefer to show the miserable commoners how you frown than flatter them in any way, even for the sake of their approval and to protect what might be ruined without it.
that's not what i meant, sir.
give me your love instead, as i give you mine. good-bye.
noble lady! come with us. your honest words may heal not only present dangers but also past losses.
but you will get it, sir, if your honor pleases. and, i beg you, look at mr. froth here, sir; a man who makes only pounds a year and whose his father died, leaving him an inheritance, on all saints' day, wasn't it all saints' day, mr. froth?
my father's ghost, armed! something's wrong. i suspect some foul play. i wish the night were here already! until then, i have to remain calm. bad deeds will be revealed, no matter how people try to hide them.
i beg you now, my son, go to them, with your hat in your hand. and once you've extended your hat to them, do what they ask, get on your knees and kiss the ground, bow your head and humble your proud heart like the ripest mulberry that falls from the branch the moment it's touched, for in this situation actions speak louder than words. or tell them that you are their soldier and admit that because you were raised on the battlefield, you never learned a gentle way with words, but you realize you should have spoken more kindly when asking for their votes. tell them that you'll work for their benefit from here on out, to the extent of your political power and physical ability.
halloween.
my belongings are on the ship already. good-bye. and, my dear sister, as long as the winds are blowing and ships are sailing, let me hear from you, write.
(to coriolanus) do as she says, and their hearts will belong to you. if you ask, they'll pardon you as easily as they speak their nonsense.
very well. i hope we'll get to the truth here. he, sir, was sitting, as i say, in a reclining chair, sir. it was at the bunch of grapes tavern, where you like to sit and relax, don't you?
do you doubt i'll write?
please, go now. submit to them, although i know you'd rather pursue your enemy through the fires of hell than flatter him in a boudoir. here's cominius.
i do, because the room has a big open fire, good in winter.
as for hamlet and his attentions to you, just consider it a big flirtation, the temporary phase of a hot-blooded youth. it won't last. it's sweet, but his affection will fade after a minute. not a second more.
sir, i've been in the marketplace. you'll need to argue your case strongly or defend yourself with calmness, or don't come at all. everyone is angry.
why, very well, then. i hope we'll get to the truth here.
no more than a minute?
just speak kindly.
this could last as long as a night in russia, during the time of year when nights are longest. i'm leaving. i'll leave you to get to the bottom of this case, hoping you'll find reasons to whip them all.
try to think of it like that, anyway. when a youth grows into a man, he doesn't just get bigger in his body, his responsibilities grow too. he may love you now, and may have only the best intentions, but you have to be on your guard. remember that he belongs to the royal family, and his intentions don't matter that much, he's a slave to his family obligations. he can't simply make personal choices for himself the way common people can, since the whole country depends on what he does. his choice has to agree with what the nation wants.
i think that'll work, if he can control his temper.
i think i will. good-bye, your lordship.
so if he says he loves you, you should be wise enough to see that his words only mean as much as the state of denmark allows them to mean. then think about how shameful it would be for you to give in to his seductive talk and surrender your treasure chest to his greedy hands. watch out, ophelia. just keep your love under control, and don't let yourself become a target of his lust. simply exposing your beauty to the moon at night is risky enough, you don't have to expose yourself to him. even good girls sometimes get a bad reputation. worms ruin flowers before they blossom. baby blooms are most susceptible to disease. so be careful. fear will keep you safe. young people often lose their self-control even without any help from others.
he must, and i beg you, say you will and then go do it.
now, sir, come on: what happened to elbow's wife, once more?
i'll keep your words of wisdom close to my heart. but, my dear brother, don't be like a bad priest who fails to practice what he preaches, showing me the steep and narrow way to heaven while you frolic on the primrose path of sin.
do i have to show them my head without a helmet? do i have to betray my heart and speak words that are lies? well, i'll do it. but if i lose, they'll grind me into dust and throw it against the wind. to the marketplace! you're asking me to play a part that i will never play convincingly.
once, sir? nothing happened to her once.
don't worry, i won't.
come, come, we'll tell you what to say.
i beg you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.
i've been here too long. and here comes father. what good luck, to have him bless my leaving not once but twice.
i beg you now, sweet son. you've said that my encouragement is what made you into a soldier, so i encourage you now to play this new role.
i beg your honor, ask me.
you're still here? shame on you, get on board! the wind is filling your ship's sail, and they're waiting for you. here, i give you my blessing again. and just try to remember a few rules of life. don't say what you're thinking, and don't be too quick to act on what you think. be friendly to people but don't overdo it. once you've tested out your friends and found them trustworthy, hold onto them. but don't waste your time shaking hands with every new guy you meet. don't be quick to pick a fight, but once you're in one, hold your own. listen to many people, but talk to few. hear everyone's opinion, but reserve your judgment. spend all you can afford on clothes, but make sure they're quality, not flashy, since clothes make the man, which is doubly true in france. don't borrow money and don't lend it, since when you lend to a friend, you often lose the friendship as well as the money, and borrowing turns a person into a spendthrift. and, above all, be true to yourself. then you won't be false to anybody else. good-bye, son. i hope my blessing will help you absorb what i've said.
well, i must do it. i'll hide my true nature and become like a whore! my voice, which ordinarily calls for war, will harmonize with my drum and become the voice of a eunuch or a virgin that sings babies to sleep! i'll smile like a servant, cry like a schoolboy, and speak like a beggar! my armored knees, which ordinarily only bend in my saddle, will bend like a man receiving alms! i won't do it because it will dishonor my true nature, and what i do with my body will degrade my mind.
well, sir; what did this gentleman do to her?
i humbly say good-bye to you, father.
this is your choice then. it is more dishonorable for me to have to beg you than for you to have to beg them. everything will be ruined. i'd rather endure the consequences of challenging your pride rather than be afraid of it, for i fear death as little as you do. do as you please. your courage comes from me, you sucked it from me as a nursing baby, but your pride is all your own.
i beg you, sir, look at this gentleman's face. good mr. froth, look at his honor, it's for a good reason. does your honor see his face?
now go, the time is right. your servants are waiting.
that's enough, mother. i'm going to the marketplace. don't scold me any further. i'll deceive them into liking me, steal their hearts, and come home beloved by all the tradesmen in rome. look, i'm going. give my regards to my wife. i'll come back as consul. never again doubt how well my tongue can flatter.
yes, sir, very well.
good-bye, ophelia. remember what i've told you.
do what you need to do.
no, i beg you, really study it.
it's locked away in my memory, and you've got the key.
go! the tribunes are waiting for you. be prepared to answer questions mildly. i've heard that they have even stronger accusations than the ones they've made so far.
well, i am.
good-bye.
the key word is "mild." please, let's go. let them invent accusations against me, and i'll answer honorably.
does your honor see any harm in his face?
what did he tell you, ophelia?
yes, but mildly.
why, no.
something about hamlet.
well, mildly it will be then. mildly!
i'll swear upon a bible, his face is the worst thing about him (confusing supposed for deposed). and if his face is the worst thing about him, how could mr. froth do the officer's wife any harm? i'd like your honor to explain that.
a good thing he did, by god. i've heard hamlet's been spending a lot of time alone with you recently, and you've made yourself quite available to him. if things are the way people tell me they are, and they're only telling me this to warn me, then i have to say, you're not conducting yourself with the self-restraint a daughter of mine should show. what's going on between you two? tell me the truth.
drive this point home: his aim is to be a tyrant. if he dodges this accusation, confront him with his ill-will toward the people, and that the spoils won from the antiates were never distributed.
he's right. officer, what do you say to that?
he's offered me a lot of affection lately.
is he coming?
(confusing respected for suspected throughout) first, if it pleases you, the house is a respected house; next, this is a respected fellow, and his employer a respected woman.
"affection!" that's nothing! you're talking like some innocent girl who doesn't understand the ways of the world. do you believe his "offers," as you call them?
he's coming.
i swear, sir, his wife is a more respected person than any of us.
i don't know what to believe, father.
who's he with?
scoundrel, you lie. you lie, wicked scoundrel! the time has yet to come that she was ever respected by man, woman, or child.
then i'll tell you. believe that you are a foolish little baby for believing these "offers" are something real. offer yourself more respect, or, not to beat this word to death, you'll offer me the chance to be a laughing-stock.
with old menenius and those senators that have always favored him.
sir, he respected her before he married her.
father, he's always talked about love in an honorable fashion, 
do you have a list of all the individual votes taken in our poll?
who's smarter here? the representative of justice or the representative of sin "justice" and "iniquity" were names of common characters in morality plays representative of justice or the representative of sin ? is this true?
yes, "fashion" is just the word, a passing whim. go on.
i do. it's ready.
oh, you wretch! oh, you scoundrel! oh, you cannibal! i respected her before i was married to her! if i ever respected her, or she respected me, i'm not the duke's poor officer. prove this, you wicked cannibal, or i'll sue you for assault.
and he's made the holiest vows to me, to back up what he says.
have you counted them by district?
if he boxed your ears, you could sue him for slander, too.
these vows are just traps for stupid birds. i know when a man is on fire, he'll swear anything. but when a heart's on fire, it gives out more light than heat, and the fire will be out even before he's done making his promises. don't mistake that for true love. from now on, spend a little less time with him and talk to him less. make yourself a precious commodity. remember that hamlet is young and has a lot more freedom to fool around than you do. in short, ophelia, don't believe his love vows, since they're like flashy pimps who wear nice clothes to lead a woman into filthy acts. to put it plainly, don't waste your time with hamlet. do as i say. now come along.
i have.
thank you, your worship. what would you like me to do with this wicked wretch?
i'll do as you say, father.
bring the people here now, and when i say, "the decision of the people is," whether it's death, fine, or banishment, if i say, "fine," have them cry, "fine," if "death," cry, "death." they must insist on their legal right to decide this and the power that comes from the truth of their cause.
honestly, officer, because he's committed some crime that you would expose if you were capable, let him keep on until you figure out what it is.
the air is biting cold.
i'll tell them.
thank you, your worship. now, you wicked wretch, you see what's going to happen to you: you're to be kept on; they're keeping you on.
yes, it's definitely nippy.
and when they begin to cry out, don't let them stop. the chaotic noise will force their decision to be carried out on the spot.
where were you born, friend?
what time is it?
very well.
here in vienna, sir.
a little before twelve, i think.
prepare them for this. they have to be able to get the signal when we give it to them.
do you have an income of pounds a year?
no, it's just after twelve; i heard the clock strike.
do it.
yes, sir.
really? i didn't hear it. so it's nearly the time when the ghost likes to appear.
get him angry right away. he's accustomed to always winning and being as controversial as he pleases. once he's provoked, he won't be able to rein in his temper. then he'll say how he really feels, and most likely we can use that as reason to break his neck.
all right. what do you do, sir?
what does that mean, sir?
well, here he comes.
bartender; a poor widow's bartender.
the king is staying up all night drinking and dancing. as he guzzles down his german wine, the musicians make a ruckus to celebrate his draining another cup.
stay calm, i beg you.
your employer's name?
is that a tradition?
yes, like a stable boy that for the smallest amount of money will tolerate being called a slave over and over again. may the honored gods protect rome and supply the chairs of justice with worthy men! let there be love among us! fill our large temples with demonstrations of peace and not our streets with war!
mistress overdone.
yes, it is. but though i was born here and should consider that tradition part of my own heritage, i think it would be better to ignore it than practice it. other countries criticize us for our loud partying.
amen, amen.
has she had more than one husband?
they call us drunks and insult our noble titles. and our drunkenness does detract from our achievements, as great as they are, and lessens our reputations. it's just like what happens to certain people who have some birth defect (which they are not responsible for, since nobody chooses how he's born), or some weird habit or compulsion that changes them completely. it happens sometimes that one little defect in these people, as wonderful and talented as they may be, will make them look completely bad to other people. a tiny spot of evil casts doubt on their good qualities and ruins their reputations.
a noble wish.
nine, sir. she got the name overdone from the last one.
look, sir, here it comes!
come close, you people.
nine! come here, mr. froth. mr. froth, i'd prefer you not associate with bartenders. they'll draw you dry, mr. froth, and you'll get them hanged a play on "hanging and drawing," a form of execution involving hanging and then disemboweling they'll draw you dry, mr. froth, and you'll get them hanged . get out, and don't let me hear of you again.
oh angels, protect us! whether you're a good spirit or a cursed demon, whether you bring heavenly breezes or blasts of hell fire, whether your intentions are good or evil, you look so strange i want to talk to you. i'll call you "hamlet senior," "king," "father," "royal dane." answer me! don't drive me crazy with curiosity, but tell me why your church-buried bones have burst out of their coffin, and why your tomb,
listen to your tribunes. be quiet!
thank you, your worship. personally, i never go into bars, unless i'm drawn in a play on ale being drawn from a tap drawn in .
where we quietly buried you, has opened up its heavy marble jaws to spit you out again. what could it mean that you have put on your armor again, you corpse, and have come back to look at the moon, making the night terrifying and stirring us humans with supernatural fears? why? what do you want from us? what should we do?
let me speak first.
well, not anymore, mr. froth. goodbye.
it wants you to go off with it, as if it wants to tell you something alone.
well then, talk! stay calm.
come here, mr. bartender. what's your name, mr. bartender?
look how politely it's pointing you to a place that's farther away. but don't go.
are there any further charges against me besides these? will everything be settled here?
pompey.
definitely not.
will you agree to listen to the people, respect their representatives, and undergo lawful punishment for the offenses we'll prove you committed?
what else?
it's not going to speak, so i'll follow it.
yes, i agree.
ass, sir.
don't do it, sir.
all right citizens, he says he agrees. think of the wars he has served in. think about the wounds on his body, each of them is like an enemy's gravestone.
yes, and your ass is the biggest thing about you, so in the crudest sense you are pompey the great. pompey, you're a part-time pimp, however much you hide it by bartending, aren't you? come on, it'll be better for you if you tell me the truth.
why, what's the danger? i don't value my life one bit. and as for my soul, how can the ghost endanger that, since it's as immortal as the ghost is? look, it's waving me over again. i'll follow it.
they're no more serious than scratches from a prickly plant. they're scars that you'd only laugh at.
honestly, sir, i'm a poor man just trying to earn a living.
what if it tempts you to jump into the sea, sir? or to the terrifying cliff that overhangs the water,
consider also that because he doesn't speak like you, you think he's attacking you. don't mistake his coarse way of speaking for hateful words. he's just talking the way soldiers talk. he's not speaking ill of you.
how would you live, pompey? by being a pimp? what do you think of that profession, pompey? is it a legal profession?
where it takes on some other horrible form that drives you insane. think about it. the edge of the sea makes people feel despair even at the best of times. all they have to do is look into its depths and hear it roar far below.
okay, that's enough.
if the law allowed it, sir.
it's still waving to me. , go ahead, i'll follow.
how did it happen that i was approved for consul with a unanimous vote and in the next moment i'm disgraced by a change of opinion?
but the law will not allow it, pompey, nor will it be allowed in vienna.
you're not going, sir.
answer our questions.
does your worship mean to castrate and spay all the young men and women in town?
let go of me.
well it's true then. i thought so.
no, pompey.
calm down. you're not going anywhere.
we accuse you of trying to do away with the established legal system in rome and to put yourself in a position of tyrannical power. for this you are a traitor to the people.
then, sir, in my poor opinion, they'll get it on. if your worship would make arrangements for the whores and their clients, you wouldn't need to fear the pimps.
it's my fate calling me. every nerve in my body is now as tough as steel. the ghost is still waving me over. let me go, gentlemen. (he draws his sword) i swear, if anyone holds me back, i'll make a ghost of him! i say, get away!, go ahead, i'll follow you.
how am i a traitor?
i can tell you, we're introducing some strong penalties, specifically, beheading and hanging.
his imagination is making him crazy.
no, stay calm. you promised.
if you behead and hang everyone who breaks the law by having sex, in just ten years you'll have to commission people to repopulate the city. if this law lasts a decade in vienna, i'll rent the best house in town at three cents a square foot. if you're alive to see this, say pompey told you so.
let's follow them. it's not right to obey his orders to let him go alone.
may the people fall into the fires of the lowest hell! you're calling me a traitor? you slanderous tribune! if your eyes had killed twenty thousand people, your hands had killed a million, and your lying tongue had killed those numbers together, i would still say to you, "you lie" with a voice as honest as the one i pray to the gods with.
thank you, pompey, and, in return for your prediction, listen carefully. i advise you, don't let me find you appearing before me again upon any complaint whatsoever, not even for living where you do. if i do, i'll beat you like julius caesar did to your namesake, pompey in shakespeare's julius caesar, caesar defeats a rival named pompey pompey , and send you scurrying to your tent in defeat. to put it plainly, pompey, i will have you whipped. so, for now, pompey, goodbye.
go ahead and follow him. but what does all this mean, where will it all end?
do you hear this, people?
i thank your worship for your good advice.
it means that something is rotten in the state of denmark.
throw him from the rock!
but i shall follow it only as my body and my opportunities dictate. whip me? no, no; let a cart driver whip his old nag. a brave heart isn't whipped out of his job.
if that's true, we should let god take care of it.
peace! we don't need to aggravate him further. what you've seen him do and heard him say, beating your officers, speaking ill of you, opposing our laws with force, and now defying those who have the great power to put him on trial, even this, which is criminal and punishable by death, deserves the most severe penalty.
come here, mr. elbow; come here, mr. policeman. how long have you been a policeman?
no, let's follow him.
but since he has served rome so well, 
seven and a half years, sir.
where are you taking me? speak. i'm not going any farther.
why do you talk about service?
i thought you'd been at the job for a while, given your skill at it. you say seven years altogether?
listen to me.
i talk about what i know.
and a half, sir.
i will.
what do you know about service?
oh, that's so hard on you. it's wrong that you have to work so much. aren't there enough capable men in your precinct?
the hour has almost come when i have to return to the horrible flames of purgatory.
is this the promise that you made your mother?
honestly, sir, few who are bright enough. they're happy to have me substitute for them. they pay me a little money, and i handle all the duties.
ah, poor ghost!
listen, i beg you, 
please bring me some six or seven names, the most competent people in your parish.
don't pity me. just listen carefully to what i have to tell you.
i'll listen no more. let them throw me from the steep tarpeian rock, make me a wandering exile, skin me alive, or condemn me to live on just a grain a day. i wouldn't buy their mercy at the cost of the truth, nor would i hold back my beliefs for the freedom they can give me, if i had to say to them, "good day."
to your worship's house, sir?
speak. i'm ready to hear you.
as much as he could, he has continually conspired against the people, looking for ways to take away their power, and now he's finally taken violent measures, and not only in front of justice itself but also those who attempt to carry it out. in the name of the people and by our power as tribunes, from this moment forward we banish him from our city. if he ever enters the gates of rome again, he will be thrown off the tarpeian rock. i declare this on behalf of the people.
to my house. goodbye.
you must be ready for revenge, too, when you hear me out.
it shall be so, it shall be so. take him away. he's banished, and it shall be so.
what time is it?
what?
listen to me, good people, my friends, 
eleven, sir.
i'm the ghost of your father, doomed for a certain period of time to walk the earth at night, while during the day i'm trapped in the fires of purgatory until i've done penance for my past sins. if i weren't forbidden to tell you the secrets of purgatory according to catholic doctrine, purgatory is a place where souls go to be punished for their sins before going to heaven. purgatory , i could tell you stories that would slice through your soul, freeze your blood,
he's been sentenced. there's nothing more to say.
please, come home to lunch with me.
make your eyes jump out of their sockets, and your hair stand on end like porcupine quills. but mortals like you aren't allowed to hear this description of the afterlife. listen, listen! if you ever loved your poor dear father, 
let me speak. i have been consul, and i can show you the wounds i've received fighting for rome. my feelings about the welfare of my country are more tender, more holy, and more profound than how i feel about my own life, my dear wife's reputation, her ability to bear my precious children. so i would like to say, 
i'm most grateful. thank you.
oh god!
we know your loyalty. what do you want to say?
claudio's death saddens me, but there's no way to prevent it.
take revenge for his horrible murder, that crime against nature.
there's no more to be said: he is banished as enemy to the people and his country. it shall be so.
lord angelo is severe.
murder?
it shall be so, it shall be so.
it's unfortunately necessary. mercy isn't often what it seems, since pardoning a crime can lead to additional pain. even so, poor claudio! there's no way to prevent it. let's go, sir.
his most horrible murder. murder's always horrible, but this one was especially horrible, weird, and unnatural.
you pack of common dogs! your breath reeks like the rotting swamps. i value your opinion of me as much as the dead carcasses of unburied men that stink up my air. i banish you! stay here with your indecisiveness and let every feeble rumor change your minds. when you see your enemies plumed helmets approaching, may you fall into despair! may you retain the power to banish the ones who would protect you, until at last your ignorance, which makes you unable to foresee anything before it happens and leaves you alone in the city as your own worst enemy, leads you to be captured by some nation that defeated you without a fight! with hatred, i turn my back on you and the city. i will seek a new life elsewhere.
he's listening to a case. he'll come at once, when i tell him you're here.
hurry and tell me about it, so i can take revenge right away, faster than a person falls in love.
the people's enemy is gone. he is gone!
please do.
i'm glad you're eager. you'd have to be as lazy as a weed on the shores of lethe lethe was a river in the underworld of classical greek mythology, whose waters induced forgetfulness. lethe not to get riled up here. now listen, hamlet. everyone was told that a poisonous snake bit me when i was sleeping in the orchard. but in fact, that's a lie that's fooled everyone in denmark. you should know, my noble son, the real snake that stung your father is now wearing his crown.
our enemy is banished! he is gone! hoo, hoo!
i'll ask him his intentions; maybe he'll relent. claudio didn't consciously commit a crime. people of every class and age indulge in this vice, and he's going to die for it!
i knew it! my uncle?
go, see him go out the gates, and look at him with contempt, as he looked at you. torment him, he deserves it. let a parade follow us through the city.
now, what's the matter, provost?
yes, that incestuous, adulterous animal. with his clever words and fancy gifts, he seduced my seemingly virtuous queen, persuading her to give in to his lust. they were evil words and gifts to seduce her like that! oh, hamlet, how far she fell! she went from me, who loved her with the dignity and devotion that suits a legitimate marriage, to a wretch whose natural gifts were poor compared to mine. but just as you can't corrupt a truly virtuous person no matter how you try, the opposite is also true: a lustful person like her can satisfy herself in a heavenly union and then move on to garbage. but hang on, i think i smell the morning air. so let me be brief here. your uncle snuck up to me while i was sleeping in the orchard, as i always used to do in the afternoon, and poured a vial of henbane poison into my ear, that poison that moves like quicksilver through the veins and curdles the blood, which is just what it did to me. i broke out in a scaly rash that covered my smooth body with a revolting crust. and that's how my brother robbed me of my life, my crown, and my queen all at once. he cut me off in the middle of a sinful life.
come, come. let's see him go out the gates. come. may the gods protect our noble tribunes! come.
do you want claudio to die tomorrow?
i had no chance to repent my sins or receive last rites. oh, it's horrible, horrible, so horrible! if you are human, don't stand for it. don't let the danish king's bed be a nest of incest. but however you go about your revenge, don't corrupt your mind or do any harm to your mother. leave her to god and her own guilt. now, good-bye. the glowworm's light is beginning to fade, so morning is near. good-bye, good-bye, good-bye. remember me.
stop crying now. a brief farewell! the people, like a many-headed beast, push me out. stop it, mother. what happened to your courage? you used to say that adversity was a test of character. that even common people can handle the chance circumstances of their lives. that when the sea is calm all boats float equally well. that when fate strikes you hardest, you must have the skill of a nobleman to endure your wounds with dignity. you used to repeat these sayings to me, sayings that would make anyone who heard them enough invincible.
did i not tell you yes? don't you have your orders? why do you ask again?
ah, all you up in heaven! and earth! what else? shall i include hell as well? damn it! keep beating, my heart, and muscles, don't grow old yet, keep me standing. remember you! yes, you poor ghost, as long as i have any power of memory in this distracted head. remember you! yes, i'll wipe my mind clean of all trivial facts and memories and preserve only your commandment there. yes, by god! oh, you evil woman! oh, you villain, villain, you damned, smiling villain! where's my notebook?, it's a good idea for me to write down that one can smile and smile, and be a villain. at least it's possible in denmark. (he writes) so, uncle, there you are. now it's time to deal with the vow i made to my father.
oh, heavens! oh, heavens!
in case i might be too rash. correct me if i'm wrong, but i've seen judges regret imposing the death sentence after the execution.
he said, "remember me." i swore i would.
stop it! please, woman, 
enough, that's my problem. do your job, or resign your position. we can easily do without you.
sir, sir!
now the typhoid fever strikes all the tradesmen in rome and the economy is crumbling!
i beg your honor's pardon. what should we do, sir, with juliet? she's in labor, very close to giving birth.
lord hamlet., 
enough, enough, enough! you'll love me when i'm gone. stop it, mother. bring back your old spirit, when you used to say that if you had been the wife of hercules, you would have done six of his twelve required tasks and saved him that much effort. cominius, don't despair. goodbye. farewell, my wife, my mother, i'll be fine. my old and true friend menenius, you cry more than a young man, and the salt is bad for your eyes. my former general, i have seen you be brave, and you have seen many heart-hardening spectacles. tell these sad women that it's as foolish to cry over inevitabilities as it is to laugh at them. mother, you've always taken comfort in the risks that i take. know this for a fact: even though i go alone, like a lonely dragon whose swamp is more feared and talked about than it is seen, i will either exceed common expectations or be caught by crafty traps and trickery.
make arrangements to get her to a more appropriate place, and do it quickly.
please let him be all right!
my firstborn son, where will you go? take good cominius with you for a while. figure out a plan other than just dealing with things as they come up.
the condemned man's sister is here and wants to speak to you.
i'm all right.
oh, the gods!
he has a sister?
oh-ho-ho, sir!
i'll go with you for a month and help you find a place to stay and a way to communicate with us. that way, if they overturn your sentence, we won't have to look all over the whole world to find you and lose momentum on your return.
yes, my good lord, a very virtuous girl who's entering a convent, if she hasn't already.
oh-ho-ho, kid! come here.
no, i must go alone. you're too old, and you've been in too many wars to go roaming around with someone like me, who's still fresh. just take me to the gate. come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and my noble friends. when i go, wish me safe travels and smile. i promise that so long as i'm still alive you'll hear from me, and the news will be the same as it's always been about me.
well, bring her in.
so how did it go, sir?
that's the best news an ear can hear. let's not cry now. if my arms and legs were just seven years younger, by the good gods, i'd go with you all the way.
see that the tramp juliet is moved, and provide her with everything she needs, but nothing extravagant. i'll authorize it.
what happened, sir?
give me your hand. come.
(departing) god save your honor!
it was incredible!
tell them all to go home. he's gone, and we won't go any further. the nobles who sided with him are angry.
don't leave yet.
oh, please, tell us, sir.
now that we've exerted our power, let's at least pretend to be humble, like before.
welcome. what do you want?
no, you'll talk.
tell them to go home. explain that their great enemy is gone and that their freedoms have been restored.
i sadly beg a request of your honor. please hear me, your honor.
i swear i won't, sir.
send them home.
well, what's your request?
i won't either, sir.
here comes his mother.
there's a certain vice that i hate, and would love to see struck down by law. i'd rather not plead for it, but i must. i shouldn't plead for it, but i'm torn between wanting and not wanting to.
okay. but you promise you can keep a secret?
let's not talk to her.
well, what's the matter?
yes, i swear.
why?
i have a brother who's condemned to death. i beg you, condemn his crime but not him.
any villain in denmark is going to be, well, a villain.
they say she's crazy.
(to himself) heaven give you the power to persuade him!
you don't need a ghost returning from the grave to tell you that, sir.
they've seen us. keep walking.
condemn the crime and not the person who commits it? why, by definition every crime is condemned before it's committed. i would have a meaningless role if i just punished the crimes whose penalties were in the law books and let the criminal go.
yes, you're absolutely right. so, without further ado, the best thing to do now is probably just to shake hands and go our separate ways. you go and take care of your business (since everybody has some business to take care of, whatever it is worth), and i'll go and pray.
some coincidence, running into you. may the gods repay you for this with the plague!
oh, fair but harsh law! then i had a brother but don't anymore. (departing) heaven protect your honor!
you're talking in such a crazy way, sir.
calm down. don't be so loud.
(aside to isabella) don't give up so fast. go to him again, beg him, kneel down before him, cling to his gown. you're too cold. you couldn't be more casual if you were asking him for a pin. go to him.
i'm sorry if i offended you; yes, very sorry.
if i could cry quietly i would. you should hear me cry, no, you will hear me.
does he have to die?
oh, don't worry about it, sir. no offense taken.
where are you going?
miss, there's no way out.
ah, but there is, horatio, there's a lot of offense. as for this ghost we just saw, he's a real one, i can tell you that much. but regarding what happened between us, don't ask, i can't tell you. and now, my friends, my courageous and educated friends, do me one small favor.
(to sicinius) you stay, too. i wish i had the power to say that to my husband.
yes, there is. i think that you could pardon him, and no one on heaven or earth would be sorry.
what is it, sir? of course we will.
are you a woman?
i won't do it.
don't ever tell anyone what you've seen tonight.
you fool, are you trying to insult me? listen, fool. wasn't my father a man? are you so ungrateful that you'd banish the man who swung his sword for rome more times than you've even opened your mouth to speak?
but could you, if you wanted to?
we won't, sir.
oh, blessed heavens!
look, what i won't do, i can't do.
no, you have to swear it.
he fought nobly for rome more times than you've ever spoken wise words. i'll tell you what: go! no, stay actually. i wish my son were in the lawless deserts of arabia, with his sword in hand, and your people stood before him.
but might you do it, without harming the world, if your heart felt as compassionate toward him as mine does?
i swear to god i won't.
what would happen then?
he's sentenced; it's too late.
me too, i won't, i swear to god.
what would happen? he'd kill you, and your family line would end.
(aside to isabella) you're too cold.
swear by my sword.
your bastard children's, too. he's a good man, and he was wounded fighting for rome!
too late? why, no, i can speak a word and then take it back. believe this: no symbol of authority, not the king's crown, or the deputy's sword, or the military officer's baton, or the judge's robe, makes a person great as much as mercy does. if he'd been you and you'd been him, you would have slipped like he did; but he, in your place, wouldn't have been so stern.
but we already swore, sir.
now, now, stay calm.
please leave.
yes, but swear by my sword this time.
i wish he had continued to honor his country the way he always did, rather than renounce his loyalty.
i wish to heaven i had your power, and you were isabel! would things be like this? no, i'd decide what it is to be a judge, and to be a prisoner.
(calls out from under the stage) swear!
i wish he had.
(aside to isabella) yes, that's the way to talk.
ha ha, is that what you say, kid? are you down there, my man?, come on, you hear this guy down in the basement. agree to swear.
"i wish he had"! it was you who incensed the commoners. those people are like cats and no more able to judge his character than i am able to know the unknowable mysteries of heaven.
your brother is doomed for breaking the law. you're wasting your breath.
tell us what to swear, sir.
please, let's go.
how sad! why, all the souls on earth were doomed once upon a time because adam and eve disobeyed god and ate from the tree of knowledge doomed once upon a time . and god, who might have seized the chance to condemn us, instead found a way to redeem our sins a reference to god letting christ die to redeem mankind's sins found a way to redeem our sins . what would happen to you, if he who is the highest judge of all should judge you as you are now? oh, think about that, and then merciful speech will flow out your mouth, as if you had been reborn.
you swear never to mention what you've seen. swear by my sword.
yes. please, sir, do go away now. you've done enough. but before you go, hear this: as much as the capitol building stands taller than the lowest house in rome, that's how much my son, her husband, the man you banished, exceeds all of you.
accept it, lovely lady. it's the law, not i, that condemns your brother. were he my cousin, brother, or my son, it'd be the same. he must die tomorrow.
(from under the stage) swear.
that's enough. we're leaving now.
tomorrow! oh, that's so sudden! spare him, spare him! he's not prepared for death. we only kill fowl in season, when they're in the best shape for eating. should we serve him up to heaven with less respect than we show toward our inferior mortal bodies? my good, good lord, consider: who else has died for this crime? many people have committed it.
you're everywhere, aren't you? maybe we should move. come over here, gentlemen, and put your hands on my sword again. swear by my sword you'll never mention what you've heard.
why would we stay to be harassed by someone who is so out of her mind?
(aside to isabella) yes, well said.
(from under the stage) swear by his sword.
take my prayers with you.
the law wasn't dead, but it was asleep. all those people wouldn't have dared to commit that crime if the first lawbreaker had been punished. now the law's awake, notes what's going on, and, like a fortuneteller, looks in a crystal ball to see what future evils, either newly conceived or just being contemplated, will someday hatch. now, they won't develop any further but will die before they're born.
you said it right, old mole. you're pretty busy down there in the dirt, aren't you? what a tunneler! let's move again, my friends.
i wish the gods had nothing else to do but carry out my curses! if i could just meet with them once a day, it would unclog the heavy weight from my heart.
show some pity.
my god, this is unbelievably strange.
you've driven them away, and rightly so, i believe. will you eat with me?
i show it most of all when i show justice, for then i pity all those people i don't know who'd be harmed by an unpunished crime. i do right to the man who, by paying for one wrong act, doesn't live to commit another one. be satisfied with this. your brother dies tomorrow. accept it.
then give it a nice welcome, as you would give to any stranger. there are more things in heaven and earth, horatio, than you've even dreamed of. but now listen to me. no matter how strangely i act (since i may find it appropriate to act a little crazy in the near future), you must never, ever let on, with a gesture of your hands or a certain expression on your face, that you know anything about what happened to me here tonight. you must never say anything like, "ah, yes, just as we suspected," or "we could tell you a thing or two about him," or anything like that. swear you won't.
i'll eat alone. anger is my meat, but indulging my anger will also be the death of me. come, let's go. do as i do: stop whining and being sad. despite being angry, let's behave like juno. come, come, come.
so you must be the first one to impose this sentence, and he the first one to suffer it. oh, it's excellent to have a giant's strength, but it's tyranny to use it like a giant.
(from under the stage) swear.
no, no, no!
(aside to isabella) that's well said.
okay, then, unhappy ghost, you can rest now. so, gentlemen, i thank you heartily and with all my love, and i'll repay you however i can some day. let's go back to court together, but shhh, please. no talking about this. there is so much out of whack in these times. and damn the fact that i'm supposed to fix it! come on, let's go.
i know who you are, sir, and you know me. i think your name is adrian.
if men of power could thunder and wield lightning as the god jove king of the gods in roman mythology jove himself does, jove would never have any peace, for every puny, petty official would use his heaven for thunder, nothing but thunder! merciful heaven, you use your sharp, sulfur-scented lightning bolts to split the hard gnarled oak tree, rather than the soft myrtle bush. but give a proud man a little bit of temporary authority and he forgets what it means to be made in god's image. instead, like an angry ape that mimics people's behavior, he does such incredibly grotesque things before high heaven that the angels, if they were human, would either weep or die laughing.
give him this money and these letters, reynaldo.
that is my name, sir. i'm sorry, but i've forgotten yours.
(aside to isabella) oh, keep at him, keep at him, girl! he's going to relent. he's coming around, i can tell.
i will, sir.
i'm a roman, but like you, i work against the romans. do you remember me yet?
(to himself) pray heaven she wins him over!
it would be wonderfully wise of you, my dear reynaldo, to ask around about his behavior a little before you visit him.
nicanor? no.
we can't use ourselves as a standard to judge others. great men may joke about the saints; that's good fun. but if an ordinary person does it, it's profane.
that's what i thought too, sir.
that's it, sir.
you're right, girl. keep talking like that.
excellent, very good. ask around and find out what danish people are in paris, who they are, where they live and how much money they have, who their friends are. and if you find out in this general sort of questioning that they happen to know my son, you'll find out much more than if you asked specific questions about him. just tell them you vaguely know laertes, say something like, "i'm a friend of his father and i sort of know him," or whatever. do you get what i'm saying, reynaldo?
you had a fuller beard the last time i saw you, but your speech gives you away. what's happening in rome? i have instructions from the volscian state to look for you there. you've saved me a day's journey.
when a captain curses, it's just angry words. when a private does it, it's blasphemy.
yes, very well, sir.
there's been an unusual uprising in rome: the people against the senators, patricians, and nobles.
(aside to isabella) you know about that sort of stuff? tell us more.
you should say, "i sort of know him, but not well. is it the same laertes who's a wild party animal? isn't he the one who's always," and so on. then just make up whatever you want, of course, nothing so bad that it would shame him. i mean make up any stories that
has been? you mean it's over? our state doesn't think so. they're preparing to attack and hope to surprise them in the middle of the chaos.
why are you attacking me with these sayings?
sound like your average young guy, the kind of trouble they get into.
most of it's over, but one small thing would make it erupt again: if the nobles take the news of coriolanus's banishment so personally that they themselves decide to take all power from the people and do away with their tribunes forever. this could easily happen, and it would definitely lead to violence.
because people in authority, even though they sin like everyone else, apply a sort of bandage to cover, but not cure, their sinful sores. look in your heart and ask yourself if you've ever experienced anything like my brother's crime. if your heart admits to being guilty of the same natural impulses, don't say a word to condemn my brother.
like gambling, sir?
coriolanus has been banished!
(to himself) she speaks with such sense, she's got my senses and desire stirred up. goodbye.
that's right, or drinking, swearing, fist-fighting, visiting prostitutes, that kind of thing.
banished, sir.
my gracious lord, come back.
but that would ruin his reputation!
you'll be welcome with this news, nicanor.
i'll consider the matter. come again tomorrow.
oh no, not if you say it right. i don't want you to say he's a sex fiend, that's not what i mean. just mention his faults lightly, so they make him seem like a free spirit who's gone a little too far.
things are looking good for the volsces now. as they say, the best time to seduce another man's wife is when she's in a fight with her husband. your noble tullus aufidius will do well in this attack, since his main enemy, coriolanus, is no longer fighting for his own country.
i'll bribe you, come back, my good lord.
but, sir, 
his victory is inevitable. i'm so glad to run into you. you've told me what i needed to know, and i'll happily accompany you home.
what? bribe me?
why should you do this, you want to know?
between now and dinner, i'll tell you all the strange things that are happening in rome, all of which is good news to her enemies. you said you had an army ready?
yes, with gifts from heaven.
yes, sir. i'd like to know.
a most royal army. each officer commands a hundred men, and they are all accounted for and deployable on an hour's notice.
(aside to isabella) you nearly blew it.
well, here's what i'm thinking. (i'm quite proud of myself for coming up with this.) as you talk with someone and hint about my son's faults and little sins, you'll watch his reaction, and if he's ever seen laertes do any of these things, it will only be natural for him to agree with you, at which point he'll call you "sir," or "my good friend," depending on who the person is, where he comes from, and so on.
i'm overjoyed to hear that they're ready. i think my report will be what sends them into battle. so glad we met, sir.
not with silly coins of real gold, or jewels whose value rises and falls, depending on fashion; but with constant prayers that will rise up and enter heaven before dawn, the prayers of protected souls, nuns whose minds are dedicated only to spiritual things.
yes, sir.
me, too, sir. i have even more reason to be glad to have met you.
well, come see me tomorrow.
and then he'll ... he'll ... wait, what was i about to say? good god, i was about to say something. what was i saying?
well, let's go together.
(aside to isabella) great, that's enough. let's go!
at, "it will be natural for him to agree with you ... he'll call you 'sir,' 'friend,'" et cetera.
antium is a good city. i made its women into widows. its sons have died at my hands in battle. may i go unrecognized, so that the women won't spit at me and the men won't throw stones.
heaven keep your honor safe!
"it will be natural for him to agree with you." ah, yes, that's right. if he agrees he'll say something like this: "yes, i know the gentleman you're referring to. i just saw him yesterday," or "the other day," or whenever it is, you know, "and there he was gambling," or "there he was, totally wasted, or fighting with somebody about a tennis match, or going into a house of ill repute", that means a whorehouse, you know, or whatever. make sure your little lie brings out the truth. we're doing this wisely and intelligently, indirectly, finding out things by roundabout means. that's how you'll find out what my son is up to in paris. you get my point, don't you?
may the gods protect you, sir.
(to himself) amen, for i'm falling into temptation, where desires and prayers work against each other.
yes, i do, sir.
and you.
what time tomorrow should i come to your lordship?
god bless you. have a safe trip.
could you please tell me where to find the great aufidius? is he in antium?
anytime before noon.
thank you, sir.
he is. the nobles of the state are having a feast at his house tonight.
god save your honor!
don't forget to see what he's up to with your own eyes. don't trust gossip.
where is his house, do you mind telling me?
from you, and from your virtue, too! what's happening? is this her fault or mine? the tempter or the tempted, who sins the most? ha! it's not her, she's not trying to be a tempter. it's me. it's like i'm lying in a field of violets, only instead of blossoming and smelling like a flower, i'm rotting and stinking like a corpse from the same sun that makes the flowers grow. is it possible that a modest woman can arouse desire more than a seductive one? having destroyed enough land already, should a person want to tear down a holy place and establish evil there as well? oh, damn, damn, damn! angelo, what are you doing, who are you? do you sinfully desire her for the things that make her good? oh, i should let her brother live! thieves are justified in robbing when the judges themselves are thieves. can it be i'm in love with her, when i want to hear her speak again, and gaze into her eyes? what am i dreaming of? oh, the devil's a cunning enemy, to catch a saint, he baits the hook with saints! the most dangerous temptation is the one that uses our love of goodness to draw us into sin. a prostitute could never attract me, even with her two powers: her seductive skills and her natural endowments. but this virtuous girl totally overwhelms me. whenever i saw men who were infatuated like idiots, i smiled and didn't understand, up until now.
i will, sir.
this one, right here.
hello, provost, i think that's who you are.
and i hope he's studying his music like he's supposed to.
thank you, sir. farewell.
i am the provost. what do you want, good friar?
got it, sir.
the world has many twists and turns! friends who at this moment are loyal to each other, who seem to share one heart, live in the same house, sleep in the same bed, eat the same food, and work together, who love each other like inseparable twins, will, within an hour, become bitter enemies because of a minor disagreement. and mortal enemies, who spend sleepless nights furiously plotting to capture each other's keep, will by some random chance become dear friends and join their interests together. this is how it is with me: i hate the place i come from and i love my enemy's town. it would be fair for him to kill me, but if he lets me live, i'll fight for his country.
my sense of charity and my religious order make it my duty to come visit the troubled souls here in prison. grant me the clergy's usual right to see them, and tell me the nature of their crimes, so i may minister to them accordingly.
good-bye.
wine, wine, wine! what kind of service is this? i think the other servants are asleep.
i'd do more than that, if it were needed.
ophelia, what's the matter?
where's cotus? my master calls for him. cotus!
look, here comes one: a gentlewoman in my charge who, by giving in to her youthful passion, has ruined her reputation. she's pregnant, and the child's father is sentenced to death. he's just a young man, who deserves the chance to make more babies, rather than to die for this one.
oh, father, father, i've just had such a scare!
this is a good house. the feast smells good, but i don't look like a guest.
when must he die?
from what, in god's name?
what are you doing here, friend? where are you from? this is no place for you. please leave.
tomorrow, i think.
father, i was up in my room sewing when hamlet came in with no hat on his head, his shirt unbuttoned, and his stockings dirty, undone, and down around his ankles. he was pale as his undershirt, and his knees were knocking together. he looked so out of sorts, as if he'd just come back from hell. he came up to me.
i wouldn't be welcomed any better if they knew i were coriolanus.
i've gotten accommodations for you. wait here, and you'll be escorted to them.
is he crazy with love for you?
where are you from, sir? is the porter blind to let someone like you in? please, get out.
pretty one, do you repent the sin you're carrying?
i'm not sure, but i'm afraid he might be.
go away!
i do, and patiently bear the shame.
what did he say?
you go away!
i'll teach you how to examine your conscience, and to test if your repentance is real or insincere.
he grabbed me by the wrist and held me hard, then backed away an arm's length and just looked at me, staring at me like an artist about to paint my picture. he stayed like that a long time.
you're causing trouble.
i'll gladly learn.
finally, after shaking my arm a little, and jerking his head up and down three times, he sighed like it was his last breath. after that he let me go. he left the room with his head turned back on me, finding his way out without looking, since his eyes were on me the whole time.
are you really this arrogant? someone's going to come reprimand you right away.
do you love the man who wronged you?
come with me. i'll go tell the king about this. this is definitely love-craziness. love is such a violent emotion that it makes people self-destruct, as much as any strong emotion. i'm so sorry. did you tell him anything that might have hurt his feelings lately?
who's this?
yes, as i love myself, the woman who wronged him.
no, father, but i did what you told me to do and sent back his letters and wouldn't let him visit me.
the strangest man i've ever seen. i can't get him out of the house. please ask my master to come here.
so then it seems your sinful act was mutually committed?
that's what made him crazy. i regret not observing him more closely before i told you to do that. i thought he was just toying with you and meant to ruin your reputation. damn my suspicious thoughts! it's as common for us old people to assume we know more than we do as for young people to be too wild and crazy. come on, let's go see the king. we've got to discuss this matter, which could cause more trouble if we keep it secret than if we discuss it openly.
why are you here, fellow? please, leave this house.
mutually.
welcome, dear rosencrantz and guildenstern. i've wanted to see you for a long time now, but i sent for you so hastily because i need your help right away. you've probably heard about the "change" that's come over hamlet, that's the only word for it, since inside and out he's different from what he was before. i can't imagine what's made him so unlike himself, other than his father's death. since you both grew up with him and are so familiar with his personality and behavior, i'm asking you to stay a while at court and spend some time with him. see if you can get hamlet to have some fun, and find out if there's anything in particular that's bothering him, so we can set about trying to fix it.
let me stay. i won't cause any harm.
but your sin is heavier a play on words. "heavier" means "more serious" but also refers literally to the heavy child juliet carries heavier than his.
gentlemen, hamlet's talked a lot about you, and i know there are no two men alive he's fonder of. if you'll be so good as to spend some time with us and help us out, you'll be thanked on a royal scale.
who are you?
i do confess it, and repent it, father.
both you and the king might have ordered us to execute your command, instead of asking us so politely.
a gentleman.
that's appropriate, daughter. but if you're only sorry because your sin's been found out, that's being sorry for yourself, not for offending heaven. we tend to repent out of fear of god, rather than love for him, 
but we'll obey. our services are entirely at your command.
a remarkably poor one.
i repent because my act was evil. i'm happy to be ashamed of it.
thanks, rosencrantz and worthy guildenstern.
that's true. i am poor.
maintain that attitude. i hear your partner must die tomorrow, and i'm going to give him spiritual guidance. grace go with you, and god bless you!
thanks, guildenstern and worthy rosencrantz. i beg you to pay a visit right away to my son, who's changed too much. servants, take these gentlemen to see hamlet.
please, poor gentleman, go to some other house. this is not the place for you. please, get out now.
must die tomorrow! oh, painful love! by making me pregnant, it's spared my life the law spared a pregnant female prisoner from execution it's spared my life . but that comfort means i have to live with the horror of claudio's death.
i hope to god we can make him happy and do him some good!
be like every other servant: go gorge yourself on cold scraps of food.
he's to be pitied.
amen to that!
what won't you do? please, go tell my master what a strange guest he has here.
when i try to pray and think, i think and pray about different things. my empty words "empty" here can mean two things: the first meaning is "absent-minded or without conviction," since angelo speaks to heaven but his thoughts are on isabel; it also suggests "meaningless," since his impure thoughts about isabel prove he doesn't mean the pious words he speaks. empty words focus on heaven, while my imagination ignores what i'm saying and fixates on isabel. it's as if i'm only mouthing god's name, while an evil idea grows in my heart. the politics i used to study with such interest now seem dry and tedious. the dignity i was so proud of (i hope no one hears this) is now worth even less than some silly hat feather waving uselessly in the wind. oh, how often do rank and ceremonial trappings impress the foolish and entrap even the wise! passions are passions, they cannot simply be swept away. you can write "good angel" on the devil's horns, but that doesn't change his devilish nature.
the ambassadors are back from norway, sir.
i will.
hello! who's there?
once again you bring good news.
where do you live?
one isabel, a nun, wishes to see you.
do i, sir? i assure your majesty i'm only doing my duty both to my god and my good king.
beneath the stars.
show her the way.
and i believe, unless this brain of mine is not so politically cunning as it used to be, that i've found out why hamlet's gone crazy.
beneath the stars!
oh, heavens! why does my blood rush to my heart, both choking it and making the rest of my body weak? it's like a stupid crowd surrounding somebody who faints, they're all trying to help him and actually they're cutting off the air he needs. or, like the common people who drop what they're doing and rush over to see their beloved king when he appears, fawning and crowding him so much that their ignorant adoration becomes offensive.
tell me! i want very much to find out.
yes.
how are you, pretty lady?
all right, but first let the ambassadors speak. then you can hear my news, as dessert.
where's that?
i've come to find out what you want to do.
then be so kind as to show them in.
in the city of kites and crows.
if only you knew what i want to do and didn't have to ask. your brother cannot live.
gertrude, he says he's found out the reason for your son's insanity.
in the city of kites and crows! what a joke this is! then do you live with the simpletons too?
very well, then. heaven keep your honor!
i doubt it's anything but the obvious reason: his father's dying and our quick marriage.
no, i don't serve your master.
on the other hand, he may live awhile, maybe as long as you or me. still, he must die.
well, we'll get to the bottom of it. welcome, my good friends. tell me, voltemand, what's the news from the king of norway?
oh, sir! are you trying to mess with my master?
by your command?
greetings to you too, your highness. as soon as we raised the matter, the king sent out messengers to stop his nephew's war preparations, which he originally thought were directed against poland but learned on closer examination were directed against you. he was very upset that fortinbras had taken advantage of his being old and sick to deceive him, and he ordered fortinbras's arrest. fortinbras swore never to threaten denmark again.
yes. it's more honest than messing around with your mistress. you babble on and on. pass the serving platter. go!
yes.
the old king was so overjoyed by this promise that he gave young fortinbras an annual income of three thousand crowns a crown is a kind of gold coin. crowns and permission to lead his soldiers into poland, asking you officially in this letter to allow his troops to pass through your kingdom on their way to poland. he's assuring you of your safety. (he gives claudius a document
where is this man?
i beg you, tell me when. so that, no matter how long or short his reprieve is, he'll be spiritually prepared and can save his soul.
i like this news, and when i have time i'll read this and think about how to reply. meanwhile, thank you for your efforts. go relax now. tonight we'll have dinner. welcome back!
here, sir. i would've beaten him like a dog, but that would've disturbed your guests.
ha! damn these filthy vices! one might as well pardon a murderer as forgive a fornicator who begets an illegitimate child. it's as easy to take a legitimate life as it is to create an illegitimate one.
well, that turned out well in the end. sir and madam, to make grand speeches about what majesty is, what service is, or why day is day, night is night, and time is time is just a waste of a lot of day, night, and time. therefore, since the essence of wisdom is not talking too much, i'll get right to the point here. your son is crazy. "crazy" i'm calling it, since how can you say what craziness is except to say that it's craziness? but that's another story.
where are you from? what do you want? your name? why aren't you speaking? speak, man. what's your name?
heaven may regard the two sins as equal, but humans do not.
please, stick to the point.
if, tullus (umuffling his voice), you don't recognize my voice and you don't recognize me by sight, i must tell you my name.
you think so? then i'll put this question to you: which would you prefer, that this very fair law took your brother's life, or to save your brother, you give up your body to the same sort of sweet sin as did the girl he ruined?
madam, i'm doing nothing but sticking to the point. it's true he's crazy, and it's a shame it's true, and it's truly a shame he's crazy, but now i sound foolish, so i'll get right to the point.
oh, martius, martius! each word that you've spoken has weeded from my heart a root of longstanding hatred. if from that far cloud jupiter should speak divine things and say, "it's true," i would believe him no less than i believe you, noble martius. let me wrap my arms around this body of yours, which my wooden lance has beaten and been splintered against a hundred times. you are the anvil that my sword used to strike, and now i embrace you. now i strive to gain your comradeship with as much ferocity and honor as i used to fight you. you should know: i loved the woman i married, that's the truth, but seeing you here, you noble thing, makes my heart more enraptured than when i first saw my new bride walk across my threshold. you are the god of war! i tell you, our army is ready to deploy, and now i have reason again to force your shield off of your strong arm, or lose my own arm instead. you've defeated me twelve different times, and every night since i have dreamed of encounters between us. we'd fight down on the ground, taking off our helmets, forcing our fists into each other's throats. then i wake up, half dead, and it was all a dream. worthy martius, even if we had no reason to attack rome other than the fact that you've been banished, we would assemble every man from ages twelve to seventy and flood ungrateful rome with our fury. come inside now and shake hands with our senators. they are just now saying goodbye to me, as i was about to attack roman territories, though not rome itself.
sir, believe this, i'd rather give up my body than my soul.
now, if we agree hamlet's crazy, then the next step is to figure out the cause of this effect of craziness, or i suppose i should say the cause of this defect, since this defective effect is caused by something. this is what we must do, and that's exactly what needs to be done. think about it. i have a daughter (i have her until she gets married) who's given me this letter, considering it her duty. listen and think about this: (he reads a letter) "to the heavenly idol of my soul, the most beautified ophelia", by the way, "beautified" sounds bad, it sounds awful, it sounds crude, it's a terrible use of the word. but i'll go on: (he reads the letter) "in her excellent white bosom," et cetera, et cetera, you don't need to hear all this stuff, 
you bless me, gods!
i'm not talking about your soul: sins we're compelled to commit get counted, but they don't count against us.
hamlet wrote this letter to ophelia?
incomparable sir, if you'd like to take the lead with your own revenge, take over half of my command. because you have the most experience and you know rome's strengths and weaknesses, decide for yourself whether to attack the city directly at the gates or to sneak up on them in the faraway territories and frighten them before destroying them. either way, come in. let me introduce you to those who will approve of your desires. a thousand welcomes! you're more of a friend now than you were ever an enemy, and you were a great enemy. give me your hand, you are most welcome!
what are you saying?
madam, please be patient. i'll read it to you. (he reads the letter) "you may wonder if the stars are fire, you may wonder if the sun moves across the sky. you may wonder if the truth is a liar, but never wonder if i love. oh, ophelia, i'm bad at poetry. i can't put my feelings into verse, but please believe i love you best, oh, best of all. believe it. yours forever, my dearest one, as long as i live, still chugging along, hamlet." dutifully and obediently my daughter showed me this letter, and more like it. she's told me all about how hamlet has been courting her, all the details of where, and what he said, and when.
that was an unexpected turn of events!
no, don't hold me to that, for i can argue a point i don't really believe. answer this. as the voice of the written law, i pronounce a death sentence on your brother's life. might it not be charity to commit a sin to save this brother's life?
and how did she react to all this?
i swear, i had thought about striking him with a club, but i knew his clothes were a disguise.
if you want to do it, i'll risk the punishment on my soul, and say it'd be no sin at all, but charity.
sir, what is your opinion of me?
what an arm he has! he turned me around with just his finger and his thumb, the way you'd spin a top.
if you felt like doing it, even at the risk of your soul, sin and charity would balance each other perfectly.
i know you are loyal and honorable.
no, i knew by his face that there was something about him. he had, sir, a kind of face, i thought, i don't know how to describe it.
if begging for his life is a sin, heaven let me bear it! if your granting my request is a sin, i'll pray each morning to have it added to my faults and not one you have to answer for.
i would like to prove to you that i am. but what would you have thought of me if i had kept quiet when i found out about this hot little love (which i noticed even before my daughter told me about it)? my dear queen, what would you have thought of me if i had turned a blind eye to what was happening between hamlet and my daughter? no, i had to do something. and so i said to my daughter: "lord hamlet is a prince, he's out of your league. you have to end this." and then i gave her orders to stay away from him, and not to accept any messages or little gifts from him. she did what i said. when she rejected hamlet, he became sad, and stopped eating, stopped sleeping, got weak, got dizzy, and as a result lost his mind. and that's why he's crazy now, and all of us feel sorry for him.
he had a kind of face that looked like it was, i can't find the words for the life of me, but i knew there was more to him than i could see.
no, listen to me. you're not following me. either you're dumb or you're playing dumb, and that's not good.
(to gertrude) do you think that's why hamlet's crazy?
so did i. i swear, he is simply the most unique man in the world.
call me dumb, then, and not very good. let me accept by god's grace that i'm not any better than that.
it may be, it certainly may be.
i agree, but you already know a better soldier.
this is how smart people try to seem really bright: by knocking their own intelligence. it's the same way hiding behind a black mask makes a woman seem ten times more beautiful than her naked face does. but pay attention. i'll be more blunt, so that you get it. your brother is to die.
has there ever been a time, i'd really like to know, when i've definitely said something was true, and it turned out not to be true?
who, my master?
yes.
not that i know of.
it's no contest.
that's the penalty for his crime, under the law.
(pointing to his head and shoulders) chop my head off if i'm wrong. i'll follow the clues and uncover the truth, even if it's at the very center of the earth.
he's worth six of him.
true.
what can we do to find out if it's true?
that's not true. i think he's the better soldier.
suppose that there was no other way to save his life, not that i'm admitting this, it's just for the sake of argument, let's say that you, his sister, were desired by someone whose influence with the judge, or whose own powerful position, could rescue your brother from the law's binding chains. and there was no other earthly way to save him, unless you gave your virginity to this hypothetical man, or else your brother dies. what would you do?
well, you know he sometimes walks here in the lobby for four hours at a time.
how could anyone ever say who's actually better? for defending towns, our general is excellent.
i would do this as much for my poor brother as myself, that is, if i were under a death sentence, i'd strip myself naked and display the whip's bloody lashes like rubies. and i'd go to my death like going to my bed, before i'd surrender my body to sin.
yes, he does.
yes, and for attacking them, too.
then your brother must die.
when he's there next time, i'll send my daughter to see him. (to claudius) you and i will hide behind the arras an arras is a hanging wall-tapestry. arras and watch what happens. if it turns out that hamlet's not in love after all, and hasn't gone mad from love, then you can fire me from my court job and i'll go work on a farm.
oh, slaves, i have news for you, news, you rascals!
and that's the better bargain. better a brother die once than a sister suffer eternal damnation to save him.
we'll try what you suggest.
what, what, what? tell us.
then aren't you as cruel as the sentence you've so deplored?
look how sadly he's coming in, reading his book.
i'd rather be from anywhere than rome. i'd gladly prefer to be condemned to die.
a shameful release and an unconditional pardon are two different things. legal mercy is in no way related to an immoral rescue.
please go away, both of you. i'll speak to him now. oh, please let me.
why? why?
you said a little while ago the law was tyrannical, arguing that your brother's sinning was a lighthearted act, not a vice.
how are you, hamlet?
because caius martius, the man who was inclined to thwack our general, is here.
oh, forgive me, my lord. to get what we want, we often say things we don't mean. i've made excuses for something i hate in order to help the brother i love.
fine, thank you.
what do you mean, "thwack our general"?
we're all weak.
do you know who i am?
i don't mean "thwack our general," but he could have.
yes. otherwise, my brother would deserve to die, if he were the only person to have inherited this weakness.
of course. you sell fish.
come, we're fellows and friends. caius martius was always too much for him, i've heard him say so himself.
no, women are weak too.
no, not me, sir.
he was too much for him directly, to tell the truth. at corioles he carved him up like a piece of meat.
yes, as weak their mirrors, which break as easily as they reflect images. women, heaven help us!, are ruined by men who take advantage of us. call us frail ten times over, for we're as soft as our skin, and gullible.
in that case i wish you were as good a man as a fish seller.
if he'd been a cannibal, he might have broiled and eaten him, too.
i agree. and based on what you say about your sex, since i suppose we're only as strong as our own weakest points, let me be bold. i take you at your word. be what you are, a woman, that is. if you are better than that, then you're not a woman. but if you are one, as you certainly seem to be by all outward appearances, show it now by being weak.
good, sir?
but what other news do you have?
i can only speak with a sincere tongue. my gentle lord, please talk plainly, as you did before.
yes, sir. only one man in ten thousand is good in this world.
the guests here can't stop talking about him. it's as if he were the son and heir to mars. he's sitting at the head of the table and none of the senators are asking him any questions, they've all taken their hats off to him. our general himself treats him like a mistress, touching his hand like a sacred relic, listening with wide-eyed wonder to his every word. but the bottom line is that our general is now half the man he was yesterday. he's given half his power away to caius martius and the whole table supports him. he says that he'll go and catch the keeper of rome's gates by the ears, that he'll mow down whoever stands in his way, leaving a trail behind him.
to put it plainly, i love you.
that's definitely true, my lord.
and he's as likely to do it as any man i can imagine.
my brother loved juliet, and you tell me that he'll die for it.
since if the sun breeds maggots on a dead dog, kissing the corpse, by the way, do you have a daughter?
do it! he'll do it. look, sir, he has as many friends as enemies, and his friends can't actually be friends to him while he's in dejectitude.
he won't, isabel, if you give me love.
i do indeed, my lord.
dejectitude! what's that?
i know your virtue gives you the freedom to act wicked, in order to test others.
then by all means never let her walk in public. procreation is a good thing, but if your daughter gets pregnant ... look out, friend.
but when they see that his spirits have lifted and that he's a man in full vitality again, they'll come out of hiding, like rabbits after a rain, and celebrate with him.
believe me, i swear i mean what i say.
(to himself) now, what does he mean by that? still harping on my daughter. but he didn't recognize me at first. he mistook me for a fish seller. he's far gone. but when i was young i went crazy for love too, almost as bad as this. i'll talk to him again., (to hamlet) what are you reading, your highness?
when will this happen?
what! to believe so much in someone with so little honor and such evil intentions! you deceiver! i'll denounce you, angelo, believe me. sign a pardon for my brother immediately, or i'll scream to the entire world what sort of man you are.
a lot of words.
tomorrow, today, soon. you'll hear the battle drum by this afternoon. it's like part of their feast and will be underway before they've wiped their lips.
who will believe you, isabel? my spotless reputation, my strict way of living, my testimony against you, and my position will all outweigh your accusation. you'll be silenced and discredited, accused of slander. the starting gate is open now, and my desires are off and running. feed my hunger, no more of your modesty and time-wasting blushes, which charm me and then banish me for being charmed. save your brother by sleeping with me, or he'll be put to death. and not only that, but it'll be death by torture, drawn out by your cruelty. accept my offer tomorrow, or by my almighty passion, i'll tyrannize him. as for you, say what you want. my lie, which calls your claim false, will outweigh your true claim.
and what is the subject?
then things will come back to life again here. this peace does nothing but rust iron and make people become tailors and singers.
who can i complain to? if i reported this, who would believe me? oh, dangerous mouths, with double-talking tongues that can both condemn and approve, and make the law bow to their wishes. they put their sexual desires before notions of right and wrong! i'll go to my brother. although he gave in to his body's demands, his mind's so honorable that, if he had twenty heads to lay on twenty bloody execution blocks, he'd give them all up, rather than let his sister pollute her body. so, isabel, you'll live chaste, and brother, you'll die. my chastity is more important than my brother. i'll tell him of angelo's request, and prepare him for death, and the eternal rest of his soul.
between whom?
i say: give me war. it's better than peace the way night is better than day. it's spritely, waking, loud, and spirited. peace is the definition of stagnation, of lethargy. it's dull, deaf, sleepy, and unfeeling. it creates more bastard children than wars destroy men.
so, you hope for a pardon from lord angelo?
i mean, what do the words say?
it's true. and while war can be said to be seductive in a sense, it cannot be denied that in times of peace, wives cheat on their husbands.
hope is the only medicine miserable people have. i hope to live, and am prepared to die.
oh, just lies, sir. the sly writer says here that old men have gray beards, their faces are wrinkled, their eyes full of gunk, and that they have no wisdom and weak thighs. of course i believe it all, but i don't think it's good manners to write it down, since you yourself, sir, would grow as old as i am, if you could only travel backward like a crab.
yes, and it makes men hate one another.
be ready to die; then either death or life will be all the sweeter. tell life this: if i lose you, i lose something that only fools would want to keep. you're just a breath, subject to all the changes of weather that hourly buffet the body you occupy. you're simply death's dupe, constantly struggling to run away from him, while all the while you're running toward him. you're not noble, because all your civilized comforts come from lowly plants and animals. you're by no means brave, because the forked tongue of a little snake scares you. sleep is your best way to rest, and you do that a lot, yet you stupidly fear death, which is basically the same thing. you're not a single being, because you're composed of thousands of grains of dust. you're not happy, because you're always trying to get what you don't have, and what you do have, you forget about. you're unstable, your moods changing as often as the phases of the moon. if you're rich, you're actually poor, like an ass staggering under a load of gold bars, you're just carrying your heavy wealth for a period, and you lose that wealth when you die. you don't have any friends, for even your children, the offspring of your own loins, curse the gout, skin rashes, and colds for not carrying you off sooner. you're neither old or young, but always suspended in a sort of mid-afternoon nap, because when young, you're like an old beggar, wheedling money from your feeble elders. and when you're old and rich yourself, you have neither the passion, love, agility, or beauty to enjoy your wealth. so, what in all this is worth living for? life hides more than a thousand deaths. yet it's death, which fixes all these problems, that we fear.
(to himself) there's a method to his madness. (to hamlet) will you step outside, my lord?
because they need one another less. i'd give my money to have war! i hope the romans are as cheap as the volsces. (a noise comes from offstage) they're getting up from the table. all in, in, in, in!
i humbly thank you. in looking to live, i find i actually seek to die, and by seeking death, i find life. let death come.
into my grave.
we haven't heard about him, so we don't need to fear him. it would be easy to deal with him now, given the peace and quietness of the people, who were in such chaos before. now we're making his friends blush because things are going so smoothly. his friends are the ones who would've chosen, to their own detriment, to see people arguing in the streets rather than have our tradesmen back in their shops and happily doing their jobs.
(offstage) hello, there! peace, grace, and good company to everyone here!
well, that's certainly out of this world, all right. (to himself) his answers are so full of meaning sometimes! he has a way with words, as crazy people often do, and that sane people don't have a talent for. i'll leave him now and arrange a meeting between him and my daughter. (to hamlet) my lord, i'll take my leave "take my leave" = say good-bye take my leave of you now.
we turned things around quickly.
who's there? come in. that wish deserves a welcome.
you can't take anything from me that i care less about, except my life, except my life, except my life.
is this menenius?
dear sir, i'll visit you again soon.
good-bye, my lord.
it's him, it's him. he has become very kind lately.
most holy sir, thank you.
(to himself) these boring old fools!
greetings, sir!
my business is a word or two with claudio.
you're looking for lord hamlet. he's right over there.
greetings to you both!
and very welcome. look, signor, here's your sister.
thank you, sir.
coriolanus is not missed much by anyone but his friends now. the people would rise up against him if he were still angry at them.
provost, a word with you.
my lord!
that's good. but things would have gone much better if he could have compromised.
as many as you please.
my dear sir!
where is he? have you heard?
take me to a place where i can hide and overhear them.
ah, my good old friends! how are you, guildenstern? and rosencrantz! boys, how are you both doing?
no, i hear nothing. his mother and his wife hear nothing from him.
now, sister, what's the good word?
oh, as well as anybody.
the gods preserve you both!
why, as all good words are, very good indeed. lord angelo has business with heaven, and he's going to make you his ambassador there, an eternal appointment. so get ready, quickly. tomorrow you set off.
happy that we're not too happy, lucky in being not too lucky. we're not exactly at the top of our luck.
good evening, neighbors.
is there no way out?
but you're not down and out, either, are you?
good evening to you all, good evening to you all.
none, except a way that would save his head by breaking my heart in two.
no, we're just somewhere in the middle, my lord.
ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees, keep you both in our prayers.
but is there any?
so you're around lady luck's waist?
live and thrive!
yes, brother, you can live. if you beg him, the judge will offer a devilish sort of mercy that will free you, yet chain you until death.
yes, we're the privates in her army.
farewell, kind neighbors. we wished coriolanus had cared for you as much as we do.
lifetime imprisonment?
ha, ha, so you've gotten into her private parts? of course, lady luck is such a slut. anyway, what's up?
now the gods keep you!
yes, exactly. a type of lifetime imprisonment that would limit your movements, even if you had the freedom to roam the entire world.
not much, my lord. just that the world's become honest.
farewell, farewell.
but what type?
in that case, the end of the world is approaching. but you're wrong. let me ask you a particular question. what crimes have you committed to be sent here to this prison?
this is a happier and more pleasant time than when the people ran in the streets, shouting their wild demands.
the type that, if you agreed to it, would strip your honor from your body like bark from a tree trunk, and leave you exposed to shame.
prison, my lord?
caius martius was a brave officer in the war, but he was stubborn, overcome with pride, unreasonably ambitious, narcissistic . . .
get to the point.
denmark's a prison.
and he thought there should be only one governing body without any counterbalancing powers.
oh, i'm afraid of you, claudio. i tremble to think you would cherish a wild existence and would value six or seven years of life more than everlasting honor. do you dare to die? the worst part of death is anticipating it. a beetle we step on suffers as much as a giant when it dies.
then i guess the whole world is one.
i don't think that's so.
why are you shaming me like this? do you think i can summon my resolve from flowery, comforting speeches? if i have to die, i will meet the darkness like a bride, and hug it in my arms.
yes, quite a large one, with many cells and dungeons, denmark being one of the worst.
if despite our protests he had become consul, we would know this to be true by now.
now, that's my brother talking, like my father speaking from his grave. yes, you must die. you're too noble to save yourself in a shameful way. this seemingly saintly deputy, whose composed face and carefully calculated words target and attack young people like some bird of prey, is really a devil. if you drained him of all the filth inside him, you'd reveal a pond as deep as hell.
we don't think so, my lord.
the gods have skillfully prevented it, and rome sits safe and sound without him.
the "priestly" angelo!
well, then it isn't one to you, since nothing is really good or bad in itself, it's all what a person thinks about it. and to me, denmark is a prison.
worthy tribunes, we've just put a slave in prison who says that the volsces, in two separate armies, have entered roman territories and are furiously destroying everything in sight.
oh, it's a cunning disguise from hell, to cloak and cover the wickedest people in priestly clothes. can you believe it, claudio? if i gave him my virginity, you'd be freed.
that must be because you're so ambitious. it's too small for your large mind.
it's aufidius. hearing of martius's banishment, he's thrusting his horns into the world again. when martius defended rome, aufidius was contained and didn't once dare to strike out.
oh, heavens! it can't be.
small? no, i could live in a walnut shell and feel like the king of the universe. the real problem is that i have bad dreams.
why are you talking about martius now?
yes, in exchange for this awful sin, he'd free you to keep on sinning. tonight's the time i have to do something i hate to even pronounce, or else you die tomorrow.
dreams are a sign of ambition, since ambition is nothing more than the shadow of a dream.
go stop this rumor. the volsces can't have dared to break our peace treaty.
you mustn't do it.
but a dream itself is just a shadow.
they can't? we've seen many times that they very well can, three times within my own lifetime in fact. talk with the prisoner before you beat him. find out where he heard this. don't run the risk of punishing the informant who warns you of dreaded news.
oh, if it were just my life, i'd throw it away like a pin to save you.
exactly. in fact, i consider ambition to be so light and airy that it's only the shadow of a shadow.
don't tell me what to do. i know this can't be true.
thanks, dear isabel.
then i guess beggars are the ones with bodies, while ambitious kings and heroes are just the shadows of beggars. should we go inside? i seem to be losing my mind a bit.
it's not possible.
be ready, claudio, for your death tomorrow.
we're at your service, whatever you say.
the nobles are all hurrying to the senate house. some news has come that's making them scowl.
yes. is his lust so great that it causes him to make a mockery of the law, even while he's enforcing it? of course, it isn't a sin, or anyway it's the least of the seven deadly sins.
no, no, i won't class you with my servants, since, to be frank with you, my servants are terrible. but tell me as my friends, what are you doing here at elsinore?
it's this slave. go whip him in public view. he's incited everyone with just his report.
which is the least?
visiting you, my lord. there's no other reason.
worthy sir, the slave's report has been confirmed, and the news is worse than we feared.
if it were a damnable thing, why, if he's so wise, would he risk being eternally punished for a momentary pleasure? oh, isabel!
well, then, i thank you, though i'm such a beggar that even my thanks are not worth much. did someone tell you to visit me? or was it just your whim, on your own initiative? come on, tell me the truth.
what could be worse?
what are you saying?
what should we say, my lord?
many people, though i don't know how much they actually know, are openly declaring that martius has joined with aufidius and is leading an army against rome and that he vows revenge on everyone alive.
death is a fearful thing.
anything you like, as long as it answers my question. you were sent for. you've got a guilty look on your faces, which you're too honest to disguise. i know the king and queen sent for you.
this is highly likely!
and a disgraced life a hateful one.
why would they do that, my lord?
the weak common people have only been incited in order to welcome martius home again.
yes, but to die, and go who knows where. to lie cold and congealing, and to rot, this conscious, warm body to become a compact lump of earth, and the vast spirit to swim in hell's fiery floods or reside in a frigid land of thick ice. to be confined inside invisible winds and perpetually, violently blown all around the world hanging in space. or to be worse off than one of those tortured souls howling from punishment of sinful thoughts, it's too horrible! the weariest, most hateful life that old age, aches, poverty and imprisonment can inflict on us is paradise compared to our fears of death.
that's what i want you to tell me. let me remind you of our old friendship, our youth spent together, the duties of our love for each other, and whatever else will make you answer me straight.
it's a trick.
oh, no!
(to guildenstern) what do you think?
that's unlikely. he and aufidius can't agree on anything other than to fight each other.
sweet sister, let me live. any sin you commit to save a brother's life, nature will pardon as though it were a good deed.
(to himself) i've got my eye on you. (to guildenstern) if you care about me, you'll be honest with me.
you've been called to the senate. a frightening army, led by caius martius and in conjunction with aufidius, rages in our territories. they've already overcome everything in their way, burned it, and took whatever was left.
oh, you beast! treacherous coward! shameful wretch! will you be given your life as a result of my vice? isn't it a kind of incest, to gain life from your own sister's shame? what should i think? god forbid, my mother must have cheated on my father, for such a twisted son as you never could have sprung from his blood! i renounce you, die, perish! even if all i had to do was pray on bended knees to stop your execution, i'd let it happen. i'll pray a thousand prayers for your death, and not one word to save you.
my lord, we were sent for.
(to the tribunes) oh, this is all your fault!
no, listen to me, isabel.
i'll tell you why, so you won't have to tell me and give away any secrets you have with the king and queen. recently, though i don't know why, i've lost all sense of fun, stopped exercising, the whole world feels sterile and empty. this beautiful canopy we call the sky, this majestic roof decorated with golden sunlight, why, it's nothing more to me than disease-filled air. what a perfect invention a human is, how noble in his capacity to reason, how unlimited in thinking, how admirable in his shape and movement, how angelic in action, how godlike in understanding! there's nothing more beautiful. we surpass all other animals. and yet to me, what are we but dust? men don't interest me. no, women neither, but you're smiling, so you must think they do.
what news do you have? what news?
oh, shame, shame, shame! your sin was no one-time accident, but a habit. granting you mercy would be like pimping, enabling you to do it again. it's best that you die right away.
my lord, i wasn't thinking anything like that.
you've helped to rape your own daughters and melt the city's lead roofs on your own heads, to see your wives dishonored before your own eyes, 
oh, listen to me, isabella!
so why did you laugh when i said that men don't interest me?
what's the news? what's the news?
permit me to say a word, young sister, just one word.
i was just thinking that if people don't interest you, you'll be pretty bored by the actors on their way here. we crossed paths with a drama company just a while ago, and they're coming to entertain you.
your temples have been burned down to their foundations, and your political power reduced to the size of a pinhole.
what do you want?
the one who plays the part of the king will be particularly welcome. i'll treat him like a real king. the adventurous knight will wave around his sword and shield, the lover will be rewarded for his sighs, the crazy character can rant all he wants, the clown will make everybody laugh, and the lady character can say whatever's on her mind, or i'll stop the play. which troupe is it?
please, give us your news now. you've made your point, what's your news? if martius has joined with volsces, 
if you can spare the time, i'd like to talk with you in a little while. you'd be doing yourself a favor as well as me.
the tragic actors from the city, the ones you used to enjoy so much.
if? then he is their god. he leads them as if he were a thing made by some other deity than nature, one that makes stronger men. and they follow him, against us children, with the confidence of boys pursuing summer butterflies or butchers killing flies.
i don't have any spare time, but i'll wait for you a little while.
what are they doing on the road? they made more money and got more attention in the city.
(to the tribunes) this is all your doing, you and the tradesmen you represent. you that built your power on the workmen's votes and the wishes of the lower class!
son, i overheard what happened between you and your sister. angelo never meant to seduce her. he was only testing her virtue, to test his ability to judge character. being a person of integrity, she virtuously refused him, and he was happy to hear it. i'm angelo's confessor, so i know this is true. therefore, prepare yourself for death. don't prop yourself up with false hopes. tomorrow you must die. fall to your knees and prepare for confession.
but things have changed there, and it's easier for them on the road now.
he'll bring rome to its knees.
let me ask my sister to forgive me. i'm so out of love with life that i'll pray to be rid of it.
are they as popular as they used to be when i lived in the city? do they attract big audiences?
the city is ready to fall like the ripe fruits hercules had to shake down from the trees. you are responsible for all of this!
maintain that attitude. farewell.
no, not like before.
but is this true, sir?
provost, a word with you!
why? are they getting rusty?
yes, and you'll be dead before it's otherwise. all the regions are revolting. whoever resists is mocked for their ignorant courage and then killed as a loyal fool. who can blame martius? your enemies and his find something in him.
what is it, father?
no, they're busy and as excellent as ever. the problem is that they have to compete with a group of children who yell out their lines and receive outrageous applause for it. these child actors are now in fashion, and they've so overtaken the public theaters that society types hardly come at all, they're so afraid of being mocked by the playwrights who write for the boys.
we're all doomed unless he has mercy on us.
now that you've come over, you should go away. leave me with the girl awhile. my intentions and the fact that i'm a friar guarantee that nothing bad will happen to her.
what, you mean kid actors? who takes care of them? who pays their way? will they stop working when their voices mature? aren't the playwrights hurting them by making them upstage adult actors, which they are going to grow up and become? (unless, of course, they have trust funds.)
who will ask him for mercy? the tribunes are too ashamed, the people deserve his pity like the wolf deserves the shepherds', and as for his best friends, if they were to ask him to "be good to rome," they would be asking of him what his enemies ought to ask, and that would make them appear to be his enemies.
very well.
there's been a whole debate on the topic. for a while, no play was sold to the theaters without a big fight between the children's playwright and the actors playing adult roles.
it's true. if he were about to burn my house, i wouldn't be bold enough to say, "i beg you, stop." you and your crafty ways! you've crafted a real mess here!
he who made you lovely made you good, as well. beauty has a cheap kind of goodness, which is why beauty doesn't last. but virtue lies at the heart of your character, so you will always be beautiful. i've heard about angelo's sexual advances to you, and if there weren't other examples of such lapses, i'd be really surprised. what are you going to do to satisfy this stand-in and save your brother?
are you kidding?
you've brought to rome a panic without remedy like never before.
i'm going now to give him my answer: i'd rather my brother die by legitimate execution than have an illegitimate baby. but, oh, how wrong the good duke was about angelo! if he ever returns and i can speak to him, the first words i speak will be to expose angelo's way of governing.
oh, there's been a lot of quarreling.
we didn't bring it.
that's not a bad idea. but, as the matter now stands, he'll deny your accusation. he'll say he was only testing you. so, listen to my advice. my delight in doing good gives me an idea for a solution. i'm convinced there's a way you righteously can do a poor wronged lady some well-deserved good, save your brother from the cruel law, keep your own gracious self pure, and greatly please the absent duke, if he ever returns to hear about all this.
and the boys are winning so far?
what? how is it our fault? we supported him but, like beasts and cowardly nobles, we gave way into your crowds of people who drove him out of the city.
tell me more. i have the courage to do anything, as long as it doesn't strike me as wrong.
yes, they are, my lord, little boys are carrying the whole theater on their backs, like hercules carried the world.
but i fear the crowds will roar him in again. tullus aufidius, the second most famous warrior, obeys martius's orders as if he were his officer. desperation is the only defense that rome can make against them.
virtue is bold, and goodness is never afraid. have you ever heard of mariana, the sister of frederick, the great soldier who died at sea?
actually, it's not so unusual when you think about it. my uncle is king of denmark, and the same people who made fun of him while my father was still alive are now rushing to pay twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for miniature portraits of him. there's something downright unnatural about it, if a philosopher stopped to think about it.
here come the crowds. is aufidius with him? you're the ones that made the air unwholesome when you tossed up your stinking greasy caps, hooting at coriolanus's exile. now he's coming, and there's not a hair on a soldier's head that won't become a whip. he'll cut off every fool's head that had tossed up a hat to repay you for your votes. if he could burn us all into one coal, we would deserve it.
i've heard of the lady, and people always spoke well of her.
the actors are here.
wait, we hear frightening news.
she was supposed to marry this angelo. they were engaged, and the wedding day was set. but before the ceremony, her brother frederick was lost at sea, in the ship that was carrying his sister's dowry. the poor woman suffered a heavy blow. she lost a famous, noble brother, who loved her dearly and devotedly. she lost with him her dowry, the bulk of her fortune, and with both, she lost her husband-to-be, this oh-so-respectable angelo.
gentlemen, welcome to elsinore. don't be shy, shake hands with me. if i'm going to welcome you i have to go through all these polite customs, don't i? and if we don't shake hands, when i act all nice to the players it will seem like i'm happier to see them than you. you are very welcome here. but still, my uncle-father and aunt-mother have got the wrong idea.
at least for me, when i said banish him, i said it out of pity.
can this be true? did angelo leave her?
in what sense, my lord?
and so did i.
left her in her tears, without drying a single one of them. he reneged on his vows completely, saying he discovered that she'd been unfaithful to him. he gave her only grief, basically, and she still wears it, like a wedding dress. her tears wash over him, but like a marble statue, he never budges.
i'm only crazy sometimes. at other times, i know what's what.
third citizen and so did i. in truth, so did most of us. what we did, we did for the best. and though we agreed to his banishment, it wasn't what we wanted.
it's the equivalent of a death to take this poor girl away from the world! and life is so unfair, that this man lives! but how can she benefit from all this?
gentlemen, i hope you are well.
you're making excuses for yourselves!
it's a break that you can easily heal, and the cure not only saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonor.
listen, guildenstern, and you too, rosencrantz, listen as close as you can! (he gestures toward polonius )this big baby is still in diapers.
you've made a mess, you and your pack! should we go to the capitol?
show me how, good father.
yes, the second time around, since, as they say, old people become children again.
yes, where else?
this maid still loves angelo. logically, his unfair cruelty should have ended her love, but it's actually intensified it, the way water becomes violent and choppy when it hits a barrier. go to angelo. pretend to yield to his request, and obey his demands to the letter. but set some conditions: that you not spend much time together, that it be in the dark, that there be absolute silence, and that it be in a convenient place. when he agrees, and now here's the key part, we'll tell the wronged girl to go in your place. if their encounter later comes to light, it might compel him to compensate her. the result of all this: your brother is saved, your honor is maintained, poor mariana is helped, and the corrupt deputy is punished. i'll prepare the girl and make her ready for the encounter. if you think you can manage this, the double benefit outweighs any blame for the deception. what do you think?
(whispering to rosencrantz and guildenstern) i bet he's coming to tell me about the actors; just watch. (to polonius) you're right, sir, that happened on monday morning.
go, masters, get yourselves home. don't be dismayed. these people are a faction that would happily have these fears come true. go home, and show no sign of fear.
i like the idea already, and i hope it'll be successful.
my lord, i have news for you.
may the gods be good to us! come, masters, let's go home. i always said we were wrong to banish him.
a lot depends on your ability to pull it off. hurry over to angelo. if he begs you to sleep with him tonight, promise to satisfy him. i'll go to saint luke's; poor mariana is living there, in a country house. arrange things with angelo and come see me there, the sooner the better.
my lord, i have news for you. when roscius was an actor in ancient rome , 
we all did. but come, let's go home.
thank you for your help. goodbye, good father.
the actors have arrived, my lord.
i don't like this news.
no, but if you go on buying and selling men and women like beasts, everyone in the world will end up spawning bastards.
yawn, snore.
nor do i.
oh, heavens! what nonsense is this?
i swear, 
let's go to the capitol. i'd give half my wealth for this to be a lie!
life's become a lot less fun since the law took two crimes, prostitution and moneylending, and suppressed the one that was the most fun, while condoning the worse of the two. the thriving moneylender wraps himself in a warm fur coat, made of skins from the innocent lamb and trimmed in fur from the crafty fox, proving that craftiness is worth more than innocence.
, each actor arrived on his ass.
let's go.
come along, sir. bless you, good father friar this greeting makes no sense since friar means brother, hence the duke's mocking response father friar .
they are the best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical, one-act plays, or long poems shakespeare is making fun of the way his contemporaries classified drama. tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical, one-act plays, or long poems . the tragic playwright seneca is not too heavy for them to handle nor is the comic writer plautus too light. for formal plays or freer dramas, these are the best actors around.
do they still obey the roman?
and you, good brother father. how has this man offended you, sir?
oh, jephthah in the bible, jephthah unwittingly sacrifices his daughter by making a vow too hastily. the lines below in italics are lyrics from a popular song about jephthah. hamlet sings them. jephthah , judge of ancient israel, what a treasure you had!
i don't know what spell he has them under, but your soldiers pray to him before eating, talk about him throughout their meal, and thank him at the end. and you are being overlooked, sir, by your own men.
actually, sir, he has offended the law. and, sir, we take him to be a thief too, sir, because we found on him, sir, a strange device for picking locks presumably for picking the locks on chastity belts picking locks , which we have sent to the deputy.
what treasure did he have, my lord?
i can't help that now, not without risking our plan. he carries himself more proudly, even in front of me, than i thought he would when i decided to join with him. but that's always been his nature, and i have to excuse what can't be changed.
(to pompey) shame, sirrah a title used to address a male inferior sirrah ! a pimp, a wicked pimp! you support yourself by doing evil. do you ever stop to think what it is to stuff your mouth or clothe your back from such a filthy vice? say to yourself, i eat, dress myself, and live off abominable, beastly sex. can you believe your way of life is a life, when it's dependent on such stinking acts? change your ways, change your ways.
well, (sings) one fine daughter, and no more, whom he loved more than anything, .
yet i wish, sir, i mean for you personally, that you hadn't shared your command with him. i wish either that you had been the commander yourself, or else that you had given him the sole command.
yes, it does stink in a way, sir; but, sir, i would prove, 
(to himself) still talking about my daughter, i see.
i understand. rest assured that he must answer for what he's done, and he doesn't know what i can accuse him of. while to the naked eye it seems, and he thinks, that he's behaving fairly and that he's taking good care of the volscian state by fighting like a dragon and achieving victory as soon as he draws his sword, there's something he has failed to do that will break his neck or risk mine, whenever we come to our reconciliation.
no, if the devil has given you excuses for sin, you'll prove only that you belong to him. take him to prison, officer. punishment and religion must both be used on this crude beast before he improves.
aren't i right, jephthah, old man?
sir, i beg you, do you think he'll conquer rome?
he has to appear before the deputy, sir, who's already given him a warning. the deputy can't stand pimps, and if he is a pimp, and appears before him, he would be better off being anywhere but there.
if you're calling me jephthah, my lord, i do have a daughter i love more than anything, yes.
wherever he goes, they yield to him before he begins to attack. the young nobles of rome, the senators, and the patricians all support him. the tribunes aren't soldiers, and their people will be as quick to reverse their judgment of him as they were to throw him out. i think he'll be to rome like the fish hawk is to the fish: the fish will submit by its nature. at first he was a noble servant to them, but he couldn't handle the honors bestowed upon him. whether it was pride, winning in battle all the time always makes men prideful, or whether it was a failure of judgment that he was unable to take advantage of the opportunities he had, or whether it was just his nature not to evolve from wearing the helmet of a soldier to the sitting on the cushion of a senator, to command peace in the same austere way that he commanded the wars. one of these, he has some of each but none in their entirety, caused him to be feared and so despised that he was banished. but all his merits should stop us from listing his faults. time will tell whether one is judged as virtuous. powerful men think their power is praiseworthy, but nothing destroys power faster than publicly proclaiming it. one fire burns out another, one nail hammers out another nail, and righteousness and strength crumble under their own weight. come, let's go. caius, when rome is yours, you will be the poorest of them all. and then you'll be mine.
if only we were all, as some of us seem to be, as free from sin as this pimp is from hypocrisy!
no, that's not logical. hamlet means that if polonius has a daughter, it isn't because hamlet called him jephthah. no, that's not logical.
no, i won't go. you heard what his former general said, the one who loved him most dearly. he called me father. but so what? go, you that banished him, and fall down on your knees a mile before his tent and crawl to him, begging for mercy. no, if he refused to listen to cominius, i'll stay at home.
like your waist friars' robes were tied at the waist with a belt made of rope or cord like your waist , his neck will soon have a rope around it, sir.
what is logical, then, my lord?
he acted as if he didn't know me.
i see help coming, and bail. here's a gentleman and a friend of mine.
why,
do you hear?
hey there, noble pompey! oh dear, are you being paraded like a prisoner-of-war after the victorious caesar's chariot? what, aren't there any more girls just turned women who can be had for a handful of dollars? ha, don't you have any answers? how do you feel about the new regime? puts quite a damper on things, right? what do you say, old man? hasn't the world changed? what's your mood nowadays, a bit sad and silent? or how? what's the plan?
as if by chance, god knows, and then, you know, it happened, as you'd expect, if you want to know more, you can refer to the popular song, because now i have to stop.
he called me by my name only once, and i reminded him of our relationship and the blood we've shed together. he wouldn't answer to "coriolanus" or any other name. he was a kind of nothing, titleless, until he had forged himself a name out of the fire of burning rome.
this is getting worse and worse.
welcome, welcome to all of you. (he turns to one of the actors), oh, you, i'm glad to see you. (turns back to all of them), welcome, my good friends. (turns to another actor), oh, it's you! you've grown a beard since i saw you last. are you going to put a beard on me too? (turns to an actor dressed as a woman) boys played female dramatic roles in shakespeare's day. (turns to an actor dressed as a woman) , well hello, my young lady friend. you've grown as much as the height of a pair of platform shoes at least! i hope your voice hasn't changed yet. (to the whole company), all of you are most welcome here. we'll get right to business. first, a speech. come on, give us a little speech to whet our appetites. a passionate speech, please.
well now, this is all your doing! a pair of tribunes that have brought down the price of coal by letting rome be burned, what a noble way to be remembered!
how's my sweetheart, your boss-lady? is she still a madam?
which speech, my lord?
i reminded him how noble it was to grant pardons when they are least expected. he replied that it was an insufficient plea from the state that exiled him.
truthfully, sir, she's worn out all her prostitutes, and is herself getting treated for an std.
i heard you recite a speech for me once that was never acted out, or if it was, it was performed only once, since the play was not popular, like caviar for a slob who couldn't appreciate it. but the critics and i found it to be an excellent play, with well-ordered scenes that were clever but not fancy.
that's fair for him to say.
that's right, that's the way it goes: your fresh-faced whore ages into a heavily made-up madam. it's unavoidable. are you going to prison, pompey?
i remember one critic said there was no vulgar language to spice up the dialogue, and showing off on playwright's part. that critic called it an excellent play, containing things to reflect upon as well as sweet music to enjoy. i loved one speech in particular. it was when aeneas told dido about priam's dido, priam, and aeneas are characters in the roman poet's epic called the aeneid, which produced the dramatic spin-off hamlet is referring to here. aeneas told dido about priam's murder. if you happen to remember this scene, begin at line, let me see, how does it go? the rugged pyrrhus pyrrhus, the son of the greek hero achilles, came to troy at the end of the trojan war to avenge his father's death by killing priam, king of troy. pyrrhus hid inside the trojan horse with the other greek heroes. pyrrhus , strong as a tiger, no, that's wrong; it begins like this: savage pyrrhus, whose black armor was as dark plans, and was like the night when he crouched inside the trojan horse, has now smeared his dark armor with something worse. from head to foot he's now covered in red, decorated horribly with the blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons. the blood is baked to a paste by fires he set in the streets, fires that lend a terrible light to his horrible murders. boiling with anger and fire, and coated thick with hard-baked blood, his eyes glowing like rubies, the hellish pyrrhus goes looking for grandfather priam. sir, take it from there.
i tried to make him think of his personal friends. his answer to me was that he couldn't stop to pick them out from a pile of offensive, musty chaff. he said it was foolish to spare one or two poor grains from being burned and still smell the stink.
i am indeed, sir.
my god, that was well done, my lord, with the right accent and a good ear.
for one poor grain or two! i am one of those. his mother, his wife, his child, and this brave fellow, too, we are the grains. you are the musty chaff. your stink can be smelled above the moon, and we must be burnt for you.
not a bad thing, pompey. goodbye. go and say i sent you. for debt, pompey? or something else?
soon he finds priam failing in his battle against the greeks. his old sword, which priam cannot wield anymore, lies where it fell. an unfair opponent, pyrrhus rushes at priam, and in his rage he misses;
no, please, be patient. if you refuse to help when it's most needed, don't lecture us while we're in distress. if you'd plead on your country's behalf, surely your good words would do more to stop our countryman than any army we could raise.
for being a pimp, for being a pimp.
but the wind created by his sword is enough to make the weakened old man fall. just then the city of ilium, as if feeling this fatal blow to its ruler, collapses in flames, and the crash captures pyrrhus's attention. his sword, which was falling onto priam's white-haired head seemed to hang in the air. pyrrhus stood there like a man in a painting, doing nothing. but just as a raging thunderstorm is often interrupted by a moment's silence, and then soon after the region is split apart by dreadful thunderclaps, in the same way, after pyrrhus paused, his newly awakened fury set him to work again. when the cyclopses were making unbreakable armor for the god of war, their hammers never fell so mercilessly as pyrrhus's bloody sword now falls on priam. get out of here, lady luck, you whore! all you gods should come together to rob her of her powers, break all the spokes on her wheel of fortune, and send it rolling down the hills of heaven into the depths of hell.
no, i won't get involved.
well, then, put him in jail: if imprisonment is the punishment for being a pimp, then he deserves it. he's undoubtedly a pimp, and has been for a long time. born a pimp. goodbye, good pompey. give my regards to prison. you'll be a good husband now, pompey, you'll never leave home.
this speech is going on too long.
please, go to him.
i hope, sir, you'll post bail for me.
we'll have the barber trim it later, along with your beard. please, continue, players. this old man only likes the dancing or the sex scenes; he sleeps through all the rest. go on, come to the part about hecuba.
what would i do?
no, i won't, pompey. it's not in style now. i will pray, pompey, to increase your sentence. show an iron will while you're in iron chains. adieu french for "goodbye" adieu , pompey. god bless you, friar.
but who, ah, the sadness, had seen the muffled queen, 
see what your kindness toward martius can do for rome.
and you.
"the muffled queen"?
all right, but what if martius sends me back without listening to me, as he did with cominius? what then? i'll come back simply as a disappointed friend, grief-stricken with his unkindness? what if that happens?
does bridget still get dolled up, pompey, ha?
that's good. "the muffled queen" is good.
no, rome will thank you for your efforts because you intended well.
come along, sir, come.
running back and forth, spraying the flames with her tears, a cloth on that head where a crown had recently sat and a blanket instead of a robe wrapped around her body, which has withered from childbearing: anyone seeing her in such a state, no matter how spiteful he was, would have cursed lady luck for bringing her down like that. if the gods had seen her while she watched pyrrhus chopping her husband into bits, the terrible cry she uttered would have made all the eyes in heaven burn with hot tears, unless the gods don't care at all about human affairs.
i'll try. i think he'll listen to me. but it discourages me that he bit his lip and hummed at good cominius. martius wasn't approached skillfully, he hadn't eaten. when the veins are empty, our blood is cold, and then our outlook on the day is sour. we are unlikely to give or to forgive. but when we have stuffed ourselves with food and wine, we become more flexible than when we're stiff with hunger. so before i ask him, i'll be sure that he has eaten and is therefore likely to grant my request.
you won't bail me out, then, sir?
look how flushed the actor is, with tears in his eyes. all right, that's enough, please.
you know exactly how to access his kindness. you can't fail.
neither then, pompey, nor now. what's happening, friar? what's the news?
(to first player) very fine. i'll have you perform the rest of it soon. (to polonius), my lord, will you make sure the actors are made comfortable? make sure you're good to them, since what they say about us later will go down in history. it'd be better to have a bad epitaph on our graves than to have their ill will while we're alive.
have faith. whatever happens, i'll try to convince him. i'll know soon enough whether i have succeeded.
come along, sir, come.
my lord, i will give them all they deserve.
martius will never listen to him.
off to the doghouse, pompey. go.
good heavens, man, give them more than that! if you pay everyone what they deserve, would anyone ever escape a whipping? treat them with honor and dignity. the less they deserve, the more your generosity is worth. lead them inside.
no?
any news, friar, of the duke?
come, everyone.
i tell you, he's sitting on a golden throne, and his eyes are red enough to burn rome, and his feeling of having been wronged overwhelms his pity. i knelt before him, and he very quietly said, "rise," and without a word, he waved for me to leave. he sent me a letter saying what he will do, and he has sworn not to yield on his conditions. there is no hope unless, as i hear, his noble mother and his wife are able to convince him to have mercy on his country. so let's go then and urge them to hurry.
i don't know anything. can you tell me any news?
follow him, friends. we'll watch a whole play tomorrow. (to first player) my friend, can you perform the murder of gonzago?
stop there. who are you?
some say he's with the emperor of russia. others say that he's in rome. where do you think he is?
yes, my lord.
stop and go back.
i don't know, but wherever he is, i wish him well.
then we'll see that tomorrow night. by the way, if i were to compose an extra speech of twelve to sixteen lines and stick it into the play, you could learn it by heart for tomorrow, right?
you're good guards, but i assure you that i'm an officer of the state, and i've come to speak with coriolanus.
it was a crazy whim of his to sneak away from the city and pretend to be the commoner he was never born to be. lord angelo runs things well in his absence, he's hard on criminals.
yes, my lord.
where are you from?
he does a good job of it.
very well. follow that gentleman now, and be careful not to make fun of him.
from rome.
it wouldn't hurt him to go a little easier on sex. there's something too harsh in the way he's handling that, friar.
my good friends, i'll see you tomorrow. welcome to elsinore.
you may not pass. you must return. our general won't listen to romans anymore.
it is too widespread a vice. it needs a severe cure.
yes, my lord.
you'll see your rome consumed with fire before you'll speak with coriolanus.
yes, to tell the truth, this is a vice a lot of people practice. but it's impossible to stamp it out totally, friar. you'd have to stop people eating and drinking first. they say this angelo wasn't the result of a normal act between a man and woman. do you think that's true?
ah yes, good-bye to you both.
good men, if you've heard your general talk of rome and of his friends there, you've undoubtedly heard my name: menenius.
what was he the result of, then?
now i'm alone. oh, what a mean low-life i am! it's awful that this actor could force his soul to feel made-up feelings in a work of make-believe. he grew pale, shed real tears, became overwhelmed, his voice breaking with feeling and his whole being, even, meeting the needs of his act, and all for nothing. for hecuba!
even if that's true, go back. you can't get in here by virtue of your name.
some say a mermaid gave birth to him, some that he was conceived by two dried codfish. but it's a fact that when he pees, his urine is congealed ice. that i know to be true. and he's an impotent puppet, that's certain.
what is hecuba to him, or he to hecuba, that he would weep for her? just imagine what he would do if he had the cause for feeling that i do. he would drown the stage with his tears and burst the audience's ears with his terrible words, drive the guilty spectators crazy, terrify the innocent ones, confuse the ignorant ones, and astound absolutely everyone's eyes and ears. but what do i, a grim and uncourageous rascal, do? mope around like a dreamer, not even bothering with plans for revenge, and i can say nothing, nothing at all, on behalf of a king whose dear life was stolen. am i a coward? is there anyone out there who'll call me "villain" and slap me hard? pull off my beard? pinch my nose? call me the worst liar? by god, if someone would do that to me, i'd take it, because i'm a lily-livered man, otherwise, i would've fattened up the local vultures with the intestines of that low-life king a long time ago. bloody, inhuman villain! remorseless, treacherous, sex-obsessed, unnatural villain! ah, revenge! what an ass i am. i'm so damn brave. my dear father's been murdered, and i've been urged to seek revenge by heaven and hell, and yet all i can do is stand around cursing like a whore in the streets. damn it! i need to get myself together here! hmm.... i've heard that guilty people watching a play have been so affected by the artistry of the scene that they are driven to confess their crimes out loud.
i tell you, fellow, the general is my close friend. i've recorded his brave acts and proclaimed, perhaps exaggeratedly, his greatness as unparalleled. i've always supported my friends, of whom he's the closest, with the highest possible praise i could give without slipping into lies. although it's true that sometimes, like bowling on an uneven surface, i've thrown the ball too far and nearly praised him beyond his actual accomplishments. so you see, fellow, you must let me pass.
you're a funny guy, sir, and speak freely.
murder has no tongue, but miraculously it still finds a way to speak. i'll have these actors perform something like my father's murder in front of my uncle. i'll watch my uncle. i'll probe his conscience and see if he flinches. if he becomes pale, i know what to do. the ghost i saw may be the devil, and the devil has the power to assume a pleasing disguise, and so he may be taking advantage of my weakness and sadness to bring about my damnation. i need better evidence than the ghost to work with. the play's the thing to uncover the conscience of the king.
sir, if you've told as many lies on his behalf as you've spoken words that benefit yourself, you should not pass here. you act as if it were as virtuous to lie as it is to live honestly. go back.
well, what a cruel thing for him to do, to take a man's life because his penis rose up! would the absent duke have done something like this? before he would've hanged a man for fathering a hundred bastards, he would've paid for nursing a thousand. he had some understanding of prostitution. he knew the game, and that made him merciful.
and you can't put your heads together and figure out why he's acting so dazed and confused, ruining his peace and quiet with such dangerous displays of lunacy?
please, fellow, remember my name is menenius, and i've always been on your general's side.
i never heard the absent duke accused of womanizing. he wasn't inclined that way.
he admits he feels confused, but refuses to say why.
even if you've lied for him, as you say you have, i must follow his orders truthfully and say that you cannot pass. so go back.
oh, sir, you're wrong.
and he's not exactly eager to be interrogated. he's very sly and dances around our questions when we try to get him to talk about how he feels.
has he eaten yet, could you tell me? because i wouldn't want to speak with him until after dinner.
that's not possible.
did he treat you well when you saw him?
you're a roman, are you?
who, the duke? yes, your fifty-year-old beggar-woman, he'd habitually make a deposit in her dish. the duke was a little kinky. he'd get drunk, too, let me tell you.
yes, in a very gentlemanly way.
i am, just as your general is.
surely, you're being unfair to him.
but it seemed like he had to force himself to be nice to us.
then you should hate rome the way he does. you've banished your greatest hero from your gates and, in a violent popular ignorance, given your best defender to your enemy. so how can you think to counteract his plan for revenge with the meaningless groans of old women, the prayers of your virgin daughters, or the crippled pleas of a decayed, senile old man such as yourself? you think you can blow out the fire that is about to engulf your city in flames with such weak breath as this? if so, you're mistaken. go back to rome and prepare for your execution. you're condemned, and our general has sworn to grant you no reprieve or pardon.
sir, i was a close friend of his. the duke was a shy fellow, and i believe i know the reason for his sudden departure.
he didn't ask questions, but answered ours at length.
sirs, if your captain knew that i were here, he would treat me with respect.
what, please tell me, was the reason?
did you try tempting him with some entertainment?
come, my captain doesn't know you.
no, sorry. it's a secret that must stay locked in my mouth. but this i can tell you: the majority of his subjects thought the duke a wise man.
madam, some actors happened to cross our paths on the way here. we told hamlet about them, and that seemed to do him good.
i mean, your general.
wise! well, there's no doubt that he was.
they are here at court now, and i believe they've been told to give a performance for him tonight.
my general doesn't care about you. go back, i say, before i spill a half pint of your blood. back, this is as far you get. back!
a very superficial, ignorant, thoughtless fellow.
it's true, and he asked me to beg you both to attend.
no, but, fellow, fellow, 
you're either jealous, mad, or mistaken. the way he conducts his life and his role as a ruler by themselves must earn him a better reputation. judge him by his public actions and even the envious would see him as a scholar, a statesman, and a soldier. so, you don't know what you're talking about. or, if you do, you're spitefully trying to tarnish his name.
it makes me very happy to hear he's so interested. gentlemen, please try to sharpen his interest even more, and let this play do him some good.
what's going on?
sir, i know him, and i love him.
we will, my lord.
now, you fellow, i'll give my version of what just happened here. you'll know now that i'm well regarded by your general and that a lowly guard such as yourself can't keep me from coriolanus, he who is like a son to me. i wonder if after i talk with him, whether you'll be hanged or killed more cruelly in some prolonged and public way. watch now and worry for what's going to happen to you.
if you loved him you would know him better, and if you knew him better you would love him more.
dear gertrude, please give us a moment alone. we've secretly arranged for hamlet to come here so that he can run into ophelia. her father and i, justifiably acting as spies, will hide in the room and observe hamlet's behavior, to determine whether it's love that's making him suffer.
the glorious gods sit in hourly discussions about your personal prosperity, and they love you no less than your old father menenius does! oh, my son, my son! you're preparing fire for us. look, here's water to quench it. i was grudgingly persuaded to come to you, but because they assured me that no one other than myself could convince you, i've been sent here from the gates with sighs and beg you to pardon rome and your pleading countrymen. may the good gods calm your anger and turn the remains of it upon this villain here, who, like a block, has kept me from seeing you.
look, sir, i know what i know.
yes, i'll go. as for you, ophelia, i hope that your beauty is the reason for hamlet's insane behavior, just as i hope your virtues will return him to normal some day, for the good of both of you.
away!
i can hardly believe that, since you don't know what you're talking about. but, if the duke ever returns, as we pray he will, i challenge you to justify your comments in front of him. if you've spoken the truth, you should have the courage to defend it. it's my duty to summon you to testify. may i ask your name?
i hope so too, madam.
what do you mean, away?
sir, my name is lucio, and it's well known to the duke.
ophelia, come here., (to claudius) your majesty, we will hide. (to ophelia), read from this prayer book, so it looks natural that you're all alone. come to think of it, this happens all the time, people act devoted to god to mask their bad deeds.
i have neither wife, nor mother, nor child. my personal life is now eclipsed by other matters. though i seek my own revenge, the power to pardon belongs to the volsces. we had a friendship, but your ungrateful failure to defend me has poisoned it. pity will not remind me of what great friends we used to be. so go away. my ears rebuff your pleas with greater force than your gates will have against my army. but because i did care for you, take this. i wrote it for your sake.
he'll know you even better, sir, if i live to report you.
(to himself) how right he is! his words whip up my guilty feelings. the whore's pockmarked cheek made pretty with make-up is just like the ugly actions i'm disguising with fine words. what a terrible guilt i feel!
and would have sent it. i won't hear you speak another word, menenius. this man was my dearest friend in rome, aufidius. but look at him!
i'm not afraid of you.
i hear him coming. quick, let's hide, my lord.
you never change.
oh, you hope the duke will never come back, or you think i'm too weak an enemy. but i really can do you a little harm, you'll end up denying this.
the question is: is it better to be alive or dead? is it nobler to put up with all the nasty things that luck throws your way, or to fight against all those troubles by simply putting an end to them once and for all? dying, sleeping, that's all dying is, a sleep that ends all the heartache and shocks that life on earth gives us, that's an achievement to wish for. to die, to sleep, to sleep, maybe to dream. ah, but there's the catch: in death's sleep who knows what kind of dreams might come, after we've put the noise and commotion of life behind us. that's certainly something to worry about. that's the consideration that makes us stretch out our sufferings so long.
now, sir, is your name menenius?
i'll be hanged first. you're wrong about me, friar. but forget all this. can you tell me if claudio is to die tomorrow or not?
after all, who would put up with all life's humiliations, the abuse from superiors, the insults of arrogant men, the pangs of unrequited love, the inefficiency of the legal system, the rudeness of people in office, and the mistreatment good people have to take from bad, when you could simply take out your knife and call it quits? who would choose to grunt and sweat through an exhausting life, unless they were afraid of something dreadful after death, the undiscovered country from which no visitor returns, which we wonder about without getting any answers from and which makes us stick to the evils we know rather than rush off to seek the ones we don't? fear of death makes us all cowards, and our natural boldness becomes weak with too much thinking. actions that should be carried out at once get misdirected, and stop being actions at all. but shh, here comes the beautiful ophelia. pretty lady, please remember me when you pray.
you see, it's like a spell with great power. you know the way home again.
why should he die, sir?
hello, my lord, how have you been doing lately?
did you hear how they scolded us for keeping your greatness back?
why? for plugging a hole. i wish the duke were back again. his sexless deputy's abstinence policy will depopulate the province. even sparrows can't nest on his roof, because they're lecherous sparrows were considered sacred to venus, goddess of love, and thus symbols of sex because they're lecherous ! the duke would have punished sexual acts privately, he'd never publicly expose them. i wish he were back! claudio is condemned for getting undressed. goodbye, good friar. please pray for me. i tell you again, the duke was no choir boy, he would eat mutton on fridays a pun, referring both to eating meat (mutton) on fridays, forbidden to catholics, and to visiting prostitutes, called mutton in elizabethan slang he would eat mutton on fridays . he's not past it yet, and i tell you, he'd french-kiss a beggar, even if she smelled of moldy bread and garlic. say that i said so. goodbye.
very well, thank you. well, well, well.
why, do you think, i swoon?
neither political power nor noble character can escape criticism; even the most virtuous person can be stabbed in the back by slurs. what king is so strong he can bottle up the poison of a slandering tongue? but who's coming now?
my lord, i have some mementos of yours that i've been meaning to give back to you for a long time now. please take them.
i don't care about the world or about your general. i can barely think of things such as yourselves, you're so insignificant. a suicidal man doesn't fear being killed by someone else. let your general do his worst. may you live long and may your misery increase with age! i say to you what was said to me: away!
go on, take her to prison!
no, it wasn't me. i never gave you anything.
he's a noble fellow, i say.
my good lord, be good to me. your honor is said to be that of a merciful man, my good lord.
my lord, you know very well that you did, and wrote letters to go along with them, letters so sweetly written that they made your gifts even more valuable. their perfume is gone now, so take them back. nice gifts lose
the worthy fellow is our general. he's like a rock or an oak that the wind can't shake.
you've been warned two, three times, and you're still committing the same crime! this is enough to turn mercy itself into a cursing tyrant.
their value when the givers turn out not to be so nice. there, my lord.
tomorrow we'll lead our army to the walls of rome. as my partner in this attack, you must report to the volscian lords on how straightforwardly i've carried this out.
a madam for eleven years, your honor.
ha ha, are you good?
you have respected their aims entirely and blocked your ears against the general plea of rome. you've never had even a private whisper with your old friends who thought they might persuade you.
my lord, this is lucio's accusation against me. he got miss kate keepdown pregnant, back in the days when the duke was still here, and he promised to marry her. now his child will be fifteen months old on may day. i kept the kid myself, and now see how he goes out of his way to abuse me!
excuse me?
this last old man, whom with a broken heart i've sent back to rome, loved me better than a father. indeed, he treated me like a god. their last resort was to send him. though i turned him away, out of love for him i again offered the same terms they had previously refused and now cannot accept. that is all i have yielded to he who thought that he could do more. i'll no longer listen to any more pleas, made either by the state or by my private friends. ha! what shout is this?
that fellow is a dangerous fellow. bring him before me. take her away to prison! no more talking.
are you beautiful?
shall i be tempted to break my vow in the same moment that i made it? i will not.
provost, my colleague angelo won't change his mind, claudio must die tomorrow. furnish him with priests, to give him spiritual consolation. if my colleague possessed my sense of pity, this wouldn't be happening.
my lord, what are you talking about?
here comes my wife. then my mother, the honorable mold from which i was cast. and in her hand, the grandchild of her blood. but affection be gone! and break all natural ties and obligations! let it be virtuous to be unmovable.what is that curtsy worth? or those doe eyes, which can make the gods break their vows? i melt, and i'm no stronger than anyone else. for my mother to bow to me is as if mt. olympus would plead before a molehill. and my young boy has an imploring look, which by nature i don't want to deny. but let the volsces destroy rome and lay siege on italy, i'll never be so weak as to obey instinct. instead i will stand firm, as if a man were his own creator and had no family.
this friar's been with him, and helped him prepare for death.
i'm just saying that if you're good and beautiful, your goodness should have nothing to do with your beauty.
my lord and husband!
good evening, good father.
but could beauty be related to anything better than goodness?
everything looks different to me since i left rome.
bliss and goodness to you!
sure, since beauty's power can more easily change a good girl into a whore than the power of goodness can change a beautiful girl into a virgin. this used to be a great puzzle, but now i've solved it. i used to love you.
if we look different to you, it's because our suffering has changed us.
where are you from?
you certainly made me believe you did, my lord.
like a bad actor, i have forgotten my lines. to my complete disgrace, i don't know what to say. my dear family, forgive my cruelty but don't ask me to "forgive our romans." (virgilia kisses him) oh, a kiss as long as my exile, and as sweet as my revenge! by the jealous queen of heaven, i kiss only you, my dear; my lips have always been faithful. you gods! forgive me for not saluting the most noble mother of the world. sink, my knee, to the earth.
not from this country, though i happen to be here for the time being. i belong to a holy brotherhood, and have just come from rome, on special business from the vatican.
you shouldn't have believed me, since we're all rotten at the core, no matter how hard we try to be virtuous. i didn't love you.
i must demonstrate a more profound sign of my duty than that of common sons.
what's the news from abroad?
then i guess i was misled.
oh, stand up, blessed one! and let me, with no softer cushion than the stone floor, kneel before you. though it's inappropriate for me to pay respect to you, it is the child that should bow to the parent.
none, except that goodness is so sick that only death can cure it. people only want the latest thing, and it's as dangerous to be faithful as it is virtuous to be promiscuous. there's barely enough honesty left for it to be safe to get involved with people, but there's enough blind trust to doom partnerships. the wisdom of the world runs on paradoxes like this. it's old news, but everyday news. tell me, sir, what sort of man was the duke?
get yourself to a convent "nunnery" could mean either convent or brothel. convent at once. why would you want to give birth to more sinners? i'm fairly good myself, but even so i could accuse myself of such horrible crimes that it would've been better if my mother had never given birth to me. and
what's this? you're kneeling before me, your chastised son? then let the pebbles on the beach rise up the stars and let the mutinous winds blow the proud cedars into the fiery sun. impossible things are now easily possible. (he helps her up.)
someone who, above everything else, truly wanted to know himself.
i am arrogant, vengeful, ambitious, with more ill will in me than i can fit into my thoughts, and more than i have time to carry it out in. why should people like me be crawling around between earth and heaven? every one of us is a criminal. don't believe any of us. hurry to a convent. where's your father?
you're my warrior; i helped make you what you are. do you recognize this woman?
what sort of things did he enjoy?
he's at home, my lord.
the noble sister of the consul publicola, the moon of rome, pure as the icicle that forms from the frost of purest snow and hangs on diana's temple: dear valeria!
he enjoyed seeing someone else happy more than doing something that made himself happy, an even-tempered man. but let's leave him to his affairs, with a prayer that they'll be prosperous, and tell me how claudio is. i understand you've visited him.
lock him in, so he can play the fool in his own home only. good-bye.
(showing young martius) here is your miniature replica, who in time may grow to be exactly like you.
he claims to have received no unfair treatment from his judge, but willingly yields to the law's verdict. out of human weakness, he'd formed many deceptive hopes about a reprieve. but gradually i showed him these made no sense, and now he is ready to die.
oh, dear god, please help him!
may the god of soldiers, with the consent of supreme jove, make your thoughts be noble. and may you be invulnerable to shame, stand firm in the wars like a great beacon for sailors, enduring every sudden blast of wind and helping those that look to you for guidance!
you have fulfilled your duty to both god and the prisoner. i pleaded for the poor man as much as i could, without giving offense, but my fellow judge is so severe, i swear, he's like justice itself.
if you marry, i'll give you this curse as your wedding present, be as clean as ice, as pure as the driven snow, and you'll still get a bad reputation. get yourself to a convent, at once. good-bye. or if you have to get married, marry a fool, since wise men know far too well that you'll cheat on them. good-bye.
on your knee, sir. (young martius kneels)
if his own behavior matches the strictness of his judgments, it's to his credit. but if he slips, he's written his own sentence.
dear god, please make him normal again!
that's my brave boy!
i'm going to visit the prisoner. goodbye.
i've heard all about you women and your cosmetics too. god gives you one face, but you paint another on top of it. you dance and prance and lisp; you call god's creations by pet names, and you excuse your sexpot ploys by pleading ignorance. come on, i won't stand for it anymore. it's driven me crazy. i hereby declare we will have no more marriage. whoever is already married (except one person i know) will stay married, all but one person. everyone else will have to stay single. get yourself to a convent, fast.
even he, your wife, this lady, and myself, plead before you.
peace be with you!
oh, how noble his mind used to be, and how lost he is now! he used to have a gentleman's grace, a scholar's wit, and a soldier's strength. he used to be the jewel of our country, the obvious heir to the throne, the one everyone admired and imitated. and now he has fallen so low! and of all the miserable women who once enjoyed hearing his sweet, seductive words, i am the most miserable. a mind that used to sing so sweetly is now completely out of tune, making harsh sounds instead of fine notes. the unparalleled appearance and nobility he had in the full bloom of his youth has been ruined by madness. o, how miserable i am to see hamlet now and know what he was before!
please, stop. or, if you must ask, remember this first: don't think that i deny you personally, but i cannot grant your pleas because i have sworn not to. don't ask me to dismiss my soldiers or to yield to the common people of rome. don't tell me the ways in which i seem unnatural. don't try to mitigate my rage and need for vengeance with your colder reasons.
(to himself) he who wants to be a ruler and enact heaven's justice should be as holy as he is severe. he should find in himself a model of proper conduct, the grace to stand firm, and the strength to go forward, punishing others no more or less than he'd punish his own sins. shame on him who cruelly strikes and kills others for the very faults he possesses! shame on angelo six times over, for weeding out my vice while nurturing his own! oh, what evil an angelic-looking man can hide in himself! how this seemingly virtuous behavior, born out of sin, can deceive everyone! it's like a spider web that traps small sins like small insects, but breaks when anything large and heavy touches it. i must combat vice with cunning. tonight angelo will sleep with his rejected, former fiance. by deceit, the deceiver will be forced to pay for his wrongful demands, and fulfill his old contract.
love? his feelings don't move in that direction. and his words, although they were a little disorganized, weren't crazy. no, his sadness is hatching something, like a hen does sitting on an egg. what hatches very well may be dangerous. so to prevent any harm being done, i've made a quick executive decision: he'll be sent to england to try to get back the money they owe us. with any luck, the sea and new countries will push out these thoughts that have somehow taken root in his mind. what do you think of this plan?
oh, no more, no more! you've said you won't grant us anything. we have nothing else to ask other than what you've already refused. but we'll ask that if you fail to grant our request, blame will be laid on your stubbornness. therefore listen to us.
(singing) take, oh take those lips away, that swore such sweet lies, and those eyes, which trick the morning by shining bright as the sun at dawn. but give back, give back my kisses, which seal my love, but seal it in vain, seal it in vain.
it should work. but i still believe that his madness was caused by unrequited love., hello, ophelia. you don't have to tell us what lord hamlet said.
aufidius, and you volsces, come here. we won't listen to anything from rome in private. what is your request?
stop singing, and leave, quickly. here comes a man whose advice has often calmed me down.
we heard everything., my lord, do whatever you like, but if you like this idea, let his mother the queen get him alone and beg him to share his feelings with her. i'll hide and listen in. if she can't find out what his secret is, then send him off to england or wherever you think best.
even if we were silent and didn't speak, our clothing and the condition of our bodies would betray the lives we've led since your exile. think how we three are worse off than all living women, because seeing you, a sight that should make our eyes flow with tears of joy and our hearts dance with relief, constrains our eyes from weeping and shakes our hearts with fear and sorrow to make the mother, wife, and child see the son, the husband, and the father tearing his country's bowels out. your hatred will kill us poor people. you deny our prayers to the gods, which is the only comfort we have, and if we can't pray, and pray for our country, where will we go if you succeed, where will we go? alas, either we must lose the country, our dear mother, or else we must lose you, our comfort in the country. we will inevitably face tragedy, but we do have a wish for one side to win. either you must, as a traitor, be led with handcuffs thorough our streets, or else triumphantly march on your ruined country and wear the medal for having bravely shed your wife and children's blood. for myself, son, i don't intend to rely on fortune until these wars end. if i can't persuade you to reach a noble compromise with both sides rather than seek total destruction, when you march to assault your country you'll be treading, and believe me about this, on your mother's womb, which brought you into this world.
i beg your pardon, sir. i wish you hadn't found me listening to music. please excuse me, and believe me, it drove away my joy and nurtured my sorrow.
that's how we'll do it, then. when important people start to show signs of insanity, you have to watch them closely.
yes, and mine that gave you this boy, to keep your name alive.
that's good, though music often has a magical power to make the bad seem good and encourage good people to misbehave. please tell me, has anybody been asking for me here today? i promised to meet someone here about this time.
perform the speech just as i taught you, musically and smoothly. if you exaggerate the words the way some actors do, i might as well have some newscaster read the lines. don't use too many hand gestures; just do a few, gently, like this. when you get into a whirlwind of passion on stage, remember to keep the emotion moderate and smooth. i hate it when i hear a blustery actor in a wig tear a passion to shreds, bursting everyone's eardrums so as to impress the audience on the lower levels of the playhouse, who for the most part can only appreciate loud noises and pantomime shows. i would whip a guy for making a tyrant sound too tyrannical. that's as bad as those old plays in which king herod ranted. please avoid doing that.
you won't tread on me. i'll run away until i'm bigger, but then i'll fight.
no one's been asking for you. i've been sitting here all day.
i will, sir.
i'll become tender like a woman if i look at your faces. i've sat too long.
i believe you; she's here now. may i ask you to leave for a little while? i'll be with you shortly, and it'll be to your advantage.
but don't be too tame, either, let your good sense guide you. fit the action to the word and the word to the action. act natural at all costs. exaggeration has no place in the theater, where the purpose is to represent reality, holding a mirror up to virtue, to vice, and to the spirit of the times. if you handle this badly, it just makes ignorant people laugh while regular theater-goers are miserable, and they're the ones you should be keeping happy.
no, don't leave us now. if it were the case that our request was to save the romans and thereby destroy the volsces, whom you serve, you might condemn us for poisoning your honor. but no, our appeal is for you to reconcile with them so that the volsces may say, "we have shown mercy," and the romans may say, "we received mercy," and both sides will salute you and cry, "may you be blessed for making this peace!" you know, great son, that the outcome of war is uncertain. but it's certain that if you conquer rome, the benefit you'll reap in so doing is a name whose repetition will be plagued with curses. you'll be remembered with these words: "the man was noble, but with his last attack he gave up his nobility, destroyed his country, and his name remains forever hated." speak to me, son. you've aspired to great honor, to behave like a god, to tear apart the sky with thunder and yet throw your lightning bolt so that it would only split an oak. why don't you speak? do you think it's honorable for a noble man to always remember how he has been wronged? daughter, speak, he doesn't like your weeping. speak, boy, perhaps your childishness will move him more than our reasons can. there's no man in the world more tied to his mother, and yet here he lets me prattle on like a common criminal. never in your life have you done your dear mother any favors, while she, poor woman, who didn't want to have another child, has cared for you while you were at war and safely home, heaped with honors. if you think my request is unfair, then turn me down. but if it's not, then you're a liar and the gods will punish you for failing to give me what you owe me as a son. he turns away. down, ladies. let's shame him by getting on our knees. his surname, coriolanus, has more pride than pity for our prayers. down! this is the end. (the women and young martius kneel) we'll go home to rome and die among our neighbors. wait, look. this boy, who doesn't know what's going to happen to him but kneels and holds up his hands for fellowship, lends more strength to our petition than you have strength to deny. come, let's go. this fellow has a volscian mother, his wife is in corioles, and his child looks just like him by chance. send us away. i'll be silent until our city is on fire, and then i'll speak a little.
i'm always grateful to you.
i've seen actors who are highly praised, but who, not to be too rude here, can't even talk or walk like human beings. they bellow and strut about like weird animals that were made to look like men, but very badly.
(crying) oh, mother, mother! what have you done? look, the heavens are opening, the gods are looking down and laughing at this unnatural scene. oh, my mother, mother! oh! you have won a happy victory for rome. but for your son, believe it, oh, believe it, because you have convinced him, he's now in mortal danger. but let it come. aufidius, though i cannot fight this war for you, i'll make arrange a peaceful settlement, fair to both sides. now, good aufidius, if you were in my place, wouldn't you have listened to your mother and done as i did, aufidius?
welcome, and perfect timing. what's the news from our favorite deputy?
i hope we've corrected that fault pretty well in our company, sir.
i was moved by what she said.
he has a garden surrounded by a brick wall, whose western side is backed by a vineyard. leading to that vineyard is a gate of wooden planks that you open with this larger key. this other key opens a little door that leads from the vineyard to the garden. i've promised to meet him there, in the dark middle of the night.
oh, correct it completely. make sure that the clowns do not ad-lib, since some of them will make certain dumb audience members laugh mindlessly at them, while an important issue in the play needs to be addressed. it's bad behavior for an actor, anyway, and displays a pitiful ambition to hog the limelight on stage.
i know you were! and, sir, it is no small achievement to make me cry tears of compassion. but, good sir, tell me that you'll make peace. for my part, i won't go to rome, i'll go back with you. and please, support me in this effort. oh, mother! wife!
but do you know how to find the way there?
so, my lord, will the king be attending the performance?
(aside) i'm glad you've distinguished between your mercy and your honor. i'll be able to rebuild my former fortune because of that distinction.
i've noted it carefully, he gave me the directions twice, whispering the details with care and using gestures to explain.
yes, he will, and the queen as well.
yes, so it will go. to volumnia and virgilia
are there any other agreed-on signals she has to give?
tell the actors to hurry.
but we'll drink together, and you'll bring back a signed peace treaty, not just our word. come with us. ladies, you deserve to have a temple built for you. all the swords of italy and her allies couldn't have made this peace.
no, none, only a visit in the dark. and i've let him know i can only stay a short time, because i told him a servant would be waiting for me, under the pretense that i was coming about my brother.
will you two help them get ready?
do you see, beyond the corner of the capitol, beyond the cornerstone?
you've handled it well. i haven't told mariana a word of this yet. hey, you in there! come here!
yes, my lord.
what is that?
(to mariana) please, let me introduce you to this girl. she's here to help you.
well, hello there, horatio!
if you can block it with your little finger, there is some hope that the ladies of rome, especially his mother, might prevail with him. but i don't think there is any hope. our fate is sealed. our throats wait to be slit.
that's what i want to do.
here i am at your service, my dear lord.
is it possible that a man can change so much in so short a time?
do you believe that i've got your best interests at heart?
horatio, you're the best man i've ever known.
there's a difference between a caterpillar and a butterfly, but butterflies were once caterpillars. this martius has grown from man to dragon: he has wings, he's more than a creeping thing.
good friar, i know you do, and that you've found a way to help.
oh, sir, 
he loved his mother dearly.
then take the hand of your new friend, who has a tale to tell you. i'll wait for you until you're ready, but hurry, night's falling.
don't think i'm flattering you. what could i hope to get from you, who've got nothing but your charm to support you in life? why would anyone flatter a poor person? no, keep flattery for kissing the hands of those who can pay well. you understand? ever since i've been a free agent in my choice of friends, i've chosen you because you take everything life hands you with calm acceptance, grateful for both good and bad. blessed are those who mix emotion with reason in just the right proportion, making them strong enough to resist the whims of lady luck. show me the person who's master of his emotions, and i'll put him close to my heart, in my heart of hearts, as i do you. but i'm talking too much. the point is, there's a play being performed for the king tonight. one of the scenes comes very close to depicting the circumstances of my father's death, as i described them to you. watch my uncle carefully when that scene begins. if his guilty secret does not reveal itself, then that ghost was just a devil, and my hunch wasn't, in fact, worth anything.
he also loved me. he won't remember his mother any more than an eight-year-old horse would. the tartness of his face makes ripe grapes go sour. when he walks, he moves like a war machine, and the ground sinks beneath his feet. he's able to pierce armor with his eye, he talks like a death knell, and his voice itself is an assault. he sits on his throne, looking like a statue of alexander the great. his orders are carried out as soon as he gives them. all that he lacks to be a god is immortality and a heaven to rule.
will you walk with me?
watch him closely. i'll stare at him too, and afterward we'll compare notes on him.
he lacks the mercy of a god, if you're telling the truth.
oh, you people of high rank! millions of treacherous eyes are fixed on you, accompanied by a mass of hostile rumors that follow everything you do. a thousand imaginations make you the source of their silly fantasies and torture you with their delusions.
my lord, i'll watch him as closely as i would a thief. i won't miss a trick.
i'm giving a sketch of his character. let's see how much mercy his mother gets out of him. there's no more mercy in him than there is milk in a male tiger. our poor city will soon find this out, and it's all because of you.
welcome back. what did you decide?
they're coming. i can't talk now. take your seat.
may the gods be good to us!
she'll do it, father, if you recommend it.
so how's my nephew hamlet doing?
no, in this case the gods won't be good to us. when we banished him, we dishonored them. and now he's returning to break our necks, which shows that they don't respect us.
i don't just recommend it. i beg her to do it.
wonderful! i eat the air, like chameleons do. i'm positively stuffed with air, i eat so much of it.
sir, if you want to save your life, go home immediately. the people have taken custody of your fellow tribune and are hauling him up and down the street, all swearing that if the roman ladies don't return with a peaceful resolution, they'll torture him to death.
when you leave him, all you have to do is say softly, "now remember my brother."
i have no idea what you're talking about, hamlet. you're not answering my question.
what's the news?
don't worry about me.
mine, neither. (to polonius) my lord, you performed in amateur dramatic productions in college, right?
good news, good news! the ladies have prevailed, the volsces have retreated, and martius is gone! rome has never had a happier day. not even the expulsion of the tarquins tops this.
and, gentle daughter, don't worry for yourself. he is your husband-to-be, so it's no sin for you two to sleep together, your valid claim as his wife allows the deception. come on, let's go. we have to sow the seeds before we can reap the harvest.
indeed i did, my lord. i was considered to be quite a good actor.
friend, are you certain this is true? is it absolutely certain?
come here, you. can you cut off a man's head?
what role did you play?
as certain as i know the sun is fire. where have you been that you doubt it? the tide has never blown more quickly through an arch as this reassuring news has blown through the gates. why, look here!
if the man's a bachelor, sir, i can. but if he's a married man, he's also his wife's head, and i can never cut off a woman's head.
i played julius caesar. i was killed in the capitol. brutus killed me.
the trumpets, trombones, strings and pipes, drums and cymbals, and the shouting romans sparkle in the sun. listen!
come on, sir, spare me your jokes and give me a straight answer. claudio and barnardine are to die tomorrow morning. here in our prison we have a public executioner, who needs a helper. if you'll take on the job of assisting him, it'll free you from your chains. if you don't, you'll have to serve your full sentence, with a fierce whipping before you're released because you've been a notorious pimp.
that was brutish of them, to kill so capital a guy. , are the actors ready?
this is good news. i'll go meet the ladies. this volumnia is worth of a city full of consuls, senators, and patricians, and she's worth a sea and land full of tribunes. you have prayed well today. this morning i thought the chance that you'd live was one in ten thousand. look how happy they are!
sir, i've been an illegal pimp for longer than i can remember, but i'll be happy to be a legal hangman. i'd be glad for my new partner to teach me.
yes, my lord. they're ready whenever you are.
first, may the gods bless you for your good news, and then accept my thanks.
hey, abhorson the name combines the words "abhor" and "whoreson" (son of a whore) abhorson ! where are you, abhorson? abhorson (the executioner) enters.
come here, my dear hamlet. sit by me.
sir, we have all great cause to give great thanks.
did you call, sir?
no thanks, my good mother. there's a nicer piece of work right here. (he sits down near ophelia )
are they near the city?
here's a fellow to help you with tomorrow's executions. if he works out, settle on an annual salary and let him stay here with you. if he doesn't, use him just for now and then fire him. he can't claim to be too good for the work since he's been a pimp.
(to claudius) hey, did you notice that?
they're just about to enter.
a pimp, sir? to hell with him! he'll discredit our profession.
my lady, should i lie in your lap?
we'll meet them and join the celebration.
go on, sir. you two are worth the same. no more than a featherweight's difference, anyway.
no, my lord.
behold our savior, the life of rome! call all your tribes together, praise the gods, and make triumphant fires. throw flowers before them. take back the cries that banished martius and bring him back by welcoming his mother. cry, "welcome, ladies, welcome!"
sir, would you please, for you do have a pleasing face, except for your hanging expression, tell me if you call your job a profession?
i mean, with my head in your lap?
welcome, ladies, welcome!
yes, sir, a profession.
yes, my lord.
go tell the lords of the city that i'm here. give them this paper. once they've read it, ask them to go to the marketplace. i'll be there to confirm its truthfulness for them and for the common people. he whom i accuse has entered through the city's gates and intends to appear before the people, hoping to explain himself with words. hurry.
i've heard it said that painting, sir, is a profession, and since whores, who are in my field, paint their faces, they prove my occupation is a profession. but i'll be hanged if i can imagine how hanging is a profession.
did you think i was talking about sex?
most welcome!
sir, it is a profession.
i think nothing in shakespeare's time, "nothing" (or " ") was slang for the vagina. nothing , my lord.
how are you, general?
can you prove it?
that's a nice thought to lie between a girl's legs.
like a man destroyed by his own kindness and killed by his compassion.
a thief steals and puts on the clothes of an honest man. if the thief thinks the clothes don't make him seem honest enough, a truly honest man will think that's appropriate. if the thief thinks the clothes make him seem extra honest, then the thief thinks the disguise fits just right. so someone is always happy with the way the disguise works for the thief.
what is, my lord?
most noble sir, if you still want to work together, we'll rid you of your great threat.
have you reached an agreement?
nothing.
sir, i don't know yet. we must see how the people react.
sir, i'll work for him, because i think a hangman's job is a sorrier one than a pimp's, he asks forgiveness more often an executioner traditionally asked the condemned person to forgive him just before the execution he asks forgiveness more often .
you're in a good mood tonight, my lord.
the people won't know how to react if there's no rivalry between you two, but whoever loses leaves the other man with power over everything.
you, fellow, have your block and your axe ready tomorrow at four o'clock.
who, me?
i know, and my reason for attacking him is well founded. i put him in this position of power, and i sacrificed my honor for his loyalty. he became so highly esteemed that he watered his new plants with the dew of flattery. he seduced my friends by changing his nature, he was never known before as anything other than rough, unswayable, and unrestrained.
come on, pimp, i'll show you the ropes. follow me.
yes, my lord.
sir, his stubbornness when he was being considered for consul is why he lost. he wouldn't humble himself.
i want to learn, sir. and i hope, if you ever get the chance to use me for your own execution, you'll find me ready. because, really, i owe you a good turn for your kindness.
oh god, who is, by the way, the best comic of them all. what can you do but be happy? look how cheerful my mother is, only two hours after my father died.
that's what i was about to say: being banished for his stubbornness, he came to my house and put my knife to his throat. i took him in, made him joint commander of my army, let him do whatever he wanted. i even let him choose men from among my soldiers to carry out his agenda, my best and freshest men. i served his vision myself, helped him do the deeds that he took all the credit for. he wronged me in becoming so prideful. in the end, i looked like his follower, not his partner, and he treated me like i was just a soldier-for-hire.
call barnardine and claudio here. i pity one, but not the other, even if he were my brother, as he's a murderer.
no, my lord, it's been four months.
that's what he did, my lord. the army was astonished by it. and finally, when he was able to conquer rome and we could have had the spoils and glory, 
look, claudio, here's your death warrant. it's now dead midnight, and by a.m. tomorrow you must be laid to eternal rest. where's barnardine?
as long as that? well, in that case these mourning clothes can go to hell. i'll get myself a fur-trimmed suit. good heavens, he died two months ago and hasn't been forgotten yet? in that case, there's reason to hope a man's memory may outlive him by six months. but he's got to build churches for that to happen, my lady, or else he'll have to put up with being forgotten, like the hobby-horse in the popular song that goes, "heigh-ho, heigh-ho, the hobby-horse is forgotten."
that's why i'll use all my strength against him. he sold us out, forfeiting the blood and labor of our great plan because of a few drops of women's tears, which are as worthless as lies. therefore he must die, and i'll reassert my power by taking him down. but look!
as fast asleep as the most innocent of exhausted laborers. he won't wake up.
trumpets play. the pantomime show begins. a king and queen enter and embrace lovingly. she kneels before him and resists his passion. he lifts her up and lays his head on her neck. he lies down on a bank of flowers. when she sees him sleeping, she leaves. another man comes in, takes the crown from the king, pours poison in the sleeping man's ear, and leaves. the queen returns and finds the king dead. she becomes hysterical. the killer comes back with three others and calms the queen. the body is carried away. the killer woos the queen with gifts. she is cold toward him for a while but then relents and accepts his advances.
you returned home like a messenger, you weren't properly welcomed. but he comes back to a loud celebration.
who could do him any good, anyway? well, go, prepare yourself. (knocking is heard offstage)
what does this mean, my lord?
and ignorant fools, whose children he has killed, tear their stupid throats as they sing his praises.
what's that noise? (to claudio) heaven give your spirits comfort!
this means we're having some mischievous fun.
seize your opportunity now, before he speaks and convinces the people with whatever he plans to say. let him feel your sword, we support you. when he lies dead, you can tell the people what he did from your perspective. his version of the story will be buried along with his body.
in a minute. i hope it's some pardon or reprieve for gentle claudio.
this pantomime was probably a summary of the play.
say no more. here come the lords.
welcome, father.
this guy will tell us everything. actors can't keep a secret. they'll tell all.
this celebration welcomes you home.
the best, most wholesome night spirits surround you, good provost! who's been here lately?
will he tell us what that pantomime meant?
i don't deserve it. but, worthy lords, have you carefully read the letter i wrote you?
no one, since the curfew bell rung at : p.m. curfew bell rang.
sure, or anything else you show him. as long as you aren't ashamed to show it, he won't be ashamed to tell you what it means.
we have.
not isabel?
you're naughty. i'm watching the play.
and we're sad to hear it. whatever mistakes he made before this last one, i think we could have forgiven with light punishment. but stopping the attack when it was about to begin, squandering the advantage of our army' position, leaving us to pay the cost of raising that army, and making a peace treaty when the enemy was weak and could have been conquered, there's no excuse for this.
no.
we beg you most courteously to be patient with us and watch our humble tragedy.
here he comes. you'll hear how he tells it.
someone will be, then, before long.
was that the prologue or the inscription on some wedding ring?
hail, lords! i have returned as your soldier, no more loyal to my country than when i left here. i remain under your great command. you should know that i have successfully won the bloody battles that brought your army to the gates of rome. the spoils we've brought home outweigh the bodies of those we killed by more than a third. we've made peace, which brings honor to the people of antium as much as it shames the people of rome. and we here present, signed by the roman consuls and patricians, and with the seal of the senate, the treaty we've agreed to.
is there any news to give comfort to claudio?
it was a bit short, my lord.
don't read it, noble lords. instead, tell the traitor that he has abused your powers to the highest degree.
there's comfort in hope.
yes, as short as a woman's love.
traitor! how's that?
angelo's a cruel deputy.
it's been thirty years since we were married.
yes, traitor, martius!
no, no. his life parallels the same straight line that his mighty justice draws. with religious restraint, he suppresses in himself the same impulses he persecutes in others. if he were stained with the sort of sins he punishes, then he'd be a tyrant. but because he's virtuous, he's fair. (knocking is heard offstage)
i hope we stay in love for thirty more years! but i'm sad. you've been so gloomy lately, so unlike your usual cheerful self, that i worry something is wrong. but don't let this upset you, since women are too afraid in love, for them, love and fear go hand in hand. you know very well how much i love you, and my fear is just as deep. when someone's love is great, the little worries become very big. so when you see someone who worries a lot about little things, you know they're really in love.
"martius"!
they're here.
my love, i will have to leave you soon. my body is growing weak, and i will leave you behind in this beautiful world, honored and much loved. perhaps you'll find another husband, 
yes, "martius." caius martius. do you think i'll honor you with that stolen name, coriolanus, that you took in corioles? you lords and heads of state, he has treacherously betrayed your mission and given up your city of rome, and i mean "your city", because of a few tears from his wife and mother. he has broken his sworn oath like a rotten braid of silk, never following the advice of his fellow officers, but at his mother's tears he cried and gave away your victory. the young attendants blushed and the courageous men looked at each other and wondered what to think.
this provost is a nice man. it's rare that a hardened jailer has sympathy for his fellow men. (knocking is heard offstage)
oh, damn everyone else! remarrying would be treason to my heart. curse me if i take a second husband. when a woman takes a second husband, it's because she's killed off the first.
do you hear this, mars?
what is that noise? that messenger's so impatient he's going to hurt that poor door with his knocking.
(to himself) harsh!
don't invoke the god of war, you boy of tears!
he's stuck there until the officer at the gate wakes up to let him in. the officer's up now.
someone might marry a second time for money, but never for love. any time i kissed my second husband in bed, i'd kill the first one all over again.
ha!
haven't you received any order yet countermanding claudio's execution tomorrow?
i know that's what you think now, but people change their minds. often our intentions are strong at first, but as time goes on they weaken, just like an apple sticks to the tree when it is unripe but falls to the ground once it ripens. the promises we make to ourselves in emotional moments lose their power once the emotion passes. great grief and joy may rouse us to action, but when the grief or joy have passed, we're no longer motivated to act. joy turns to grief in the blink of an eye, and grief becomes joy just as quickly. this world is not made for either one to last long in, and it's no surprise that even our loves change along with our luck. it's still a mystery to be solved whether luck controls love, or love controls luck. when a great man has a run of bad luck, watch how followers desert him, and when a poor man advances to an important position, he makes friends with the people he used to hate. love is unreliable. a person with lots of money will always have friends, while one fallen on hard times makes an enemy of any friend he turns to for money. but back to my original point, what we want and what we get are always at odds. we can have our little dreams, but the fates decide our futures. you think now you'll never remarry, but that thought will die with me, your first husband.
no more.
none, sir, none.
may the earth refuse me food and the heavens go dark, may i have no rest day and night, may my trust and hope turn to despair, may the gloom of a prison overtake me, and may my every joy be turned to sorrow. may i know no peace either in this life or the next one, if i become a wife again after i am a widow.
incalculable liar, you make my heart swell beyond the bounds of my chest. "boy"! oh, slave! forgive me, lords, this is the first time that i've ever been forced to scold. my grave lords, you must judge this lowlife to be the liar. even his own version of events, he who has scars from my sword on his body and must carry the mark of my victory to his grave, will confirm that he's the liar.
even though it's almost dawn, provost, you'll have news before morning.
nice vow, but what if she breaks it?
that's enough, both of you. hear me speak.
perhaps you know something. but i don't think any reprieve is coming. there's no precedent for it. besides, lord angelo declared the opposite, in public, from the judge's bench.
you have made this vow with deep sincerity. my dear, leave me alone now awhile. my mind is getting foggy, and i would like to sleep and escape this endless day.
cut me to pieces, volsces. men and lads, stain your swords with my blood. "boy"! miserable liar! if you've written your histories accurately, it's recorded there that like a wolf in a hen house, i destroyed your volscians in corioli. i did it alone. "boy"!
this is his lordship's servant.
sleep tight, and may nothing come between us.
noble lords, remember that it was simply good luck that allowed this prideful sinner to cause you this shame, he who now stands before your own eyes and ears.
and here comes claudio's pardon.
madam, how are you liking this play?
let him die for it.
(presenting a paper) my lord has sent you this note, and charged me to tell you not to swerve from the smallest item in it, not the time, details, or anything else. good morning, since i gather it's almost morning.
the lady's overdoing it, i think.
tear him to pieces! do it now! he killed my son! my daughter! he killed my cousin marcus! he killed my father!
i will obey him.
oh, but she'll keep her word.
peace! stop! no outrage. peace! the man is noble and his fame is known around the world. we will review his most recent offenses fairly in the court of law. stop, aufidius, don't disturb the peace.
(to himself) this is his pardon, bought by the same sin angelo committed. crimes spread quickly when those in power perpetrate them as well. when evildoers extend mercy, they widen mercy's grasp, pardoning other sinners because they love the sin. now, sir, what's the news?
do you know the plot? is there anything offensive in it?
(drawing his sword) oh, i wish i could lawfully kill him and his whole family with my sword.
i told you. lord angelo, thinking me careless in my duties maybe, is putting unusual pressure on me. it's strange, he's never done this before.
no, no, it's just a joke, a little jibe but all in good fun. not offensive at all.
contemptuous villain!
please, let's hear the letter.
what's the play called?
kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!
(reads) "whatever you may hear to the contrary, have claudio executed by four o'clock, and barnardine in the afternoon. reassure me by sending me claudio's head by five o'clock. be sure you do it, and be aware that more depends on it than i can reveal at this time. don't fail to do your duty, or you will be held accountable." what do you say to this, sir?
the mousetrap. why on earth is it called that, you ask? it's a metaphor. this play is about a murder committed in vienna. gonzago is the duke's name, and his wife is baptista. you'll see soon enough. it's a piece of garbage, but who cares? you and i have free souls, so it doesn't concern us. let the guilty wince. we can watch without being bothered.
wait, wait, wait, wait!
who is this barnardine who's to be executed in the afternoon?
this is lucianus, the king's nephew in the play.
my noble masters, hear me speak.
he was born in bohemia, but raised here. he's been a prisoner for the last nine years.
you're an expert commentator, aren't you?
oh, tullus, 
how did it happen that the absent duke neither freed him nor executed him? i've heard he usually does one or the other.
yes. i could even supply the dialogue between you and your lover if you did your little puppet show of love for me.
you've done a dishonorable deed.
barnardine's friends kept getting him reprieves. and there was no clear evidence that he was actually guilty, until now, when angelo came to power.
ooh, you're sharp.
don't stand on him. noble ones, be quiet. put away your swords.
it's clear now?
yes, pointy, but you could take the edge off me, though it might make you moan a little.
my lords, when you understand, because in this rage he provoked, you cannot, the great danger this man intended to put you in, you'll rejoice that he has been stopped. if your honors will please call me to your senate, i'll prove myself to have been your loyal servant or endure your strictest punishment.
very clear, and he doesn't deny it himself.
you get better in your jokes and worse in your manners.
step away from his body and mourn for him. let him be considered as the most noble corpse that a procession has ever followed to a grave.
has he shown remorse while in prison? what effect has it had on him?
that's what you women get when you trick us into marriage., let's get started, murderer on stage, please! damn it, stop fussing with the makeup, and get going. we're all waiting for the revenge!
his own fury frees aufidius from most of the blame. let's make the best of it.
he's a man who fears death as no worse than a drunken sleep. he's careless, reckless, and fearless of the past, present, or future. he's unaware of the concept of death, and desperately clinging to life.
evil thoughts, ready hands, the right poison, and the time is right too. the dark night is on my side, for no one can see me. you deadly mixture of weeds and plants, which hecate, goddess of witchcraft, has put a spell on, use your magic to steal this healthy person's life away. (pours the poison into the player king 's ears)
my rage is gone, and i'm full of sorrow. lift him up. help, three of the best soldiers. i'll be the fourth. play the drum in a mournful beat. lay down your steel spears. even though he has killed the husbands and children of many people in this city and they're still mourning their loss, we'll give him a noble memorial. help me.
he needs counseling.
you see, he poisons the king in his own garden to get the kingdom for himself. the king's name is gonzago. the original story was written in the finest italian. you'll see shortly how the murderer wins the love of gonzago's wife.
he won't listen to any. he's always had the freedom to go anywhere inside the prison. if you gave him a chance to escape, he wouldn't run. he's drunk many times a day, or spends many days entirely drunk. often, we've woken him up, as if to take him to be executed, and shown him a pretend warrant. it's never affected him at all.
the king is getting up.
continue, solinus, and bring on my downfall. give me the death sentence and end all my troubles.
more of him soon. provost, i see honesty and loyalty in your face. if i'm wrong, my old skill at reading people deceives me, but because i'm confident of my ability, i'll take a chance. claudio, whom you have a warrant to execute, deserves to die no more than angelo, who sentenced him. i can clearly demonstrate this, but i need four days, so i'm going to ask you to do me an immediate and dangerous favor.
what, is he scared of a gun that only fired a blank?
merchant of syracuse, stop your begging: i'm not inclined to bend our laws. the hatred and discord between our two cities is the result of the bitter offenses your duke has perpetrated against the merchants of ephesus, our well-behaved countrymen. lacking the money to ransom themselves, these merchants were executed under your duke's harsh laws, and this has erased all looks of pity from my face. ever since these deadly conflicts erupted between your violent countrymen and ours, both you syracusians and we ephesians have held serious councils and decided not to permit any travel between our two hostile towns. no, the law goes further: if anyone born in ephesus is seen in syracuse's marketplaces or if anyone born in syracuse comes to ephesus, that man dies, and his possessions will be confiscated by the duke, unless he can raise a thousand marks to pay the penalty and ransom himself. your possessions, even if we calculate their worth very generously, don't even add up to a hundred marks. therefore, by law, you are condemned to die.
what is it, sir?
my lord, how are you feeling?
at least i have this comfort: when you finish speaking, my troubles will also end, at sundown.
delay the death.
stop the play.
well, syracusian, tell us, briefly, why you left your hometown and came to ephesus.
sorry, but how can i, with the time fixed and an explicit command to deliver his head to angelo, at risk of penalty? i'll find myself in claudio's shoes if i swerve from this in even the smallest way.
turn on the lights. get me out of here!
asking me to speak of my unspeakable griefs, that's the hardest task you could impose on me. but i'll do it so that the world can see that it was natural emotion, and not a desire to break the law, that brought me to this fate. i'll tell you whatever my sorrow permits me to say. i was born in syracuse, and i married a woman, a fortunate woman, except for having been married to me. and yet i would have made her happy had our luck not been so bad. i lived with her in joy, and our wealth increased from the prosperous journeys i frequently made to epidamnum. then my agent died and, obligated to care for my now untended goods abroad, i was drawn away from my wife's fond embraces. i hadn't been gone for six months when my wife, almost fainting with the pains of pregnancy, made arrangements to follow me, and she soon arrived safely where i was. she hadn't been there very long before she became the joyful mother of twin boys. it was strange: they looked so much alike that the only way to tell them apart was by their names. in the same hour, and in the same inn, a poor woman also delivered identical twin boys. their parents had very little, so i bought the boys and raised them as companions and servants for our twin sons. my wife was more than a little proud of our two boys, and every day she would press me to return home. reluctantly, i agreed, alas! too quickly, we boarded a ship.
by my holy vows, i guarantee your safety if you follow my instructions. execute this barnardine this morning, and take his head to angelo.
lights, lights, get us some lights!
we had sailed a league league = about three miles league away from epidamnum before the sea, which always obeys the winds' commands, gave any indication of danger. we didn't stay hopeful much longer: soon, the sky grew so dark that we were convinced we were going to die immediately. i could have accepted that, but i was forced by my wife's incessant weeping, she wept in advance for the things that she saw ahead, and the piteous complaints of the sweet infants, who cried in imitation of the adults, without understanding why, to find a way to save us. here's the best i could do: the crew of our ship had fled for safety in the lifeboats and left us to sink with the ship. my wife, who was very concerned about the younger of our twins, tied him to a spare mast, the kind that sailors use for just such a purpose. she tied one of the other twins to him. i did the same with the remaining two boys. with the children taken care of, my wife and i tied ourselves to opposite ends of the mast and floated off, obedient to the current. it carried us toward corinth, or so we thought. eventually the sun, looking down upon the earth, burned off the threatening storm clouds. by the power of the sun's wished-for light, the seas became calm. we saw two ships sailing toward us, one from corinth, the other from epidaurus. but before they reached us, let me say no more! you'll have to imagine what came next, based on what had already happened.
angelo's seen both of them, and will recognize the face.
let the deer that's been shot go off and weep, while the unharmed deer happily plays. for some must watch while other must sleep, that's how the world goes. couldn't i get work as an actor (if i hit a run of bad luck) in some acting company, and wear flowers on my shoes?
no, keep going, old man; don't stop like that. for we may take pity on you, even if we can't pardon you.
oh, death's a great disguiser, and you can help disguise him more. shave his head and trim his beard, and say it was the prisoner's request to be shaved before his death. you know that's a common thing. if anything happens to you because of this, aside from thanks and good fortune , by the patron saint of my brotherhood, i'll plead against it with my life.
they might even give you half a share of the company.
had the gods taken pity on us, i wouldn't be here calling them merciless. the two ships hadn't come within ten leagues of us when our ship hit a huge rock and split down the middle. as we were unjustly separated from each other, both my wife and i were left with something to delight in and something to sorrow over. for her part, the poor soul! her half of the mast weighed less, but she was no luckier than i was: the wind carried her away more quickly. i saw them rescued by fishermen from corinth, or so i thought. after a while, another ship rescued me and the two boys who were with me. the sailors knew me, so they took good care of us. our ship would have caught up with the other ship and taken back my wife and the children, but we sailed too slowly and their ship sped toward their home. so now you've heard how i was separated from everything i love. it's been my bad luck to remain alive long enough to be able to tell the sad stories of my own misfortunes.
forgive me, good father. it's against my oath.
no, a whole share for me. for you know, my dearest damon, that jove, king of the gods, was thrown out of power here, and who's in charge? a big, peacock.
and for the sake of those you grieve for, do me a favor: tell me the full story of what has happened to you and them, up to this point.
did you swear allegiance to the duke, or to the deputy?
you could have at least rhymed the obvious rhyme is "ass." rhymed .
my youngest son, whom i care about the most, turned eighteen and started to wonder about his twin brother. he asked me to let him take his attendant, who had also lost a brother, though he had kept his brother's
to him, and to his representatives.
oh, horatio, i'll bet you a thousand bucks the ghost was right. did you notice?
name for himself, and go in search of him. i wanted to see my lost son as well, so i risked losing the one i loved in order to find the other. i've spent five years in the remotest parts of greece and roaming all over asia. on my way home, i came to ephesus. i have no hope of finding my boys here, but i will check every place that is inhabited by men. but that is where the story of my life must end. i'd be happy to die if, in all my travels, i could prove that they are alive.
will you think you've done nothing wrong if the duke vouches for the justice of your action?
yes, i did, my lord.
poor egeon! fate has decreed that you must endure the extremes of terrible misfortune. believe me, if it weren't against the law, my crown, my duty, and my position (which princes cannot disobey, not matter how they feel), my very soul would argue your case. but you are sentenced to death, and changing a sentence that's already been passed would dishonor my title. however, i'll do what i can for you. i will allow you one day to look for help in ephesus. call any friends you have. beg or borrow to come up with the ransom. if you can, you live. if not, you are doomed to die. jailer, take him into custody.
but how likely is that?
when the actors were talking about poison?
i will.
not a possibility, but a certainty. yet since i see you're afraid, that neither my religious robes, integrity, nor arguments can easily persuade you, i'll go farther than i meant to, to dispel all your fears. (displays a letter) look, sir, here's the duke's handwriting and seal. you recognize them both, i'm sure.
i watched him very closely.
hopeless and helpless, i go my way, merely putting off my fatal end.
i know them both.
ah ha! hey, let's have some music here! play your flutes! for if the king doesn't like the play, then he doesn't like it, we may say. come on, music!
so, tell people that you're from epidamnum, otherwise all your goods will be confiscated. just today, a merchant from syracuse was arrested for coming here. he couldn't afford the ransom, so by law, he'll be put to death before the sun sets. here's the money you asked me to hold.
this letter's contents describe the duke's return; you can read it over at your leisure, and you'll learn that he'll be here in two days. angelo doesn't know this, since today he'll be getting some letters with strange news, maybe about the duke's death, maybe about him entering some monastery, but nothing about what's written here. look, the morning star is out. don't be confused by all this. everything makes sense after it's been done. call your executioner, and off with barnardine's head. i'll give him confession, and prepare him for a better place. you're still stunned, but this absolutely will explain everything to you. let's go, it's almost dawn.
my lord, could i have a word with you?
dromio, bring this money to the centaur inn, where we're lodging, and wait there until i come. it'll be lunchtime within an hour. until then, i'll walk around town, peruse the markets, and gaze upon the buildings, and then i'll return and sleep at the inn. i'm stiff and weary from all this travel. get going now.
i've got as many friends here as i did back at the brothel. you'd think it were mistress overdone's very own house, so many of her old customers are here. first, here's young mister hasty; he's in for debt, having paid pounds for some coarse brown paper and old ginger candy, and making back only three pounds selling it. ginger ginger was considered an aphrodisiac for older women ginger wasn't much in demand, because the old ladies were all dead. then there's one mister pirouette, defendant in a suit about four suits, brought by mister thick velvet, the textile merchant. he's being impeached over peach-colored satin. then we've also got young ditsy, and young mister cross-my-heart, and mister cubic zirconia and mister cheapskate, armed to fight duels, and young kill-heir who murdered robust stuffed-guts, and mister forward-thrust the fighter, and dressed-to-kill mister shoe-buckle, the world-traveler, and wild half-pint who stabbed pots, and, i think, forty more gents, all great clients of our business, who now sing that old prison refrain, "give us food for the lord's sake."
you can have a whole story, not just a word.
many men would take you literally and take off with all this money.
you there, bring barnardine here.
sir, the king, 
he's a trustworthy servant. often, when i'm dulled by worry and melancholy, he lightens my mood with his merry pranks. listen, will you walk with me around the town and then dine with me at the inn?
mister barnardine! you've got to get up, and get onto the scaffold. mister barnardine!
yes, what about him?
begging your pardon, but i've been invited to see some merchants, who i'm hoping to see a profit from. but if
hey, barnardine!
he's in his chambers now, and he's extremely upset.
it pleases you, i'll meet you in the marketplace at five and will keep you company until bedtime. right now, my pressing business calls me away.
(offstage) damn your throats! who's making all that noise? who are you?
what, an upset stomach from too much booze?
farewell till then. i will go lose myself, wandering up and down throughout the city.
your friends, sir, the hangmen. please be so good, sir, as to rise and be put to death.
no, sir, he's angry.
sir, i leave you to your own contentment.
(offstage) go away, scoundrel. away! i'm sleepy.
you should be smart enough to tell this to a doctor, not me, since if i treated him, he'd just get angrier.
he leaves me to my own contentment, but that's the one thing i cannot find. out in the world, i'm like a drop of water, trying to find a drop that matches in the whole wide ocean. when that drop fails its task, unnoticed, inquisitive, it dissipates into the ocean and destroys itself. in order to find a mother and a brother, i too have lost myself, unhappily.
tell him he has to wake up, and quickly too.
my lord, please try to stick to the subject at hand.
here comes the man who shares my birthday. what is it? how is it that you've come back so soon?
please, mister barnardine, stay awake till you're executed, and sleep afterwards.
i'll be good, sir. go ahead.
back so soon? too late is more like it. the chicken is burning, the pig is overcooked, the clock has already struck twelve, and my mistress has clocked me one on the cheek. she's hot because lunch is cold; lunch is cold because you're not home; you're not home because you're not hungry; you're not hungry because you've eaten already. but we servants, who know how to properly fast and pray, are being punished for your offenses today.
get in there and fetch him.
the queen your mother is upset, and sent me to see you.
hold on a second. answer me this, please: where's the money i gave you?
he's coming, sir, he's coming. i hear the straw on his cell floor rustling.
it's lovely to see you.
oh, the sixpence you gave me last wednesday to buy leather goods for my mistress? the saddle maker has it, sir, i didn't keep it.
is the axe on the block, man?
no, my lord, your polite words are not to the point. if you could please stop fooling around, i'll tell you what your mother wants. if not, i'll leave you alone and that'll be the end of my business.
i'm not in a joking mood. tell me right now and stop fooling: where's the money? we're strangers here. how dare you let such a large amount escape your keeping?
very ready, sir.
sir, i can't.
please, sir; crack jokes over lunch. my mistress made me hurry here. if i go back without you, she'll punish your faults by breaking my head open. i should think that your appetite would act like a clock (as mine does) and bring you home on its own, without the need for a messenger.
how goes it, abhorson? what's the news with you?
can't what, my lord?
that's enough, dromio, please. this isn't a good moment for jokes, save them till a happier time. where's the gold i gave you?
actually, sir, i'd like you to get on with your prayers, because the warrant's arrived.
stop fooling around. my mind is confused. but i'll do my best to give you a straight answer, as you wish, or rather, as my mother wishes. okay, to the point. my mother, you say ...?
gave me, sir? you didn't give me any gold.
you jerk, i've been drinking all night. i'm not ready for it.
she says that your behavior has astonished her.
come on, you rogue. quit joking. tell me what you've done with the money i entrusted to you.
oh, all the better, sir, for he who drinks all night and is hanged early in the morning may sleep better all the next day.
oh, what a wonderful son, i can impress my mother! but what's the upshot of her admiration? do tell.
the only thing that i've been entrusted with was getting you from the market and bringing you to your house, the phoenix, for lunch. my mistress and her sister are waiting for you.
look, sir, here comes your holy confessor. think we're joking now?
she wants to have a word with you in her bedroom before you go to bed.
tell me where you've stowed away my money, or i swear i'll break that comical head of yours for goofing when i'm not in the mood. where are the thousand marks marks = units of currency marks you had from me?
sir, out of my sense of charity, and hearing how hastily you have to leave, i came to advise you, comfort you, and pray with you.
i'd obey even if she were my mother ten times over. is there anything else i can do for you?
i have some marks from you on my head and some of my mistress's marks on my body. but between the both of you, i don't have a thousand marks. if i gave those marks back to you, chances are you wouldn't take them as patiently as i did.
not me, friar. i've been drinking hard all night, and either i get more time to prepare, or they'll have to beat out my brains with clubs. i won't agree to die today, that's for sure.
my lord, you used to like me.
your mistress's marks? what mistress do you have?
oh, sir, you must, and so i beg you to look forward to the journey you're going on.
and still do, i swear by my hands.
your wife, sir. my mistress. at the phoenix. the one who's waiting for you to come home for lunch and praying that you'll get home quickly.
i swear i will not die today, no matter who tries to persuade me.
my lord, what's wrong with you? you're not doing yourself any good by refusing to tell your friends what's bothering you.
what, are you going to mock me to my face when i told you not to? there, take that, you scoundrel! (beats dromio of ephesus)
but listen, 
sir, i have no future ahead of me.
what are you doing? stop, for god's sake! well, if you don't, then i'm out of here.
not a word: if you got anything to say to me, come to my cell. i'm not leaving it today.
but how can you say that, when the king himself says you're the heir to the danish throne?
i swear, somehow the fool has been cheated out of all my money. they say that this town is full of deception, illusionists that can fool the eye, dark sorcerers who can bewitch your mind, soul-killing witches who can disfigure your body, disguised swindlers, fast-talking fakers, and all kinds of other unchecked sins. if this is true, then i'll be leaving all the sooner. i'll go to the centaur to find this servant of mine, i fear that my money isn't safe.
unfit to live or die, that stony heart! after him, boys. bring him to the block.
yes, eventually, but as the proverb goes, "while the grass grows ..." the rest of the proverb goes, "...the horse starves." "while the grass grows ..." but that's a tired old proverb. oh, the recorders! let me see one.(he takes a recorder and turns to guildenstern ) why are you hovering so close, as if you want to ambush me?
neither my husband nor the slave has returned, even though i sent the slave off running. surely, luciana, it's already two o'clock.
now, sir, how is the prisoner?
oh, my lord, i'm sorry if i'm forgetting my manners. it's just that i'm worried about you.
maybe some merchant at the marketplace invited him home for lunch. sister, let's eat and stop worrying. a man is master of his own freedom: time is his only master, and when the right moment comes along, he'll come or go as he pleases. if this is so, be patient, sister.
a creature unprepared, unfit for death. to send him off in his current frame of mind would be damnable.
i don't really understand what you mean. will you play this recorder?
why should men be more free than women?
here in prison, father, a notorious pirate named ragozine just died this morning of a terrible fever. he was claudio's age, with the same color beard and hair. what if we forget about this reprobate until he's agreeable, and send the deputy ragozine's head, which is more like claudio's?
i can't, my lord.
because their business lies outside the home.
oh, this is a heaven-sent chance! do it at once. it's getting near the time angelo set for the execution. see that it's done, and the head sent, as ordered. meanwhile, i'll persuade this uncivilized wretch to die willingly.
please.
listen, when i behave this way toward him, he hates it.
we'll do it, good father, immediately. but barnardine must die this afternoon. and what do we do with claudio, to save me from the danger of word getting out that he's alive?
i'm serious, i can't.
oh, you should know that he's the bridle bridle = muzzlelike device used to restrain a horse bridle to your will.
let's do this: put both barnardine and claudio in secret cells. before two more days, it'll be obvious you're safe.
i'm begging you.
only a mule would agree to that.
i'm in your hands.
i have no idea how.
why, too much freedom leads to woe. there's nothing under heaven that doesn't have its limits. the beasts on the earth, the fish in the sea, and the birds in the sky are all subject to the males of their species and under their control. men, who are nearest to god, are the masters of all these creatures. and men, the lords of the wide
hurry, get the head and send it to angelo.
oh, it's as easy as lying. just put your fingers and thumb over the holes and blow into it, and it'll produce the most moving music. here, the holes are here.
world and the wild watery seas, gifted with intellectual sense and souls, greater than the fish and the birds, are the masters of women and their lords. therefore, you should obey their wishes.
now i'll write letters to angelo. the provost can deliver them. they'll say i'm close to home and it's of the utmost importance that i make a big public entrance. i'll ask him to meet me at the holy springs three miles out of town. and from there, step by cool step, and observing all the proper procedures, i'll deal with angelo.
but i can't play a melody. i don't know how.
it's this servantlike mentality that's keeping you unmarried.
here's the head. i'll carry it myself.
well, look how you play me, as if you knew exactly where to put your fingers, to blow the mystery out of me, playing all the octaves of my range, and yet you can't even produce music from this little instrument? my god, do you think i'm easier to manipulate than a pipe? you can push my buttons, but you can't play me for a fool.
no, that's not it, it's because of what happens in the marriage bed.
suitable, isn't it? come back soon, because i want to talk with you about things that are for your ears only.
hello and god bless you, sir.
but if you were married, you'd wield some influence.
i'll be as fast as i can.
my lord, the queen wants to speak with you right away.
before i learn how to love, i'll learn how to follow orders.
(offstage) hello! peace to all here!
do you see that cloud up there that looks like a camel?
what if your husband strays elsewhere?
that's isabel's voice. she's here to see if her brother's pardon has come yet. but i'll hide the news for her own good, to turn her despair into divine comfort when she least expects it.
by god, it does look like a camel.
i'd endure it until he came home again.
may i come in?
to me it looks like a weasel.
now that's patience! no wonder she's waiting to get married. it's easy to preach meekness when you have no reason to act otherwise. when we're faced with a wretched person, bruised and crying with hardship, we try to get them to shush up. and yet, if we were suffering the same kind of pain, we'd complain just as much, if not more! so you, who have no husband causing you problems, want to comfort me by preaching the virtue of feeble patience. but if you live to see yourself similarly denied your rights, this foolish patience will abandon you.
good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.
it does have a back like a weasel's.
well, i'll get married one day, just to see. here comes your servant, your husband must be coming soon.
all the better a morning when so holy a man says it to me. has the deputy sent my brother's pardon yet?
or like a whale.
tell me, is your tardy master close at hand?
he has released him, isabel, from the world. his head is off and sent to angelo.
yes, very much like a whale.
no; but he came at me with two hands, just ask my ears i.e., "he beat me on my ears." ears .
no, it's not true.
i'll go see my mother soon. (to himself) they're trying as hard as they can to mess with me., i will go soon.
did you talk to him? do you know his plans?
it is. be smart, daughter, and keep control of yourself.
i'll tell her.
yes, yes, he told me his plans on my ears. damn his hands, i could barely understand dromio puns on "understand," using the word to mean "stand up under the force of the beating." understand it.
oh, i'll go and tear his eyes out!
it's easy enough to say "soon."
did he speak so ambiguously that you couldn't get a feeling for what he meant?
they won't let you see him.
now please leave me alone, my friends.
no; he hit me very clearly and i felt his punches perfectly well. they were so dreadful, i could barely stand up under them.
unhappy claudio! wretched isabel! cruel world! damned angelo!
this is the time of night when witches come out, when graveyards yawn open and the stench of hell seeps out. i could drink hot blood and do such terrible deeds that people would tremble even in the daylight. but i've got to go see my mother., oh, heart, don't grow weak, like nero nero was a roman emperor known for his extreme cruelty. nero let me be cruel, but not inhuman.
but please, tell me: is he coming home? it seems he has taken great care to please his wife.
this neither hurts him nor helps you a bit. control yourself and leave your case to heaven. pay attention to what i say. every syllable is truth you can rely on. the duke's coming home tomorrow, no, dry your eyes. his confessor, who belongs to our monastery, gave me this information. he's already sent word to escalus and angelo, who are preparing to meet him at the gates and surrender their authority to him there. if you can, steer your mind along the path i want it to follow. you'll have your desire inflicted on this wretch, the favor of the duke, revenge to your heart's content, and general acclaim.
i'll speak as sharp as a dagger to her, but i won't use one on her. and so, my words and thoughts will be at odds.
why, mistress, my master is as angry as a bull with horns.
i'll do whatever you say.
i don't like the way he's acting, and it's not safe for me to let his insanity get out of control. so get prepared. i'm sending you to england on diplomatic business, and hamlet will go with you. as king, i cannot risk the danger he represents as he grows crazier by the hour.
horns? you bastard!
then give this letter to friar peter. it's the one he sent me about the duke's return. it'll be a sign that i want to meet him at mariana's house tonight. i'll tell him all about her case and yours, and he'll bring you before the duke, and you can thoroughly accuse angelo face-to-face. my poor self is bound by a sacred vow, so i won't be there. (giving the letter) go with this letter. banish those worried tears with a light heart. never trust my holy order again if i steer you wrong. who's here?
we'll take care of it. it's a sacred duty to protect the lives of all those who depend on your highness.
i don't mean he's cuckold cuckold = a man whose wife cheated on him; cuckolds were commonly depicted wearing horns cuckold mad. but he sure is angry. when i asked him to come home to lunch, he asked me for a thousand marks. "it's lunchtime," i said. "my gold," he said. "the meat's burning," i said. "my gold," he said. "will you come home?" i said.
good evening. friar, where's the provost?
everyone tries to avoid harm, but the public figure demands even more protection. when a great leader dies he doesn't die alone but, like a whirlpool, draws others with him. he's like a huge wheel on the top of the highest mountain whose spokes touch the rim of ten thousand smaller things, when it falls down the mountain, every little object goes down with it. whenever a king sighs, everyone groans.
"my gold," he said. "where's the thousand marks i gave you, scoundrel?" "the pig," i said, "is burned." "my gold," he said. "my mistress," i said. "damn your mistress! i don't know your mistress, the hell with your mistress!"
not inside, sir.
prepare yourself, please, for this trip. we'll put a leash on this danger that's now running wild.
who said that?
oh, pretty isabella, i'm sick at heart to see your eyes so red, but try to calm down. i have to dine on plain bread and water, to control my desire, i don't fill my belly, since one big meal would get me excited. but they say the duke will be here tomorrow. i swear, isabel, i loved your brother. if the good old whimsical duke, who loved to fool around in dark places, had been at home, claudio would've lived.
we'll hurry.
my master said it. "i don't know," he said, "any house, wife, or mistress." my message, which was supposed to be delivered with my mouth, ended up being carried back home by my shoulders. because at the end of it all, that's where he beat me.
sir, the duke is nothing at all like you report.
my lord, hamlet's going to his mother's room. i'll hide behind the tapestry to hear what they say. i bet she'll chew him out. and as you said (and you said it wisely), it's good to have someone other than a mother listening in on them, since she can be too partial to him. goodbye, my lord. i'll stop by before you go to bed, and tell you what i've heard.
go back again, slave, and bring him home.
friar, you don't know the duke as well as i do. he's more of a womanizer than you think.
thanks, my dear lord.
go back again, to be beaten home again? for god's sake, send somebody else.
well, you'll pay for this one day. goodbye.
oh, my crime is so rotten it stinks all the way to heaven. it has the mark of cain in the bible, cain was the first murderer, killing his brother in genesis : - . cain on it, a brother's murder. i can't pray, though i want to desperately. my guilt is stronger even than my intentions. and like a person with two opposite things to do at once, i stand paralyzed and neglect them both. so what if this cursed hand of mine is coated with my brother's blood? isn't there enough rain in heaven to wash it clean as snow? isn't that what god's mercy is for? and doesn't prayer serve these two purposes, to keep us from sinning and to bring us forgiveness when we have sinned? so i'll pray. i've already committed my sin. but, oh, what kind of prayer is there for me? "dear lord, forgive me for my horrible murder"?
go back, slave, or i'll knock you one across the head.
no, wait. i'll go along with you. i can tell you some great tales about the duke.
that won't work, since i'm still reaping the rewards of that murder: my crown and my queen. can a person be forgiven and still keep the fruits of his crime? in this wicked world, criminals often take the money they stole and use it to buy off the law, shoving justice aside. but not in heaven. up there, every action is judged for exactly what it's worth, and we're forced to confront our crimes. so what can i do? what is there left to do? offer whatever repentance i can, that couldn't hurt. but it can't help either! oh, what a lousy situation i'm in. my heart's as black as death. my soul is stuck to sin, and the more it struggles to break free, the more it sticks. help me, angels! c'mon, make an effort. bend, stubborn knees. steely heart, be soft as a newborn babe, so i can pray. perhaps everything will turn out okay after all. (he kneels)
and he'll add another knock across. with all these crosses, i'll have a holy head.
you've already told me too many, sir, if they're true. if they're not true, i don't want to hear any.
i could do it easily now. he's praying now. and now i'll do it. (he draws out his sword) and there he goes, off to heaven. and that's my revenge. i'd better think about this more carefully. a villain kills my father, and i, my father's only son, send this same villain to heaven. seems like i just did him a favor. he killed my father when my father was enjoying life, with all his sins in full bloom, before my father could repent for any of them. only god knows how many sins my father has to pay for. as for me, i don't think his prospects look so good.
get out of here, you blathering peasant! bring your master home.
i appeared before him once for getting a girl pregnant.
so is it really revenge for me if i kill claudius right when he is confessing his sins, in perfect condition for a trip to heaven? no. away, sword, and wait for a better moment to kill him. (he puts his sword away) when he's sleeping off some drunken orgy, or having incestuous sex, or swearing while he gambles, or committing some other act that has no goodness about it, that's when i'll trip him up and send him to hell with his heels kicking up at heaven. my mother's waiting. the king's trying to cure himself with prayer, but all he's doing is keeping himself alive a little longer.
do i treat you this roundly? you're kicking me around like i'm a football. you kick me out, he kicks me back. if i keep working for you, i'm going to end up wrapped in leather, like a football.
did you do such a thing?
(rising) my words fly up toward heaven, but my thoughts stay down here on earth. words without thoughts behind them will never make it to heaven.
look at you! you have impatience all over your face.
yes, i did, but i denied it under oath. they would've made me marry the rotten whore otherwise.
he'll come right away. make sure you lay into him. tell him his pranks have caused too much trouble, and that your highness has taken a lot of heat for them. i'll be right here, silent. please be blunt with him.
he feels the need to grace all his other tramps with his presence while i sit at home starving for a smile from him. has homely old age taken the alluring beauty from my poor cheeks? that's because he has squandered my beauty. am i boring? have i lost my wit? if my conversation is no longer free and clever, that's because he's dulled it, i'm like a sharp tool he's blunted with a hard piece of marble. is he charmed by their pretty clothes? well, that's not my fault, he's the one in charge of my spending. what faults can you find in me that weren't first caused by him? one smile from him would repair my decayed beauty. but like an unruly deer, he's always trespassing past the park borders and straying away from home to feed in new pastures. i am nothing but a poor, used fool.
sir, you look a lot nicer than you are. goodbye.
(offstage) mother, mother, mother!
this jealousy is harming only you! drive it out of you.
i swear, i'll go with you to the end of the lane. if dirty talk offends you, we'll avoid it. no, friar, i'm like a kind of burr, i'll stick to you.
don't worry, i'll do what you say. now hide, i hear him coming.
only someone who doesn't feel this pain could tell me to ignore it. i know his eyes are worshiping some other woman, or why wouldn't he be here? sister, you know he promised to give me a necklace. i would gladly do without that if he would only stay faithful to me. even the best jewel can be tarnished. gold, however, can't be corrupted, though it can be worn down if it's touched too often. and no man with a reputation will tarnish that name with lies and bad behavior. since my beauty no longer pleases my husband, i'll weep away what's left and then die with weeping.
every letter he's written has contradicted the others.
now mother, what's this all about?
how many infatuated people go mad with jealousy!
in a very vague, inconsistent way. his behavior seems almost insane, pray god he's not going mad! and why do we have to meet him at the gates, and surrender our authority there?
hamlet, you've insulted your father.
the gold i gave dromio is safe and sound at the centaur, and the inn host says that dromio has left and is looking for me. i haven't spoken to him since i sent him away from the marketplace earlier. here he comes.
i can't guess.
mother, you've insulted my father.
so, sir. are you over your ridiculous mood? if you like being hit, crack some more jokes. you never heard of the centaur? you weren't given any gold? your mistress sent for me to come to dinner? the phoenix is my house? were you mad when you spoke to me so madly?
and why, an hour before his arrival, should we announce that if anyone wants compensation for unjust treatment, they should come ready to present their petitions publicly?
come on, you're answering me foolishly.
said what, sir? when did i say all that?
he gives a reason for that: to be able to deal promptly with the complaints, and to save us from future lawsuits.
go on, you're questioning me evilly.
just now. right here. less than half an hour ago.
well, i urge you to announce it early in the morning. i'll come pick you up at your house. alert all the high-ranking officials who are supposed to meet him.
hamlet, what, why?
i haven't seen you since you sent me to the centaur with the gold you gave me.
i will, sir. goodbye.
what's the problem now?
you moron, you denied having any gold, and you told me about a mistress and a lunch. and i hope you realized i wasn't very happy about it.
good night.
have you forgotten who i am?
i'm glad to see you in such a merry mood. but what's the joke? please, master, tell me.
this thing i've done has totally destroyed me. i'm stupid, can't concentrate on anything. a girl robbed of her virginity, and by a respected public figure who enforced the law against sex! if she weren't too ashamed to admit it, she could easily denounce me! but her head tells her not to, because my credibility is so strong that any scandal would ruin the person who spreads it, not me. i would've let claudio live, except that a hotheaded youth like him might have come after me someday, feeling that his life is dishonored because he paid such a shameful price for it. even so, i wish i'd let him live. sadly, nothing goes right once we forget virtue. i don't do the good thing, which i don't want to do, but the evil i don't want to commit, that i do.
for god's sake no, i haven't. you are the queen, your husband's brother's wife, and you are my mother, though i wish you weren't.
what, are you mocking me to my face? you think i'm joking? here. take that, and that! (beats dromio of syracuse)
at the right time, deliver these letters for me.
in that case i'll call in others who can still speak.
stop, sir, for god's sake! now this joke has turned serious. why are you doing this?
the provost knows about my plan. once things get going, remember your orders and follow my lead, though sometimes you can deviate from the plan, if it seems appropriate. go to flavius' house, and tell him where i'm staying. inform valentinus, rowland, and crassus, too, and ask them to bring the trumpeters to the gate. but send me flavius first.
no, sit down. you won't budge until i hold a mirror up to you, where you will see what's deep inside you.
just because i act familiar with you sometimes and let you fool around and joke with me, you try to take advantage of my affection. you pull pranks when i'm in a serious mood. you know, foolish gnats come out in the sunshine, but they creep back into their holes when it's dark. if you want to crack jokes, first check what kind of mood i'm in and then adjust your behavior to suit me. if you don't learn this rule, i'll have to beat it into your sconce.
i'll do it right away.
what are you going to do? you won't kill me, will you? help!
you call it my " sconce dromio puns on various meanings of "sconce,"including "head," "fortress" (which dromio imagines being attacked with a battering ram), and "curtain." sconce "? i'd rather call it my "head" so you'd stop battering it. if you keep pounding me, i'll need a sconce to wrap my head with, or else i'll have to keep my brain in my chest. but sir, why are you beating me?
thanks, varrius, you got here fast. let's get going. more of our friends will be here soon, honorable varrius.
(from behind the tapestry) hey! help, help, help!
don't you know?
i hate to speak so evasively. i'd rather tell the truth. but to accuse angelo is your job, the friar says, and he advises me to lie, to hide our real aim.
what's this, a rat? i'll bet a buck he's a dead rat now.
all i know is that i'm being beaten.
we should do as he says.
(from behind the tapestry) oh, i've been killed!
should i tell you why?
besides, he tells me that i shouldn't think it strange if he happens to contradict me. it'll be like swallowing a bitter pill that offers a sweet cure.
oh my god, what have you done?
yes, and wherefore. you know the old saying: "every 'why' has a 'wherefore.'"
i wish friar peter, 
i don't know. is it the king?
"why" first: for defying me. and then "wherefore": for doing it a second time.
oh, wait! the friar's here.
oh, what a senseless, horrible act!
i don't think any man's ever been beaten for a "why" and "wherefore" that made so little sense. well, thank you.
come on, i've found you a good place to stand, where you'll be so positioned that the duke won't be able to bypass you. the trumpets have blown twice, the most high-born and important people have already gathered at the gates, and the duke's about to enter. so, let's go!
a horrible act, almost as bad, my good mother, as killing a king and marrying his brother.
thank me? for what?
(to angelo) my fellow nobleman, welcome! (to escalus) my faithful old friend, i'm glad to see you.
killing a king?
because you gave me something for nothing.
welcome home, your royal grace!
that's what i said, my good woman.
next time i'll give you nothing for something. is it lunchtime?
many hearty thanks to you both. i've been asking about you, and i've heard such good things about your rule that i just had to thank you publicly, as a preview of more rewards to come.
you low-life, nosy, busybody fool, goodbye. i thought you were somebody more important. you've gotten what you deserve. i guess you found out it's dangerous to be a busybody. (to gertrude) stop wringing your hands. sit down and let me wring your heart instead, which i will do if it's still soft enough, if your evil lifestyle has not toughened it against feeling anything at all.
no. the meat lacks something that i have.
you make my debt to you even greater.
what have i done that you dare to talk to me so rudely?
what would that be?
oh, you're extremely worthy, and it'd be wrong of me to hide it in my heart, when it deserves to be written in brass letters, as on a monument, where time can't erase it. give me your hand, and let the people see, so they'll know how proud i am to display my high regard for you. come, escalus, you must walk with me on my other side. you make a fine supporter in heraldry, one of the figures that holds up a shield (as in a coat of arms, for instance) supporter .
a deed that destroys modesty, turns virtue into hypocrisy, replaces the blossom on the face of true love with a nasty blemish, makes marriage vows as false as a gambler's oath, oh, you've done a deed that plucks the soul out of marriage and turns religion into meaningless blather. heaven looks down on this earth, as angry as if judgment day were here, and is sick at the thought of what you've done.
a basting.
now's the time: speak up and kneel before him.
c'mon, what's this deed that sounds so awful even before i know what it is?
well, then it will be dry.
justice, royal duke! look down here, at a girl, i wish i could say a virgin, who has been wronged. oh, worthy prince, don't consider anything else until you've heard my valid case and given me justice, justice, justice, justice!
look at this picture here, and that one there, the painted images of two brothers hamlet may be referring to miniatures they wear around their necks, or to pictures on the wall. the painted images of two brothers . look how kind and gentlemanly this one is, with his curly hair and his forehead like a greek god. his eye could command like the god of war. his body is as agile as mercury just landing on a high hill. a figure and a combination of good qualities that seemed like every god had set his stamp on this man.
if it is, i suggest you don't eat it.
describe how you've been wronged, in what way? by whom? be brief. lord angelo here will give you justice. tell him your complaint.
that was your husband. now look at this other one. here is your present husband, like a mildewed ear of corn infecting the healthy one next to it. do you have eyes? how could you leave the lofty heights of this man here and descend as low as this one? ha! do you have eyes? you cannot say you did it out of love, since at your age romantic passions have grown weak, and the heart obeys reason. but what reason could move you from this one to that one? you must have some sense in your head, since you're able to get around, but it seems to be paralyzed, since even if you were crazy you would know the difference between these two men. no one ever went so insane that they couldn't get an easy choice like this one right. what devil was it that blindfolded you? eyes without feeling, feeling without sight, ears without hands or eyes, smell without anything else, the use of even one impaired sense would not permit such a mistake as yours. oh, for shame, why aren't you blushing? if evil can overtake even an old mother's bones, then let it melt my own. it turns out it's no longer shameful to act on impulse, now that the old are doing so, and now that reason is a servant to desire.
why not?
oh, worthy duke, you're urging me to ask the devil for help. listen to me yourself. what i have to say will result either in you not believing and punishing me, or you feeling compelled to right the wrong. hear me, oh hear me, here!
oh, hamlet, stop! you're making me look into my very soul, where the marks of sin are so thick and black they will never be washed away.
because it will make you angry, and that will get me another beating.
my lord, i'm afraid she's not in her right mind. she's appeared before me, begging for her brother, who was executed by the justice system, 
yes, and you lie in the sweaty stench of your dirty sheets, wet with corruption, making love, 
well, learn to make jokes at the appropriate time. there's a time for all things.
by the justice system!
oh, you must stop! your words are like daggers. please, no more, sweet hamlet.
before you got so angry, i never would have thought that.
and she will speak in a very bitter, strange way.
a murderer and a villain, a low-life who's not worth a twentieth of a tenth of your first husband, the worst of kings, a thief of the throne, who took the precious crown from a shelf and put it in his pocket, 
why not?
i'll speak strangely, but truthfully. that angelo's a liar, isn't that strange? that angelo's a murderer, isn't that strange? that angelo's an adulterous thief, a hypocrite, a man who rapes virgins, isn't that extremely strange?
stop!
i'll tell you: it's because of a law as plain as father time's bald head.
that's strange to the tenth degree.
a ragtag king, 
let's hear it.
it's just as true as the fact that he's angelo, and this is all as true as it is strange. no, it's true to the tenth degree, for the truth is the truth, no matter how much you multiply it.
oh, angels in heaven, protect me with your wings!, what can i do for you, my gracious lord?
there may be a time for everything, but no man who has gone bald naturally can get his hair back.
take her away! poor soul, she's insane.
oh no! hamlet's gone completely crazy.
can't he get it by fine and recovery fine and recovery = a legal term related to claiming ownership of private property fine and recovery ?
oh, prince, i beg you, as you believe in a better world than this one, don't dismiss me by thinking i'm mad! don't assume something's impossible because it's unlikely. it's not impossible that the wickedest wretch on the face of the earth may look just as cautious, as dignified, as fair, as perfect as angelo, even as angelo, for all his official finery, badges, titles, and ceremonies, can be an arch-villain. believe it, royal prince. if he's less than a wretch, he's nothing. but he's more, if only i had more names for badness.
have you come to scold your tardy son for straying from his mission, letting your important command slip by? tell me!
yes, he can pay a fine for a wig and then recover another man's lost hair.
i declare, if she's mad, as i believe she is, her madness has an oddly rational sound. i've rarely heard such coherent logic from someone insane.
don't forget. i've come to sharpen your somewhat dull appetite for revenge. but look, your mother is in shock. oh, keep her struggling soul from being overwhelmed by horrid visions. the imagination works strongest in those with the weakest bodies. talk to her, hamlet.
why is time so cheap about giving out hair? after all, it's plentiful in its growth.
oh, gracious duke, don't harp on that. but don't dismiss rational statements because they don't jibe with appearances. use your intelligence to uncover the hidden truth, which is obscured by lies that seem like truth.
how are you doing, madam?
because animals are blessed with hair. with men, he's been stingy with hair, but he makes up for it by giving them intelligence.
a lot of sane people make a lot less sense. what would you like to say?
and how are you doing, staring into the empty air and talking to nobody? your eyes give away your wild thoughts, and your hair is standing upright, like soldiers during a call to arms. oh my dear son, calm yourself and cool off your overheated mind! what are you staring at?
but a lot of men have more hair than intelligence.
i am the sister of one claudio, sentenced to die by the decree against fornication, sentenced by angelo. i was about to enter a convent, when my brother contacted me. he sent me a message through a man named lucio, 
at him, at him! look how pale he is and how he glares at me. preaching even at stones, he could get them to act. (to the ghost) don't look at me like that, unless you want me to cry instead of kill.
and not one of them is smart enough to stop himself from going bald.
that's me, if it please your grace: i came to her from claudio, and asked her to try her good luck in asking lord angelo for her poor brother's pardon.
who are you talking to?
so then, you must think that hairy men are honest and simpleminded.
yes, that's the man.
you don't see anything?
the more simpleminded they are, the sooner they lose their hair in the original shakespearean line, there are a series of sexual puns and jokes about venereal diseases-venereal disease can cause hair loss; "sound" can mean "healthy," "thing" can refer to a sexual organ, and "falsing" means "deceptive." lose their hair . but they have a good time doing so.
no one asked you to speak.
nothing at all, but i can see everything that's here.
why?
no, my good lord, but no one asked me to be quiet, either.
and you don't hear anything?
two reasons. and good ones, too.
i'm asking you now, then. remember it. and when you have your own business before me, pray heaven you behave yourself.
no, nothing but us talking.
not good ones, please.
i'll take notice, your honor.
look, look how it's sneaking away! my father, dressed just like he was when he was alive! look, he's going out the door right now!
then sure ones.
the notice is for yourself. pay attention to it.
this is only a figment of your imagination. madness is good at creating hallucinations.
no, not sure ones when we're talking about something unsure.
this gentleman has told some of my story, 
madness? my heart beats just as evenly as yours does. there's nothing crazy in what i've just uttered. put me to the test. i'll rephrase everything i've just said, which a lunatic couldn't do. mother, for the love of god, don't flatter yourself into believing that it's my madness, not your crime, that's the problem. you'd just be concealing the rot that's eating you from the inside. confess your sins to heaven. repent and avoid damnation. don't spread manure over the weeds in your heart; it'll only make them more filthy. forgive me my good intentions here since in these fat and spoiled times, virtuous people have to say, "beg your pardon" to vile ones and beg for the chance to do any good.
then certain ones.
right.
oh hamlet, you've broken my heart in two!
name them.
it may be right, but you're wrong to interrupt. proceed.
then throw away the worse half, and live a purer life with the other! good night to you. but don't go to my uncle's bed tonight. at least pretend to be virtuous, even if you're not. habit is a terrible thing, in that it's easy to get used to doing evil without feeling bad about it. but it's also a good thing, in that being good can also become a habit. say no to sex tonight, and that will make it easier to say no the next time, and still easier the time after that. habit can change even one's natural instincts, and either rein in the devil in us, or kick him out. once again, good night to you, and when you want to repent, i'll ask you for your blessing too. i'm sorry about what happened to this gentleman (pointing to polonius), but
one, so they can save the money they spent on hairstyling, and two, so that when their hair falls out it doesn't land in their dinner.
i went to this wicked, evil deputy, 
god wanted to punish me with this murder, and this man with me, so i'm both heaven's executioner and its minister of justice. this is bad, but it'll get worse soon. oh, and one other thing, madam.
you were supposed to be proving that there isn't time for everything.
you're sounding crazy.
what should i do?
right, and i did, sir. there's no time to get back hair that's fallen out.
excuse me, the choice of words is appropriate.
whatever you do, don't do this: let the fat king seduce you into his bed again, so he can pinch your cheek, call you his bunny, and with filthy kisses and a massage of your neck with his damned fingers, make you admit that my madness is fake, all calculated. what a great idea that would be, because why would a fair, sober, wise queen hide such things from a toad, a pig, a monster like him? who would do that? no, no, it's much, much better to spill the beans right away, let the cat out of the bag, and break your neck in the process.
you didn't come up with a very good proof.
that's better. continue.
you can rest easy, since words are made of breath, and breathing requires that you be alive. i feel too dead to breathe a word of what you've told me.
then i'll change it to this: father time himself is bald, so for all time there will be bald men.
to make a long story short, because it took a while, how i begged, how i prayed and kneeled, how he refused me, and how i replied, i'll sadly and shamefully get to the awful ending. he wouldn't release my brother unless i gave my chaste body over to his yearning lust. and after much internal debate, my sisterly pity overcame my honor, and i gave in to him. but having got what he wanted, early the next morning he sent an order for my poor brother's head.
i have to go to england, don't you know that?
i knew you'd come up with a bald "bald" can also mean "trivial" or "lame." bald conclusion. but wait, who's that waving to us?
(sarcastically) this is very believable!
ah, i'd forgotten all about that! it's been decided.
yes, yes, antipholus: look bewildered and frown at me. you've given away all your sweet looks to some other woman, i am not adriana nor your wife. there was a time when you'd freely tell me that words were never music to your ear unless i said them, that objects never pleased your eye unless i showed them to you, that touches never pleased your hands unless they were my touches, and that food never tasted sweet to you unless i had prepared it. how is it, my husband, oh, how is it, that you have become a stranger to yourself? i say yourself because you are a stranger to me now, but when we are indivisible and united in one body, i am better than the best part of you. ah, don't tear yourself away from me! for you should know, my love, that it would be as easy to let a drop of water fall into the churning sea and then fish it out again, unmingled and undiminished, as it would be to take yourself from me without taking me out of myself as well. how deeply would it cut you if you heard that i had been cheating on you and that my body, which is sworn for you only, had been contaminated by vile lust?
oh, i wish it were as believable as it is true!
yes, it's a done deal, the documents are ready, and my two schoolmates, whom i trust about as much as rattlesnakes, are in charge. they're the ones who'll lead me on my march to mischief. let it happen. it's fun to watch the engineer get blown up by his own explosives, and with any luck i'll dig a few feet below their bombs and blow them to the moon. oh, it's nice to kill two birds with one stone. (points to polonius) now that i've killed this guy, i'll be off in a hurry. i'll lug his guts into the next room. mother, have a good night. this politician who was in life a babbling idiot is now quiet and serious. come on, sir, let's get to the end of our business. good night, mother.
wouldn't you spit at me, and spurn me, and throw our marriage vows in my face? wouldn't you tear the mark off my whorish forehead whores were commonly punished by being branded on the forehead. whorish forehead , cut the wedding ring off my finger, and swear to divorce me? i know you would, so go ahead. for i have, in fact, committed adultery, and my blood has been contaminated by lust. because if marriage has made us one, then when you cheat, you poison my flesh as well, your contagion makes me a prostitute. so stay faithful to me and return to your marriage bed.that way, my reputation will be protected and your honor will be intact.
heavens above, you poor fool, you don't know what you're saying, or else you've been bribed to falsely accuse him. first of all, his integrity is beyond reproach. next, it makes no sense that he should so vigorously prosecute crimes he himself commits. if he had committed such a crime, he would've judged your brother against himself, and not executed him. someone has put you up to this. confess the truth, and tell us who urged you to come here with this accusation.
(to gertrude) these deep, heaving sighs of yours mean something. you have to tell me what. i need to know. where's your son?
are you talking to me, fair woman? i don't know you. i've only been in ephesus for two hours. your talk is as strange to me as your town. i'm trying with all my wits to figure out what you mean, but i can't understand a word of it.
that's it? then, oh, you blessed angels above, help me be patient, and let time reveal the evil hiding here behind appearances! heaven protect your grace from harm. since you don't believe me, i have to go.
(to rosencrantz and guildenstern) let us speak privately awhile, please.
shame on you, brother-in-law! you've changed so much! why are you treating my sister like this? she sent dromio to bring you home for lunch.
i bet you'd like to go. officer, take her to prison! should i permit such destructive, scandalous rumors about someone so close to me? this must be a conspiracy. who knew about your plan, and that you were coming here?
ah, my lord, you wouldn't believe what i've witnessed tonight!
dromio?
someone i wish were here now, friar lodowick.
what, gertrude? how is hamlet?
me?
a holy ghost, probably. who knows this lodowick?
as mad as the waves and the wind when they struggle together in a storm. in an insane rage, he hears something behind the tapestry, whips out his sword, shouts, "a rat, a rat!" and in his deranged state of mind he kills the good old man, who is still hidden.
you. and this is what you told me he said: that he beat you and pretended his house wasn't his and i wasn't his wife.
my lord, i know him. he's the sort of friar who's always meddling in people's business. i don't like the man. if he hadn't been a member of the clergy, i would have punched him out for certain words he spoke against your grace while you were away.
oh, this is terrible! it would've happened to me if i'd been there. his wildness is a threat to all of us, to you, to me, to everyone. how will we deal with this violent deed? i'm the one who will be blamed for not restraining and confining this mad young man. but i loved him so much i didn't want to think about what i had to do. so, like someone suffering from a nasty disease who refuses to divulge his condition and lets it infect him to
did you talk with this woman? what kind of scheme do you have going together?
words against me? some holy friar this is! and to set this wretched woman here against my replacement! someone locate this friar.
the core, i kept hamlet's condition secret and let it grow more and more dangerous. where has he gone?
me, sir? i never saw her till now.
just yesterday, my lord, i saw her and this friar at the prison. he's a smart-aleck, a very nasty piece of work.
to remove the corpse of the man he killed. his madness allows a glimmering of morality to shine through, like a vein of gold in a chunk of coal. he weeps for what he has done.
you liar! you said those exact things to me back in the marketplace.
god bless your royal grace! i've stood by, my lord, and i've heard your royal ears deceived. first, this woman has wrongfully accused your replacement, who is as far from any sexual or moral misbehavior with her as she is from a virgin birth.
oh, gertrude, let's go. as soon as the sun sets we'll ship him off to england. it'll take all my diplomatic know-how to explain and excuse the murder he's committed. hey, guildenstern!
i never talked with her in my life.
i never believed anything else. do you know this friar lodowick she's talking about?
my friends, go find others to help you. hamlet in his madness has killed polonius and dragged him out of his mother's bedroom. go find him and speak nicely to him, and bring the corpse into the chapel. please hurry.
then how does she know our names? by magic?
i know him for a divine and holy man, not lowdown, and not someone who meddles in earthly pleasures, as this gentleman reports. and, trust me, he's a man that never slandered your grace.
come, gertrude. we'll confer with our wisest friends and tell them what we're going to do, and what terrible deed has been done already. let's hope slander, a bullet that can travel halfway around the world and still hit its exact target, spares us. oh, we must go. i'm full of confusion and despair.
how distasteful! that a man of your stature would scheme with his servant to upset me like this. it may be my fault that you've been avoiding me, but don't make things worse by treating me with contempt as well. i'll hang on your sleeve: you're an elm tree, my husband, and i'm a vine. my weakness is enhanced by your strength, which gives me the strength to say this: the things that take you away from me are worthless, just overgrown weeds in need of a trimming. they get into your system and infect you, feeding off your confusion.
my lord, he did, and very maliciously too. believe it.
the body is safely hidden.
she's talking to me. she's talking about me. what, was i married to her in a dream? or am i asleep now and imagining all this? what is making our eyes and ears act so strangely? until i know for sure, i'll humor her.
well, in time he may come to clear himself, but at this instant he's sick, my lord, suffering a rare fever. learning there was an accusation planned against lord angelo, he personally asked me to come here and speak, as he would have, about what he knows is true and false. and when he's summoned, he'll give his oath and furnish proof that will clear everything up. this worthy nobleman, who's been so publicly and personally accused, will be vindicated, and this woman will be discredited to her face, to such an extent that she herself will have to admit it.
(from offstage) hamlet, lord hamlet!
dromio, tell the servants to prepare for lunch.
good friar, let's hear it.
what's that noise? who's calling for hamlet? oh, here they come.
oh, i wish i had my rosary! i'll cross myself. this must be some kind of fairyland. oh, spite of spites! we're
isn't this funny, lord angelo? oh, heaven, the nerve of these wretched fools! give us some seats. come, angelo, my friend. i won't take any part in this. you be the judge of your own case. is this the witness, friar? first, let her show her face, and then speak.
what have you done with the corpse, my lord?
speaking with goblins, owls, and demons. if we don't obey them, they'll suck the life out of us or pinch us black and blue.
pardon me, my lord. i will not show my face until my husband bids me to.
i've gotten it dirty, ashes to ashes, and dust to dust.
why are you mumbling to yourself instead of answering the order i gave you? dromio, you drone, you snail, you slug, you idiot!
what, are you married?
but tell us where it is, so we can take it to the chapel.
i've been transformed somehow, haven't i, master?
no, my lord.
don't believe it.
i think your mind has been altered, and mine too.
are you single?
believe what?
no, master, i've been changed in both mind and body.
no, my lord.
that i'd take your advice rather than keep my own secret. besides, you're a sponge! what is the son of a king supposed to say to a sponge?
your body looks the same.
a widow, then?
you think i'm a sponge, my lord?
no, i'm an ape ape = a counterfeit (of myself); a fool ape .
neither, my lord.
yes, sir, a sponge that soaks up the king's approval, his rewards, and his decisions. officers like that give the king the best service in the end. he keeps them in his mouth like an ape. first he moves them around, then he swallows them. when he needs what you have found out, he can just squeeze you like a sponge and you'll be dry again.
if you've changed into anything, it's an ass.
so, you are neither single, widow, nor wife?
i don't follow, my lord.
that's true. she's riding me hard, and all i want to do is get out of here. i must be as stupid as an ass, that's why i don't know her, but she knows me.
my lord, she may be a prostitute. many of them are neither virgin, widow, nor wife.
i'm glad about that. sly words are never understood by fools.
all right, all right. i won't play the fool anymore and just cry while my husband and his man laugh at me. come, husband, let's go to lunch. dromio, guard the door. husband, i'll eat with you in private today and hear your confession about all the pranks you've pulled. sirrah sirrah = term of address for a person of low social standing sirrah , if anyone asks where your master is, say he's out to lunch, and don't let anyone come in. come, sister. dromio, do a good job as doorkeeper.
keep that fellow quiet. i wish he were up on some charge of his own.
my lord, you have to tell us where the body is, and then go with us to see the king.
am i on earth, in heaven, or in hell? asleep or awake? crazy or sane? these people know me, but i don't
ok, my lord.
the body's with the king, but the king's not with the body. the king's a thing ...
know myself! i'll agree with them and keep with it, whatever happens.
my lord, i do admit i've never been married, and i also admit i'm not a virgin. i've slept with my husband, but my husband doesn't know he's slept with me.
a "thing," my lord?
master, should i watch the door?
he was drunk then, my lord. that's the best explanation.
a thing of no importance. take me to him. ready or not, here i come!
yes, and don't let anyone come in, or else i'll break your head.
for silence's sake, be silent yourself!
i've sent men to find him and retrieve the body. how dangerous to have this madman on the loose! but we can't throw him in jail. the people love him, because they judge based on appearance rather than reason. they'll pay attention to the severity of the punishment, not the severity of the crime. no, we must seem calm and fair-minded, and our sending him away must seem like a carefully considered move. but a terminal disease requires extreme treatment, or nothing at all.
come come, antipholus. we're late for lunch.
ok, my lord.
so what's happened?
signior angelo, please excuse us. my wife gets angry when i'm late. here's the story we'll tell her: that i was with you at your shop, watching you make her necklace, and that you're going to deliver it tomorrow. but here comes a scoundrel who says he saw me at the marketplace and that i beat on him, told him i'd given him a thousand marks in gold, and then lied about my wife and my house. you drunkard, what was that all about?
this is hardly a witness for lord angelo.
we can't get him to tell us where he's put the body.
say what you want, but i know what i know. you beat me at the marketplace, and i have the bruises to prove it. if my skin were paper and your punches were ink, you could read the beating on my body.
i'm coming to it now, my lord. the woman who's accusing him of fornication is actually accusing my husband. and she charges it was at the very time when, as i'll swear, he was in my arms, making love to me.
but where is he?
i think you're an ass.
is she accusing more men besides me?
outside, my lord, under guard, waiting for your orders.
honestly, it sure looks that way, judging by all the beatings and the bad treatment i'm getting. since i'm an ass, i ought to kick like one. then you'd be scared of me and keep away.
not that i know of.
bring him to me.
signior balthasar, you look upset. i hope the good meal i'm going to give you will show the goodwill i bear you and how welcome you are.
no? you say your husband.
hey, guildenstern! bring in my lord.
your delicacies aren't worth as much to me as your welcome is.
why, exactly, my lord. he's angelo, who believes he never slept with me, and who believes he slept with isabel.
now, hamlet, where's polonius?
signior balthasar, all the welcome in the world can't compare to a good meal, whatever kind of food it might be.
this is a strange deception. let's see your face.
at dinner.
good food's not a big deal, everyone can afford that.
my husband bids me to, so i'll lift my veil.
at dinner where?
and everyone can say "welcome," which is just a word.
this is the face, you cruel angelo, that you once swore was well worth looking at. this is the hand that was locked in yours with a signed contract. this is the body that kept your appointment with isabel, and satisfied you in your garden-house, pretending to be her.
not where he's eating, but where he's being eaten. a certain conference of worms hamlet is punning on a famous event in european history, the diet of worms, which was a gathering convened by the holy roman emperor in . conference of worms is chowing down on him. worms are the emperor of all diets. we fatten up all creatures to feed ourselves, and we fatten ourselves for the worms to eat when we're dead. a fat king and a skinny beggar are just two dishes at the same meal. that's all i have to say.
a little food and a huge welcome makes a joyous feast.
do you know this woman?
oh no, oh no!
sure, to a cheap host and an even cheaper guest. but look, even if my dishes are poor, eat them with my best wishes. you may come across better food, but not a warmer welcome. what's this? my door is locked. (to dromio) tell them to let us in.
sexually, she says.
a man can fish with the worm that ate a king, and then eat the fish he catches with that worm.
maud, bridget, marian, ciceley, gillian, ginn!
quiet, you!
what do you mean by that?
(from offstage) dope, moron, eunuch, fool, idiot, clown! either get away from the door or sit yourself down there! what, are you trying to summon women with your spells, is that why you're calling out so many names? isn't one enough for you? get away with you!
right, my lord.
nothing much, just to demonstrate that a king can move through the bowels of a beggar.
what clown did they hire as the new doorkeeper? my master is standing out in the street!
my lord, i must confess i know this woman. five years ago, there was some talk of marriage between she and i. it was broken off, partly because her dowry fell short of the agreed amount, but mainly because she had a reputation for promiscuity. for the last five years, i haven't spoken with her, seen her, or heard from her, i swear.
where is polonius?
(from offstage) then he should go back where he came from so he doesn't catch a cold.
noble prince, as light comes from heaven and words from breath, as there is meaning in truth and truth in virtue, i am engaged to this man as strongly as words can make vows. and, my good lord, last tuesday night in a garden house, he treated me as a wife. this being the truth, let me safely rise from my knees, or else let me be fixed here forever, like a marble monument!
in heaven. send a messager there if you want to be sure. if your messenger can't find him, you can check hell yourself. but seriously, if you don't find him within the next month, you'll be sure to smell him as you go upstairs into the main hall.
who's in there? hey, open the door!
i was amused up until now, but now my patience is exhausted. my good lord, let me apply the full force of the law. i believe these poor, demented women are just tools of some more powerful person who has put them up to this. give me the chance, my lord, to unravel this plot.
(to attendants) go look for him there.
(from offstage) right. give me one good reason and i will.
yes, with all my heart, and punish them as much as you like. you foolish friar and you wicked woman, in collusion with that one we just took away, even if you swore by every single saint, do you think your oaths would mean anything against his worthiness and reputation, which are proven beyond a doubt? you, lord escalus, sit with my colleague. do all you can to help him unravel this conspiracy and discover where it came from. there's another friar who put them up to this. send for him.
no need to hurry, he's not going anywhere.
a reason? so i can eat lunch. i haven't eaten today.
i wish he were here, my lord! because he did encourage the women to make this accusation. your provost knows where he lives and can go get him.
hamlet, i care for you just as much as i grieve for polonius. for your own protection, i must send you to england at once. so get ready to leave. the ship is set to sail, the wind is favorable, your servants are waiting for you, everything is ready for you to go to england.
(from offstage) and you won't eat here today. come again some other time.
go do it, immediately.
to england?
who do you think you are, keeping me out of my own house?
(to angelo) and you, my noble and respected friend, who have a stake in seeing this matter to the end, deal with the crimes against you as you think best, with any form of punishment. i'll leave you for a while, but don't move until you have fully decided the fate of these slanderers.
yes, hamlet.
(from offstage) i'm the doorkeeper for the moment, and my name is dromio.
my lord, we'll do it thoroughly.
good.
you jerk! you've stolen both my job and my name! true, the job never did me much good, and my name only ever got me in trouble. if you were the dromio in my shoes today, you would have felt like you traded your head for a target and your name for the name of "ass."
signor lucio, didn't you say you knew this friar lodowick to be a dishonest person?
yes, you'd think so, if you knew why i was sending you.
(from offstage) what's all the commotion, dromio? who's at the door?
"a hood does not make a monk", his friar's clothes are the only holy thing about him. and he's said very evil things about the duke.
i know an angel who can read your mind. but okay, off to england! good-bye, dear mother.
luce, let my master in.
we'll ask you to stay here until he comes and we lay those charges against him. we think this friar's a notorious character.
i'm your father, hamlet, your father who loves you.
(from offstage) no way, he's too late. tell your master that.
as much as anyone in vienna, on my word.
you're my mother. when you married my mother, the two of you became one flesh, so if you're my father you're also my mother. come on, off to england!
oh, lord, this makes me laugh! i'll come at you with the old proverb: "should i make myself at home?"
call that isabel here once again. i want to speak with her.
follow him on foot, and get him on board as quickly as possible. don't waste any time. i want him out of here tonight. go now; everything else is ready. please hurry.
(from offstage) i'll come at you with another: "i'd like to see you try it!"
please, my lord, let me do the questioning. you'll see how i'll handle her.
and you, dear king of england, if you care about me at all, and you should, since you can still feel the damage that denmark has done to you in the past and, so, fear and respect us, then you won't ignore my letters instructing you to kill hamlet immediately. do it,
(from offstage) if your name's luce, then i say: luce, good answer!
not better than he, according to her.
english king, since he's raging like a fever in my brain, and you must cure me. until i know it's been done, i'll never be happy, no matter how much luck i have.
listen up, you slave. are you going to let us in?
what did you say?
go, captain, and give the danish king my greetings. tell him that fortinbras asks permission to move his troops across denmark. you know the meeting place we've arranged. if his majesty wants us to do any favor for him, tell him his wish is my command.
(from offstage) i was going to ask you that question.
frankly, sir, i think, if you handled her privately, she'd be more likely to confess. she might be ashamed to do it in public.
i'll tell him, my lord.
(from offstage) but you already answered no.
i'll keep the matter out of the spotlight.
go ahead, then.
come, help me bang on the door, master. well done! we answered them, blow for blow.
that's the way. women are easiest in the dark.
sir, whose troops are these?
you good-for-nothing, let me in.
(to isabella) listen, mi this woman contradicts everything you've said.
the king of norway's, sir.
(from offstage) says who?
my lord, here comes the rascal i was talking about, with the provost.
what are they doing here, sir?
master, knock hard upon the door.
all in good time. don't speak to him until we summon you.
they're on their way to invade some part of poland.
(from offstage) he can knock till it hurts.
mum's the word.
who's commanding them, sir?
if i break the door down, slave, you'll be sorry for this.
now, sir, did you egg these women on to slander lord angelo? they have confessed you did.
the nephew of the old king of norway, fortinbras.
(from offstage) why are we putting up with all this? the town's got a pair of stocks stocks = an instrument of public punishment. offenders had their hands and feet locked in a wooden frame and were left to be mocked and abused. stocks .
it's a lie.
is he attacking the heartland of poland or some frontier?
(from offstage) who's making such a ruckus at the door?
what! do you know where you are?
to tell the truth, we're fighting to win a little patch of ground that's not worth anything. i myself wouldn't pay five ducats for it, if someone offered it to me to farm. and it won't provide any more profits than that to either the norwegian or the pole.
(from offstage) i swear, this town's plagued by troublesome boys.
all due respect to your great office, even the devil gets some respect for being the king of hell. where's the duke? he's the one who should hear me speak.
so then the poles won't be willing to defend it.
is that you, wife? you could have come sooner.
we represent the duke, and we will hear you speak. see that you speak honestly.
oh, yes they will. they've already stationed troops there.
(from offstage) your wife, you scoundrel? get away from the door.
boldly, at least. but, oh, you poor souls, did you come to find your lambs in the fox's den? say goodnight to any justice, then. is the duke gone? then your case is gone too. the duke's unjust, rejecting your accusation and turning your case over to the very villain you came here to accuse.
(to himself) even two thousand men and twenty-thousand ducats are just the beginning of what it will cost to settle this pointless matter. this is what happens when countries have too much money and peace. this quarrel is like an abcess that grows inside someone until it bursts and kills them, and no one knows why. (to the captain) thank you very much for the information, sir.
if she punishes you, master, she's sure to punish me.
this is the rascal i was talking about.
good-bye, sir.
it looks like we're not going to get food or welcome here.
why, you disrespectful and unholy friar, it's not enough that you've enlisted these women to accuse this worthy man, but with your foul mouth you call him a villain within his earshot? and then to shift your attack from him to the duke himself, to accuse the duke of being unjust? take him away, to the rack with him! we'll tear you limb from limb, until we discover your motive. to call the duke "unjust"!
will you please come now, my lord?
we argued about which was best, and now we won't get either one.
don't get so excited. the duke doesn't dare to hurt my little finger any more than he'd torture his own. i'm not his subject, or a native of this province. my business in this state has made me an on-looker here in vienna, where i've seen corruption boil and bubble until it overflows out of the brothels. you've got laws for all the crimes, but the crimes are so tolerated that the strong statutes are like those joke lists of "house rules" in stores elizabethan barbers posted mock lists of penalties for customers behaving badly in the shop joke lists of "house rules" in stores , people look at them just to laugh.
i'll be there in a minute. start without me.
master, your guests are just standing here. tell them they're welcome.
slandering the state! take him away to prison!
my god! everything i see shows me how wrong i am and tells me to hurry up and get on with my revenge. what is a human being if he just eats and sleeps? nothing more than a beast. god didn't create us with such a huge power of thought and a divine capacity for reason in order for us not to use them. now, whether it's animal-like mindlessness, or the cowardly hesitation
there's something strange in the air that's keeping us from getting in.
what evidence do you have against him, signor lucio? is this the man you told us about?
that comes from thinking too much (thinking thoughts that are one part wisdom, three parts cowardice), i don't know why i'm still alive to say "i have to do this deed" rather than having done it already. i have the motivation, the willpower, the ability, and the means to do it. it's as plain as the ground beneath my feet that i must do it. look at this massive army led by a delicate and tender prince who's so puffed up with divine ambition that he puts his fragile life at risk, exposing it to danger and death, for a reason as thin as an eggshell. to be truly great doesn't mean you'd only fight for a good reason. it means you'd fight over nothing if your honor was at stake. so where does that leave me, whose father has been murdered and mother defiled, ignoring these mental and emotional provocations and letting well enough alone? meanwhile, to my shame, i watch twenty thousand men go marching to their deaths for an illusion and a little bit of fame, fighting for a tiny piece of land not even big enough to bury them all. from now on, if my thoughts aren't violent i'll consider them worthless.
and if your clothes were as thin as mine, you'd really feel the air. the food inside is warm, but you're out here freezing. it would make any man as mad as a bull to be betrayed like this.
he's the one, my lord. come here, baldy friars traditionally shaved their heads baldy . do you know me?
i won't speak to her.
go get me something i can use to break down the door.
i remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice. i met you at the prison, back when the duke was away.
she's insistent. in fact, she's crazed. you can't help feeling sorry for her.
(from offstage) break anything here and i'll break your head.
oh, you did? and do you remember what you said about the duke?
what does she want?
i'll break words with you, sir. and since words are just wind, i'll be breaking wind right in your face.
definitely, sir.
she talks about her father a lot, and says she hears there are conspiracies around the world, and coughs, and beats her breast, and gets angry over tiny matters, and talks nonsense. her words don't mean anything, but her babbling causes her listeners to draw conclusions. they hear what they want to hear. her winks and nods and gestures do suggest that she means to convey a message, and not a happy one.
(from offstage) it seems you're the one who needs to be broken. be off with you, you dog!
do you, sir? and was the duke a pimp, a fool, and a coward, as you then reported him to be?
it's a good idea to speak to her, since she might lead those with evil intentions to dangerous conclusions.
i've had enough of this "off with you!" come on, let me in!
you must, sir, switch identities with me, before you claim those were my words. you were the one who said that about him, and much more, much worse.
show her in.
(from offstage) of course, when birds have no feathers and fish have no fins.
damn you, fellow! didn't i smack you in the nose for your comments?
(to herself) to my sick soul (since sin is always a sickness), every detail looks like an omen of disaster to come. guilt makes you so full of stupid suspicions that you give yourself away because you're trying so hard not to.
well, i'm going to break in. go get me a crow.
i swear i love the duke like i love myself.
where is the beautiful queen of denmark?
a crow without feathers? master, do you really mean that? he said "when fish have no fins," and you came back with a bird with no feathers. (to dromio of syracuse) if a crow gets us in, sirrah, then you and i will have a crow to pluck together "crow to pluck together" = score to settle with each other crow to pluck together .
look, how the villain would appease us now, after his treasonable slanders!
what are you doing, ophelia?
i meant a crowbar. get going already.
you can't talk to this type of fellow. take him away to prison! where is the provost? take him to prison! put him in chains, gag him. away with those loose women, too, and their co-conspirator.
(sings) how can you tell the difference between your true lover and some other? your true one wears a pilgrim's hat and a pilgrim's sandals and staff.
be patient, sir! don't do this! this will hurt your reputation and make your wife, who's innocent, look suspicious. look, you've known her a long time. she's wise, serious, mature, and modest. all this suggests that she has a good reason for doing this to you. let's assume that she has a reason, which you don't know yet: have faith that she'll eventually explain why she shut the doors on you today. listen to me. be patient and leave, and we'll all go to the tiger for lunch. in the evening, come back alone and figure out this strange resistance. if you get violent and break in now, in broad daylight, people will talk about it. the common mob will presume things, and your untarnished reputation will be damaged, and that damage will last long after you're dead. slander passes from generation to generation, and once it sticks to a family, it's there forever.
(to the provost) wait, sir, stay a minute.
oh heavens, what does that song mean, my dear?
you're right, i'll go quietly. and even though i'm in a distasteful mood, i'll work on being happy. i know a terrific wench. she's beautiful and charming, a little wild, but also gentle. we'll eat at her place. my wife has accused me more than once of misbehaving with this woman. i swear to her that i haven't, but it doesn't change anything. we'll go to her place for lunch. (to angelo) go get the necklace, which i'm sure is done by now. bring it to the porcupine, where this woman is. i'll to give it to her, just to spite my wife. hurry, good sir. since my own doors refuse to admit me, i'll knock somewhere else and see if they turn me away as well.
is he resisting arrest? help the provost, lucio.
i'm sorry, did you say something? please just listen. (sings) he is dead and gone, lady, he is dead and gone. at his head is a patch of green grass, and at his feet there is a tomb stone. oh, ho!
i'll meet you there in an hour.
come on, sir. come on, sir. come on, sir. ugh! so, you bald, lying rascal, you want to keep your hood on, do you? show your lowlife face, damn you! show your thieving face, and be hanged in an hour! won't it come off?
no, ophelia, 
do that. this little prank of hers is going to cost me.
you're the first lowlife to ever turn someone into a duke. first, provost, let me free these three gentle people. (to lucio) don't you sneak away, sir. the friar and you will have a chat later on. hold him.
just listen, please. (sings) his death shroud was as white as snow, 
have you completely forgotten your duty as a husband? antipholus, your marriage is still fresh and new, like the springtime, have the young shoots of your love already started to wither? is the building of your love already in ruins? if you married my sister for her wealth, then for her wealth's sake, treat her with more kindness. or if your affection has already strayed to another woman, at least be stealthy about it. hide your false love, blindfold yourself so my sister cannot read your faithlessness in your eyes. watch what you say, and don't let your own words give away your shame. look sweet and act kindly, be attractive in your disloyalty. disguise your misbehavior as integrity, and behave properly even if your heart is tainted. though you are sinful, carry yourself like a holy saint. be false in secret: why does she need to know? what foolish thief brags about his crimes? it's doubly wrong to cheat on your wife and then let her see the offense in your eyes. when you do something shameful, it's possible to put a good spin on it, but bad deeds are made worse by speaking of them. alas, poor women! we're so gullible, we believe it when you say you love us. even if you love someone else in your heart, make it appear as if you love us. we follow in your orbit, and you have the power to move us. so, my sweet brother-in-law, go inside. comfort my sister, cheer her up, call her "wife." it's a holy thing to lie a little when sweet flattery can smooth over trouble.
this may turn out worse than hanging.
my lord, look at this poor girl.
sweet mistress, i don't know what other name to give you, or how you've figured out mine, you seem as
(to escalus) i forgive the things you said to me. sit down. we'll take angelo's seat. (to angelo) sir, if i may. do you have any words, either intelligent or impudent, that can help you? if so, keep them until i tell my story. don't hold the truth back any longer.
(sings) covered with sweet flowers which did not fall to the ground in true-love showers.
wise and graceful as the earth is wonderful and divine. teach me how i should think and speak. my understanding is clumsy and human, riddled with errors, it is feeble, shallow, and weak. reveal to me the hidden meaning of your words. why would you have me betray the truth of my emotions and make my love wander in some other direction? are you a god? are you trying to remake me? go ahead, i'll yield to your power. but if i am myself, then i know for sure that your weeping sister is not my wife. i don't owe her any duty, it's you that i submit to. oh, sweet mermaid, don't command me to drown myself in the flood of your sister's tears. siren sirens = mermaids of greek myth who lured men to their death with their singing siren , use your song to make me love you instead, and i will obey. spread your golden hair over the silver waves, and i will lie down in it like a bed. if a man could die "to die" also has the suggestion "to orgasm." die in that glorious fantasy, then i think he would benefit by dying. love is light and therefore floats, if my love is false, let me sink!
oh my dreaded lord, i'd be even more guilty to think i could go undiscovered, now that i realize your grace, like some divine power, has seen my sins. so, good prince, stop inquiring about my shame. let my confession count as my trial. i beg only for the mercy of an immediate sentence and then death.
how are you doing, my pretty lady?
are you insane, talking like this?
come here, mariana. (to angelo) were you ever engaged to this woman?
i'm quite well, and may god give you what you deserve. they say the baker's daughter was turned into an owl for refusing jesus' bread. my lord, we know what we are now, but not what we may become. may god be at your table.
not insane, but amazed. i don't know how. in the original "shakespearean line, "mated" can mean both "overthrown" and "married."
i was, my lord.
she's talking about her dead father.
your eyes are playing tricks on you.
take her and marry her at once. you perform the ceremony, friar, and when it's done, bring him back here. go with him, provost.
oh, let's not talk about that, but when they ask you what it means, just say: (sings) tomorrow is st. valentine's day and early in the morning i'm a girl below your window waiting to be your valentine. then he got up and put on his clothes and opened the door to his room. he let in the girl, and when she left she wasn't a virgin anymore.
that's because you are near me, and you're as dazzling as the sun.
my lord, i'm more amazed by angelo's dishonesty than by the strangeness of this situation.
pretty ophelia, 
train your eye on what you should be looking at, and you'll see straight again.
come here, isabel. your friar is now your prince, but my heart hasn't changed with my clothes. i guided and devoted myself to your affairs then, and i'm still acting for you now.
hang on, i'll end it soon, i promise: (sings) by the name of jesus and saint charity, my goodness, what a shame it is, young men will do it if they get a chance: by god, they're very bad. she said, "before you got me into bed, you promised to marry me." he answers: "i would have married you, i swear, if you hadn't gone to bed with me."
sweet love, i'd rather close my eyes than look at darkness.
oh, forgive me! to think that i, your servant, unknowingly used and created problems for your royal person!
how long has she been like this?
why are you calling me "love"? call my sister that.
you're forgiven, isabel. and now, dear girl, be as generous to me. i know your brother's death hurts you deeply. and you may be wondering why i disguised myself, working behind the scenes to save his life, and didn't just use my authority rather than let him die. sweet girl, it was the speed of his execution, which i thought would take longer, that ruined my plan. but, peace be with him! the afterlife is a better life, since you don't have to fear death anymore. try to take comfort in the fact that your brother has that happiness.
i hope everything will turn out fine. we must be patient, but i can't help crying when i think of him being laid in the cold ground. my brother will hear about this. and so i thank you for your good advice. come, driver! good night, ladies, good night, sweet ladies, good night, good night.
your sister's sister.
i do, my lord.
follow her. keep an eye on her, please.
that's my sister.
for mariana's sake, you must forgive this newly married man, whose lecherous imagination wronged your well-defended honor. but after he condemned your brother, he committed two crimes, violating your virginity and breaking his promise about the pardon that your brother's life depended on. even the merciful part of the law cries out, "an angelo for claudio, death for death!" haste always results in hasty decisions, and deliberation comes from slowness. one thing is rewarded by a similar thing, and the measure of justice you use will be the measure used against you. so, angelo, your crime is clear for all to see, and it denies you the right to any preferential treatment, even if you yourself feel otherwise. i sentence you to be executed on the very block where claudio knelt to die, and just as quickly. take him away!
oh, her grief has poisoned her mind. her father died and now look at her! oh, gertrude, gertrude, when bad things happen, they don't come one at a time, like enemy spies, but all at once like an army. first her father was killed, then your son was taken away, because of his own violent actions. the people are confused and spreading nasty rumors about polonius's death, and i was a fool to bury him in a hurry, without a proper state funeral. poor ophelia has been robbed of her sanity, without which we're just pictures, or animals. last but not least, her brother has secretly returned from france and is surrounded by gossip-mongers, who fill his ears with wicked stories about his father's death. deprived of proper evidence, he'll naturally attribute the murder to me. oh, dear gertrude, i feel as though i'm being murdered many times over.
no, it's you: my better half. my eye's clear vision, my heart's most precious desire. my food, my fortune, my sweetest hope, my heaven on earth, and my entrance to heaven.
oh, my most gracious lord, please don't make a mockery of my marriage!
oh, no, what's that noise?
my sister is all those things, or else she should be.
it's your husband who's made a mockery of your marriage. i thought it appropriate that you be married, to protect your honor. otherwise, revealing that he'd slept with you would haunt your life and destroy your future prospects. as for his possessions, technically they belong to the state, but we are giving you a widow's rights and bequeathing them to you, to buy you a better husband.
listen! where are my bodyguards? let them guard the door.
call yourself your own sister, because i want you. i will love you, and with you i'll spend my life. you have no husband yet, and i have no wife. give me your hand.
oh my dear lord, i don't want any other man or any better man.
what is it?
oh, wait, sir. stay here. i'll go get my sister and see what she thinks.
you shouldn't want him. my decision is final.
you must save yourself, my lord. the young laertes, like the ocean when it floods the shore and devours the lowlands, is leading a rebellion against your government. the crowd calls him "lord" and shouts, "we want laertes to be king!" it's as if they were starting the world from scratch right now, throwing out the traditions and ancient customs that are the support of every word we utter. they throw their caps in the air and yell, "laertes will be king! laertes king!"
what's going on, dromio? where are you running so fast?
my gentle lord, 
they sound so cheerful as they hunt down the wrong prey! oh, you're on the wrong track, you disloyal danish dogs!
do you know me? am i dromio? am i your servant? am i myself?
you're just wasting your time. take him to his death!
the doors have been smashed open.
you are dromio, you are my servant, and you are yourself.
now, sir, about you.
where's this so-called king? men, wait outside.
i'm an ass, i'm a woman's servant, and i'm beside myself.
oh, my good lord! sweet isabel, take my side. kneel with me, and for the rest of my life i'll be at your service.
no, let us in!
what woman's servant? what do you mean, beside yourself?
it makes no sense to beg her. if she were to kneel and plead for mercy, her brother's horrified ghost would break through his stone-covered grave and drag her away with him.
please wait.
i'll tell you. besides belonging to myself, i belong to a woman. a woman who says she owns me, who won't leave me alone, and who wants me.
isabel, sweet isabel, just kneel beside me, and hold out your hands. don't say anything, i'll do all the talking. they say the best men are formed out of their faults, and most of them become much better for being a little bad. that might happen with my husband. oh, isabel, won't you kneel?
all right, we will, we will.
how does she claim to own you?
he dies for claudio's death.
thank you. guard the door. (to claudius) oh, you vile king, give me my father!
the same way a person would claim to own his horse. and she wants me as a beast. i don't mean that she wants me because i'm a beast, but that she, who is a beast, says i belong to her.
(kneeling) generous sir, please look on this condemned man as if my brother were still alive. to some extent, i think his behavior was sincere, until he laid eyes on me. so, don't let him die. my brother was justly treated, in the sense that he did the thing he was executed for. but angelo didn't actually fulfill his bad intentions, and his behavior should be considered with that fact in mind. intentions are merely thoughts, and thoughts aren't subject to our control.
calm down, good laertes.
what's she like?
merely, my lord.
i've got exactly one calm drop of blood in my body, and it proclaims that i'm a bastard laertes suggests that since he hasn't yet punished his father's murderer, he must not be his real son. i'm a bastard , says my father was betrayed, and stamps the label "whore" on the pure forehead of my devoted mother.
she has a very significant body. you couldn't even talk about it without saying, "i beg your pardon." i.e., you'd have to say "i beg your pardon" when talking about her body because you'd have to use obscene language to discuss it. "i beg your pardon." my luck would be running thin if i ended up with her, although she'd make it a fat marriage.
your pleading's no use. stand up, i say. another crime has just occurred to me. provost, why was claudio beheaded at such an unusual hour?
laertes, what makes you so rebellious? let him go, gertrude. don't worry about my getting hurt. god protects the king, so traitors can't hurt him., tell me, laertes, why you're so angry., gertrude, let him go., tell me, man.
what do you mean, a fat marriage?
it was so ordered.
where's my father?
sir, she works in the kitchen, so she's oily. the only thing i could do with her is to use all that oil as fuel in a lamp and then use that light to run away by. her
did you have a special warrant?
he's dead.
clothes are so oily, they'd burn through the longest winter. even if she lives till the end of the world, she'd keep burning an additional week.
no, my good lord, it was a private message.
but the king didn't kill him.
what's her skin like?
you're fired for this. turn in your keys.
let him ask what he wants to ask.
it's dark, like my shoe. but it's not as clean. you'd be up to your ankles in how filthy it is.
forgive me, noble lord. i thought it might be wrong, but wasn't sure. after further consideration, i did change my mind, and to prove i did, i kept alive another prisoner who was to be executed by a private order.
how did he end up dead? don't mess with me. to hell with my vows of allegiance to you! vows can go to hell! conscience, too! i don't care if i'm damned. i don't care what happens to me in this world or the next. whatever happens, happens, but i'll get revenge for my father's murder.
some water will fix that.
who's he?
who's stopping you?
no, it's permanent. noah's flood wouldn't be enough water to clean it.
his name is barnardine.
only my free will, nothing else. what little means i have, i'll use against you.
what's her name?
i wish you had done the same with claudio. go get him. let me see him.
my dear laertes, in your eagerness to know the truth about your father's death, are you determined to hurt your father's friends and enemies alike?
nell. but an ell an "ell" is a unit of measure forty-five inches long. ell and three-quarters wouldn't be long enough to measure her waist.
lord angelo, i am sorry that someone so educated and wise, as you always appeared to be, should slip so badly, both in the heat of desire and the lack of judgment afterward.
no, only his enemies.
so she's wide?
i am sorry that i cause such sorrow, and it sticks so deeply in my penitent heart that it makes me crave death more than mercy. i deserve death, and beg for it.
do you want to know who they are, then?
her hips are as wide as she is tall. she's round, like a globe. i could use her like a map to find out where countries are.
which one is this barnardine?
i'll open my arms wide to his true friends, and like a mother pelican pelicans were believed to feed their young with their own blood. pelican with her brood, i'll even give my life for them.
what part of her body is ireland?
this one, my lord.
why, now you're talking like a good son and a true gentleman. i'll prove to you as clearly as daylight that i'm innocent of your father's death, and am struck with grief over it.
her bottom. it's near the bogs a "bog" is a kind of swamp found in ireland, but it's also a slang term for toilet. bogs .
a certain friar told me about this man. (to barnardine) fellow, you're said to have a stubborn soul, one that can't imagine an existence beyond this one, and shapes your life accordingly. you're doomed. but i pardon you for all your crimes here on earth, and hope you'll take advantage of this mercy to prepare for the better world to come. friar, counsel him. i leave him in your hands. who's that covered-up fellow?
what's that noise?
where's scotland?
this is another prisoner i saved, who should have died when claudio lost his head. he looks almost exactly like claudio.
oh, heat, dry up my brains! salty tears, burn my eyes! by heaven, i'll get revenge for your madness! oh, you springtime rose, dear maiden, kind sister, sweet ophelia! is it possible that a young woman's mind could fade away as easily as an old man's life? human nature is refined and thoughtful, person graciously gives a valuable part of herself away to her beloved, as ophelia has sent off her sanity to her dead father.
in the palm of her hand, which is covered in calluses shakespeare's audience would hear "barren ness." a "ness" in scotland is a wide-open space, nell's calloused palms remind dromio of the rough, empty terrain of scotland. calluses .
(to isabella) if he resembles your brother, then for his sake, he's pardoned. and for your own lovely sake, give me your hand and say you'll be mine. he's my brother, too, but there'll be a more appropriate time for that. by the way angelo is behaving, i think he realizes this means he's safe. well, angelo, your evil has repaid you well. make sure you love your wife since her worth is equal to yours. i'm feeling merciful, and yet here's someone i can't forgive. (to lucio) you, who called me a fool, a coward, a lecher, an ass, a madman. what did i ever do to you that you call me these things?
(sings) they carried him uncovered in the coffin, hey non nonny, nonny, hey nonny. and tears poured down into his grave. good-bye, honey.
where's france?
i swear, my lord, i only spoke according to what people say of you. you can hang me for it, if you want, but i wouldn't mind if you preferred to whip me.
if you were sane and could urge me to take revenge, you couldn't be more persuasive than you are now.
in her forehead at the time this play was written, there had recently been a rebellion against the heir to france's throne. since nell is going bald, dromio puns that her forehead is like france, rebelling against her hair (or "heir"). forehead , which is enormous because of her receding hairline.
whipping first, sir, and hanging afterward. proclaim it, provost, around the city, that if this lecher wronged any woman, as i heard him swear himself he got someone pregnant, let her appear, and he'll marry her. after the wedding, let him be whipped and hanged.
you're supposed to sing, "a down a-down," and you, "call him a-down-a." oh, how it turns around like a wheel! like the worker who stole his boss's daughter.
where's england?
i beg your highness, don't marry me to a whore. your highness just said i made you a duke. my good lord, don't pay me back by making me husband of a cheating wife.
this nonsense means more than rational speech.
i thought her teeth might be like the white cliffs the white cliffs of dover are located in southern england, along the english channel. the cliffs are covered in lime, which renders them white in color. white cliffs , but they're dark and stained. so i guess it's her chin, which is separated from her forehead by all the sweat on her face.
by my honor, you will marry her. i forgive your slurs, and in so doing, lift your other punishments. take him to prison, and see that my wishes are carried out.
look at my flowers. there's rosemary, that's for remembering. please remember, love. and there are pansies, they're for thoughts.
where's spain?
marrying a whore, my lord, is like being pressed to death a type of torture in which stones were piled upon a person until he confessed or was crushed pressed to death , whipped, and hanged.
a case study in madness, to connect memory and thought.
honestly, i didn't see it, but i felt it in her hot breath.
you deserve it for slandering a prince.
(to gertrude ) here are fennel and columbines for you, they symbolize adultery. (to claudius) and here's rue for you, it symbolizes repentance. we can call it the merciful sunday flower. you should wear it for a different reason. and here's a daisy, for unhappy love. i'd give you some violets, flowers of faithfulness, but they all dried up when my father died. they say he looked good when he died. (sings) for good sweet robin is all my joy.
where's america and the west indies?
claudio, the girl you wronged, make sure you marry her. joy to you, mariana! love her, angelo. i've heard her confession, and i know her virtue. thanks, good friend escalus, for being so good. a greater expression of my gratitude is yet to come. thanks, provost, for your care and ability to keep secrets. i'm going to give you a better position. forgive him, angelo, for bringing you ragozine's head in place of claudio's. the crime redeems itself. dear isabel, i have a proposal that's greatly to your benefit, if you'll lend a willing ear. it's along the lines of what's mine is yours, and what's yours is mine. so, accompany me to my palace, where i'll show and tell you everything you ought to know.
sadness and torment, suffering, hell itself, she makes them almost pretty.
oh, sir, on her nose, which is covered with pimples, sores, and red welts. it points straight down at her mouth, which catches everything that drips from it. exotic jewels in shakespeare's time, america and the west indies were known for having exotic jewels. exotic jewels
(sings) and won't he come again? and won't he come again? no, no, he's dead. go to your deathbed. he'll never come again. his beard was white as snow, his hair was all white too. he's gone, he's gone, and we moan as we're cast away. god have mercy on his soul. and on the souls of all good christians, i hope. goodbye, god be with you.
where's belgium and the netherlands the netherlands were known as the "low countries." netherlands ?
despite how shaken and pale with worry we are, let's take advantage of this moment of peace to catch our breath, and as we pant we'll speak about the battles we'll soon fight in foreign lands. england will no longer be wet with her own people's blood. war will no longer damage her fields, and warhorses will no longer trample her flowers. the soldiers on either side of this vicious civil war were countrymen and brothers, as similar to one another as shooting stars. they may have clashed recently, but now they will march together in beautiful formation, no longer struggling against family and friend. war is like a mishandled knife: it can cut its owner, but it will no longer cut us. my friends, we are now soldiers for christ, and we take his blessed cross as our battle flag. we'll raise a new army of englishmen and march all the way to the holy land. our soldiers were born to chase non-believers from that holy ground touched by jesus' feet, feet which, fourteen hundred years ago, were nailed to the cross for our sins.
do you see this, oh, god?
oh, sir, i didn't look down there. in conclusion, this witch said i was hers. she called me dromio and swore i'd promised to marry her. she knew private things about my body, like the birthmark on my shoulder, the mole on my neck, and the huge wart on my left arm. i was terrified, and i ran away from her as if she were a witch. and i think that if i hadn't been brave and strong, she would have turned me into a dog and made me her slave.
but that's been my plan for a year now, so there's no point in telling you all this again. that's not the issue at hand. so tell me, my noble kinsman westmoreland, what my royal advisors decided last night about this important undertaking.
laertes, i have a right to share your grief. go choose your wisest friends, and have them listen to both of us and decide which of us is right. if directly or indirectly they find me implicated in your father's murder, i'll give up my kingdom, my crown, my life, and everything i call my own to you as restitution. but if they find me innocent, then be patient and i'll work to satisfy to the fullest extent your deepest need for revenge.
get going, hustle over to the port. if there's enough wind for a ship to sail out tonight, i won't spend tonight in this town. if a ship's leaving, come to the marketplace. i'll wait there for you. if everyone here knows us but we don't know anybody, it's time, i think, for us to pack our bags and take off.
your highness, there was hot debate about this urgent mission, and many responsibilities had just been assigned when we were suddenly cut off by a messenger with bad news from wales. the worst of it was that the noble mortimer, who was leading the men of herefordshire in battle against that barbarian glendower, was captured. a thousand of his men have been butchered, their dead corpses desecrated by the welsh women. the things they did were so horrible that i'm too ashamed to report them.
all right, then. the way he died, his secret funeral, no funeral rites or military display, no noble rites or formal ceremony, shout out from heaven and earth that i must call the way he died into question.
i'll run from this woman who claims to be my wife as fast as i'd run from a bear.
i suppose this news disrupts our plans to invade the holy land.
and you're right to do so. may the guilty party be punished by death. please, come with me.
everyone who lives here is a witch. that means it's high time for me to go. that woman who claims i am her husband, i loathe her in my soul. but her gorgeous sister, who's so lovely and gracious, who's so charming and who speaks so well,
this and other things, your highness: even more unsettling and unwelcome news has arrived from the north. on holy cross day, the heroic young harry percy, who we know as hotspur, fought at holmeden against archibald, earl of douglas, that brave and battle-proven scotsman. the two of them fought a long and bloody battle there, judging by the way the guns were firing. the messenger who brought the news left when the battle was at its height, so he couldn't say for sure who had won.
who are the people who want to speak with me?
almost makes me want to stay here against my better judgment. i'd better stop up my ears against this siren's song.
my loyal, hard-working friend sir walter blunt has arrived here at court, fresh off his horse and covered with the mud of every town from holmedon to here. he's brought us very welcome news. the earl of douglas has been defeated. blunt saw ten thousand scotsmen and twenty-two knights piled up in their own blood on the fields of holmedon. hotspur took these men prisoner: douglas' son mordake, the earl of fife; as well as the earls of athol, murray, angus, and menteith. that's a valuable group! a fantastic catch, isn't it, kinsman?
sailors, sir. they say they have letters for you.
master antipholus, 
truly, that's a conquest to make even a prince brag.
show them in.
yes, that's my name.
yes, and that makes me sad. seeing lord northumberland with such a blessed son makes me commit the sin of envy. when honor speaks, it speaks about hotspur. in a grove of trees, hotspur stands straightest. he is the favorite darling of fortune. when i see how he is praised, i can only see my own son, harry, and his reputation for wildness and dishonor. if only it could be proven that a fairy had come to their cradles at night and switched them! then the percy family would have my harry, and we plantagenets would have hotspur! but stop thinking about harry now. westmoreland, what do you make of young percy's arrogance? he says he'll keep all the prisoners prisoners taken in battle were supposed to be turned over to the king so that he could collect ransoms from them. hotspur's refusal to do this breaks the usual rules and upsets king henry. prisoners he captured for himself, and will only send me mordrake, earl of fife.
i don't know who else would send me a letter from abroad except hamlet.
i know that, sir. look, here's the necklace. i was on my way to take it to you at the porcupine, but it took a little longer to finish than i thought it would.
his uncle worcester put him up to that. it is just like worcester to act against you in all ways. he's the one making hotspur behave like this, flaunting his youth in the face of your dignified age.
hello, sir. god bless you.
what do you want me to do with this?
i've sent for hotspur to explain himself. we'll have to postpone the plans for our crusade to jerusalem. go tell my advisers that our next meeting will be wednesday at windsor. then hurry back here. there's more to be said and done, but i'm too angry now to speak.
may he bless you, too.
whatever you want, i made it for you.
i will, my lord.
he will, sir, if he wants to. there's a letter for you, sir. it's from the ambassador, lord hamlet, who was going to england, if your name's horatio, as they told me it is. (he hands horatio a letter)
made it for me? i didn't order it.
hal, what time is it, my boy?
(reading the letter) "horatio, when you've read this letter, find a way to let these guys see the king. they have letters for him. before we were at sea for even two days, a pirate ship equipped for battle pursued us. we were too slow to escape, so we were forced to stand and fight. in the battle that followed i ended up on the pirate ship. just then they left our ship behind, so i became the only prisoner on board. they've treated me quite mercifully for thieves, but they knew what they were doing. they want me to do a favor for them.
you did, not just once or twice, but twenty times. take it home and make your wife happy. i'll come over at suppertime and you can pay me for it then.
you are so wasted from drinking booze and loosening your pants after lunch and sleeping on benches all afternoon that you don't even remember how to ask for what you really want to know. what the hell does it matter to you what time it is? unless hours were glasses of wine, minutes were chickens, clocks were whores' tongues, sundials were whorehouse signs and the sun itself were a hot woman in a flame-colored dress, i don't see any reason why you would need to know the time.
give the king the letters i've sent, and come to me as fast as you would run from death. i've got things to tell you that will make you speechless, and they aren't even half the story. these guys will take you to me. rosencrantz and guildenstern are on their way to england. i have a lot to tell you about them. good-bye. your trusted friend, hamlet." come, men. i'll show you where to deliver these letters as quickly as possible, so that you can take me to the man who sent them.
you should take the money now. if you don't, you might never see the money or the necklace ever again.
now you're talking, hal. thieves like us operate at night, by the moon and stars, and not by the sun. i hope, pretty boy, that when you become king, god save your grace, or maybe i should just call you "your majesty," since you don't have any grace, 
now you've got to acknowledge my innocence and believe i'm your friend, since you've heard and understood that the man who killed your father was trying to kill me.
you're a funny man, sir. take care.
none?
it looks that way. but tell me why you didn't take immediate action against his criminal acts, when your own safety and everything else would seem to call for it.
i don't know what to think about this. but what i do think is that nobody in his right mind would refuse to accept such a beautiful necklace when somebody offers it. i
no, i swear. not even enough to say grace before a snack.
oh, for two main reasons which may seem weak to you, but strong to me. the queen, his mother, is devoted to him. and (for better or worse, whichever it is) she is such a part of my life and soul that i can't live apart from her, any more than a planet can leave its orbit. the other reason why i couldn't prosecute and arrest hamlet is that the public loves him. in their affection they overlook all his faults. like magic, they convert them into virtues, so whatever i said against him would end up hurting me, not him.
guess there's no need to be a thief in ephesus. people come up to you in the street and hand you gold. i'll go wait for dromio at the marketplace. if any ships are sailing, i'll get right on one.
come on, out with it. get to the point.
and so i've lost my noble father, had my sister driven insane, my sister who once was (if i can praise her for what she once was, not what she is now) the most perfect girl who ever lived. but i'll get my revenge.
you've owed me this money since the pentecost holiday. i haven't pressed you for it, and i wouldn't now except that i'm going to persia and i need money for the trip. so pay me now, or i'll have this officer arrest you.
okay then, pretty boy. whey you become king, don't let those of us who work at night be blamed for wasting daylight by sleeping through it. give us fancy names: "servants of the moon goddess diana;" "gentlemen of shadows;" "lunar laborers." make people admire us for being well behaved. after all, we're governed by the same force that governs the tides, the pale and cool moon, who lights our way as we sneak around.
don't you worry about that. you must not think that i'm so lazy and dull that i can be severely threatened and think it's just a game. you'll hear more about my plans soon enough. i loved your father, and i love myself, which should be enough to, 
antipholus owes me the exact amount that i owe you. just before i ran into you, i gave him a necklace. at five o'clock he's going to pay me for it. please, come to his house with me. i'll pay what i owe you then and say thank you as well.
well said. and you're right, our luck ebbs and flows like the tide, because, like the sea, we're governed by the moon. i'll prove it. imagine a bag of gold, brilliantly swiped on a monday night and extravagantly spent on a tuesday morning. you snatch it, shouting, "hand it off!" and spend it, calling, "bring it on!" it's like the gallows: one minute you're at the bottom of the ladder, low tide. the next, you're swinging from the top, high tide!
what is it? what's the news?
he saves you the trouble: look, here he comes.
by god that's right, my boy! and by the way, isn't the hostess of the tavern the following banter about the hostess of the tavern depends on puns that suggest she's not only running a legitimate business (the bar), but an illegal one as well (a house of prostitution). hostess of the tavern a delicious woman?
letters, my lord, from hamlet. this one's for your highness, this one for the queen. (gives claudius letters)
(to dromio) i'm going to the jeweler's house. you go buy a piece of rope, i'll whip my wife and her cohorts for locking me out of my own house. wait a minute! i see the jeweler. go, be gone with you. buy a rope and bring it to me.
sweet as honey from hybla hybla is a place in sicily that is famous for its bees and honey. hybla , you dirty old man. and isn't a sheriff's uniform a pretty durable outfit?
from hamlet? who delivered them?
i buy myself a thousand beatings a year if i buy a rope. there's no consensus about the exact meaning of this obscure line, which is an expression of dromio's frustration.
what's that supposed to mean, you crazy man? you're in the mood for jokes? why are you talking to me about a sheriff's uniform?
sailors, my lord, or so they say. i didn't see them. claudio gave them to me, and he got them from the one who delivered them.
(to angelo) good luck to any man who trusts you. i swore that you would come with the necklace, but neither you nor the necklace showed up. perhaps you were concerned about being chained to me and so decided not to come.
well, why the hell are you asking me about the hostess of the tavern?
laertes, i want you to hear what they say. leave us alone now.
all joking aside, here's an invoice spelling out exactly how many carats the necklace weighs as well as the quality of the gold and the workmanship. the total due is about three ducats more than i owe this gentleman. please, pay him immediately. he's about to leave on a trip and he's waiting for the money.
you've asked her for the bill shakespeare's line had the added suggestion that hal has slept with the hostess. bill enough times.
(reads) "high and mighty one, you know i've been set down naked, you might say, in your kingdom. tomorrow i'll beg permission to look into your kingly eyes, at which point i'll tell you the story (after first apologizing) of how i came back to denmark so strangely and suddenly. hamlet"
i don't have the cash right now. besides, i have some business to take care of in town. good signior, take this stranger to my house. bring the necklace with you, and tell my wife to pay you the amount due. i might make it back in time to meet you.
did i ever ask you to pay for any of it?
what does this mean? has everyone else come back too? or is it all a lie, and no one has yet returned?
so you'll bring the necklace to her yourself?
no. i've got to admit, you've settled with her all by yourself.
do you recognize the handwriting?
no. you bring it in case i can't make it.
and not just with her, but wherever my cash was good. and when i ran out, i switched to credit.
it's hamlet's writing. "naked," he says. and in a p.s. he adds, "alone." can you help me out with this?
all right, sir, i will. do you have it with you?
and you've stretched that so far that if it weren't "here apparent" that you're the "heir apparent," your credit wouldn't be worth a thing. but listen, pretty boy. will england still have hangmen when you're king? and will a thief's courage still be thwarted by that nasty old clown, the law? when you're king, don't hang thieves.
i have no clue, my lord. but let him come. it warms my weary heart to think i'll get the chance to look him in the eye and say, "you did this."
if i don't, i hope you do. or else you'll leave without your money.
no. you will.
if that's how you feel, laertes, and why shouldn't you? will you let me guide and direct you?
listen, please, give me the necklace. this gentleman's ready to go. the wind is right and it's high tide, and i've delayed him a long time already.
i will? excellent! by god, i'll be a great judge.
yes, my lord, as long as you won't lead me toward peace.
good lord! you're using this as an excuse for not showing up at the porcupine like you promised. i should have reprimanded you then for not bringing it, but you started fighting with me first.
you've judged wrong already. i mean, you'll be in charge of hanging thieves, and become a superb hangman.
no, just toward your own peace of mind. if he's come back to denmark without plans to continue on his trip, then i'll trick him into an undertaking, which i'm working out now, that's sure to kill him. when he dies, no one will be blamed, even his mother will call it an accident.
it's getting late. please, sir, hurry up.
all right, hal. i'll tell you this: in a way, being a hangman agrees with me just as well as hanging around the court.
my lord, i'll let you make the decision. i only ask to be in on your plans, the agent of his death.
antipholus, you hear how the man pleads with me. give me the necklace!
waiting to get your suits suits = petitions suits granted?
that'll be fine. since you left, people have been talking about, and within earshot of hamlet, a certain quality of yours in which, they say, you shine. all your talents and gifts didn't arouse as much envy from him as this one quality did, though to me it's far from your best attribute.
give it to my wife, and get your money.
exactly. i've got plenty of those, just like the hangman has plenty of suits, the suits he takes off the dead men he hangs., damn, i'm as depressed as a tomcat or a dancing bear in chains.
what quality is that, my lord?
come, come. you know i gave it to you just now. send the necklace to her, or send me with a token that will authorize her to pay me.
or an old lion, or a guitar playing a sad lovesong.
a trivial little ribbon on the cap of youth, yet an important one, too, since casual clothes suit young people as much as serious business suits and overcoats suit the middle-aged. two months ago i met a gentleman from normandy. i've fought against the french and have seen how well they ride, but this man was a magician on horseback. it was as if he were part of the horse, so skillful that even having seen him, i can hardly conceive of the tricks he did.
damn it, this isn't funny. where's the necklace? let me see it.
or the wailing of a bagpipe.
hmm, he was from normandy, you say?
my business cannot wait for this delay. (to antipholus) good sir, tell me if you're going to pay me. if not, i'll turn this man over to the officer.
how about a rabbit, or a trip to moorditch? in shakespeare's time it was believed that eating rabbit caused depression. moorditch was an open ditch that served as london's main sewer channel. moorditch?
yes, from normandy.
pay you? what should i pay you?
you have a knack for foul images. you are the most metaphorical and rascally, sweet young prince. but hal, please stop corrupting me with frivolous matters. i wish to god that you and i knew where we could buy a supply of good reputations. the other day, an elderly lord on the king's council came up to me in the street and lectured me about you, but i didn't pay any attention. he spoke wisely, but i ignored him. but he made sense, and in the street, too.
i bet it was lamond.
the money you owe me for the necklace.
you did well. you know the scripture: "wisdom cries out in the street but no man listens."
yes, that's the one.
i owe you nothing until i receive the necklace.
oh, you have a wicked talent for wrongly quoting scripture, you really could corrupt a saint. you've deeply harmed me, hal, and god forgive you for it! before i met you, i was innocent. and now, if i can speak truly, i'm no better than a sinner. i've got to change my life, and i will change my life, by god. if i don't, i'm an evildoer. i won't be damned, not for any king's son in the universe.
i know him well. he's his homeland's jewel.
you know that i gave it to you a half hour ago.
where should we go stealing tomorrow, jack?
he mentioned you to me, giving you such high marks in fencing that he exclaimed it would be a miracle if someone could match you. french fencers wouldn't be good enough for you, he said, since they don't have the right moves or skills. hamlet was so jealous when he heard lamond's report that he talked about nothing else but having you come over and play against him. now, the point is ...
you gave me nothing, and you wrong me by saying you did.
for god's sake, wherever you want, boy. i'll be one of the gang. if i'm not, call me evildoer and string me up.
what's the point, my lord?
you wrong me even more, sir, by denying it. consider how poorly this reflects on me.
i see you've changed your life, alright. from praying to pursesnatching.
laertes, did you love your father? or is your grief just an illusion, a mere painting of sorrow?
well, officer, i charge you to arrest him.
it's my calling, hal. it's no sin for a man to follow his calling.
how could you ask?
i will. (to angelo) and i order you to obey me, in the name of the duke.
poins! now we'll find out whether mr. gadshill has planned a robbery. if good deeds bring a man to heaven, there's no hell hot enough for poins. this is the most incredible villain, whoever said "stick 'em up!" to an honest man.
not that i suspect you didn't love your father, but i've seen it happen that, as the days go by, time dampens the flame of love. the fire of love always burns itself out, and nothing stays the way it began. even a good thing can grow too big and die from its own excess. we should do what we intend to do right when we intend it, since our intentions are subject to as many weakenings and delays as there are words in the dictionary and accidents in life. and then all our "woulds" and "shoulds" are nothing but hot air. but back to my point: hamlet's coming back. what proof will you offer, in action, not just words, that you're your father's son?
this harms my reputation. either pay this sum, antipholus, or i'll have this officer arrest you.
morning, ned.
i'll cut hamlet's throat in church.
pay for something i never got? go ahead, you fool. arrest me if you dare.
morning, sweet hal. what's mr. feelbad got to say? what's going on, sir john, wino jack? how's your deal with the devil coming along? you sold him your soul last good friday for some cold chicken and a glass of cheap wine, right?
it's true, no place, not even a church, should offer refuge to that murderer. revenge should have no limits. but laertes, will you do this: stay in your room? when hamlet comes home he'll learn you're here. i'll have people praise your excellence and put a double coat on the fame the frenchman gave you. in short, we'll get you together and place bets on you. hamlet's so careless, high-minded, and unsuspecting that he won't examine the swords beforehand, so you can easily choose one with a sharpened point and in one thrust avenge the death of your father.
officer, here's your fee, arrest him. i would have my own brother arrested if he treated me so terribly.
the devil will get what's coming to him. sir john's a man of his word, and he never disagrees with a proverb. he will "give the devil his due."
i'll do it, and i'll put a little dab of something on my sword as well. from a quack doctor i bought some oil so poisonous that if you dip a knife in it, no medicine in the world can save the person who's scratched by it. if i even graze his skin slightly, he's likely to die.
you're under arrest, sir. you hear the charges.
(to falstaff )then you're damned for keeping your word with the devil.
let's think about this, and consider what time and what method will be most appropriate. if our plan were to fail, and people found out about it, it would be better never to have tried it. we should have a backup ready in case the first plan doesn't work. let me think. we'll place bets on you and hamlet, that's it! when the two of you have gotten all sweaty and hot, keep him jumping around a lot for that purpose, hamlet will ask for something to drink. i'll have a cup ready for him. if by chance he
i'll obey you until i can make bail. but angelo, you'll pay for this, even if it costs all the precious metals in your jewelry shop.
his only other choice is to be damned for cheating the devil.
escapes your poisoned sword tip, the drink will kill him. but wait, what's that sound?
sir, the laws of ephesus will be on my side, and you'll be embarrassed. i'm certain of it.
but boys, boys! four o'clock tomorrow morning some pilgrims are going to pass by gad's hill. they'll be on their way to canterbury cathedral with expensive offerings, and traders will be heading to london with bags of money. i've got masks for you, you've got horses for yourselves. mr. gadshill is spending tonight in rochester, and i've already ordered tomorrow night's dinner in eastcheap. we could do this in our sleep. if you come, i'll make you rich. if not, stay home and hang yourselves.
the bad news just keeps on coming, one disaster after another. your sister's drowned, laertes.
master, there's a ship from epidamnum that's going to set sail as soon as its owner gets on board. i've left our luggage on the ship, and i bought the oil, balm, and liquor you wanted. the ship is ready, the wind is up, and the sailors are only waiting for their owner and for you.
listen, yedward. if i stay home and don't go, i'll hang you , for going.
drowned? oh, where?
what are you, a madman? you annoying idiot, what epidamnum ship is waiting for me?
you will, fatface?
there's a willow that leans over the brook, dangling its white leaves over the glassy water. ophelia made wild wreaths out of those leaves, braiding in crowflowers, thistles, daisies, and the orchises that vulgar shepherds have an obscene name for, but which pure-minded girls call "dead men's fingers." climbing into the tree to hang the wreath of weeds on the hanging branches, she and her flowers fell into the gurgling brook. her clothes spread out wide in the water, and buoyed her up for a while as she sang bits of old hymns, acting like someone who doesn't realize the danger she's in, or like someone completely accustomed to danger. but it was only a matter of time before her clothes, heavy with the water they absorbed, pulled the poor thing out of her song, down into the mud at the bottom of the brook.
a ship you sent me to find, to book passage out of here.
hal, are you in?
so she is drowned.
you drunken slave, i sent you for a rope, and i told you what to do with it.
who? me, a robber? me, a thief? not me. no way.
drowned, drowned.
yeah, right, you sent me to get whipped. you sent me to the port to find a ship.
if you don't dare to fight for ten shillings, there's no honesty, manhood, or friendship in you, and you never came from royal blood.
you've had too much water already, poor ophelia, so i won't shed watery tears for you. but crying is what humans do. we do what's in our nature, even if we're ashamed of it. after i stop crying i'll be through acting like a woman. good-bye, my lord. i have some fiery words i could speak now, but my foolish tears are drowning them out.
i'll debate this with you later, and then i'll teach you to listen more carefully. go to adriana, you scoundrel, and quickly. give her this key, and tell her that there's money in the desk that's covered with a turkish tapestry. have her send it to me. tell her that i've been arrested and the money will be my bail. hurry, you slave! go! officer, take me to prison until the money comes.
well, okay. for once in my life, i'll be a little crazy.
let's follow him, gertrude. i worked so hard to calm him down, and now i'm worried he's getting all excited again. let's follow him.
to adriana? that's where we had lunch. where that "sweetheart" said i was her husband! she's too much for me to handle. but i must go there, against my will: servants must fulfill their masters' wishes.
there you go.
are they really going to give her a christian burial after she killed herself? in shakespeare's time, people who committed suicide were not given a christian burial. after she killed herself?
oh, luciana, did he tempt you like that? could you tell from his face if he was serious? yes or no? did he look flushed or pale? sad or happy? could you tell from his looks what he was feeling in his heart?
well, you know what? i'll stay home.
i'm telling you, yes. so finish that grave right away. the coroner examined her case and says it should be a christian funeral.
first, he said you had no right to him.
by god, then i'll be a traitor when you become king.
but how, unless she drowned in self-defense?
he meant he did nothing right for me, which is true, unfortunately.
i don't care.
that's what they're saying she did.
then he swore he was a stranger here.
sir john, do me a favor: leave me and the prince alone. i'll spell out such good reasons for this adventure, he's sure to join.
sounds more like "self-offense," if you ask me. what i'm saying is, if she knew she was drowning herself, then that's an act. an act has three sides to it: to do, to act, and to perform. therefore she must have known she was drowning herself.
and that's true, he is being strange. and yet he lies as well, for he's no stranger.
may god give you the power of persuasion and him the good sense to listen, so that what you say will affect him and what he hears will sink in. this way, the true prince will turn into false thief, just for laughs. after all, all the poor, little vices of the age need encouragement. so long; you'll find me in eastcheap.
no, listen here, gravedigger sir, 
then i pleaded for you.
farewell hal is teasing falstaff for acting like a teenager, even though he's an old man. farewell , you second spring! farewell, you summer-in-november!
let me finish. here's the water, right? and here's a man, okay? if the man goes into the water and drowns himself, he's the one doing it, like it or not. but if the water comes to him and drowns him, then he doesn't drown himself. therefore, he who is innocent of his own death does not shorten his own life.
and what did he say?
now, my good sweet honey sir, come with us tomorrow. i have an idea for a practical joke, and i can't do it by myself. falstaff, peto, bardolph, and mr. gadshill will rob the travelers we're planning to ambush, but you and i won't be there. if you and i don't rob them once they have the loot, then chop off my head!
is that how the law sees it?
that he felt for me the love that i begged him to feel for you.
but we're all planning to leave together. how will you and i separate ourselves?
it sure is. the coroner's inquest law.
how did he try to persuade you to love him?
we'll leave before them, or after them. we'll tell them to meet us someplace, but then we won't show up. they'll pull off the robbery by themselves, and the second they've done it, we'll attack them.
do you want to know the truth? if this woman hadn't been rich, she wouldn't have been given a christian burial.
with words that, if they were spoken honestly, might have moved me. first, he praised my beauty, then my eloquence.
sure, but they'll recognize our horses, our clothes, and all our other things.
well there, now you've said it. it's a pity that the rich have more freedom to hang or drown themselves than the rest of us christians. come on, shovel. the most ancient aristocrats in the world are gardeners, ditch-diggers, and gravediggers. they keep up adam's profession.
did you praise him as well?
psh! they won't see our horses, because i'll tie them in the forest. we'll put on new masks after we leave them. and, just for this occasion, i've made cloaks out of rough buckram cloth, to cover our regular clothes.
was he an aristocrat? with a coat of arms?
have some patience, please.
okay. but i'm afraid they'll be too tough for us.
he was the first person who ever had arms.
i cannot and i will not keep quiet. my voice will have its way, even if my heart can't. he is misshapen, crooked, old, and withered. his face is ugly, and his body is even worse, all shapeless, everywhere. he is vicious, mean, foolish, blunt, unkind. his body is deformed, and his mind is worse.
well, i know that two of them are the biggest cowards who ever turned and ran. as for the third, if he fights even a second longer than is absolutely necessary, i promise to never fight again. the best part about this joke will be listening to the outlandish lies this fat clown will tell when we meet for dinner, how he fought at least thirty men, how he defended himself, how he got hit, what he endured. the funniest part will be when we call him on it.
he didn't have any.
then why be jealous of a person like that? when an evil thing has been lost, no one cries.
okay. i'll go. get everything together and meet me in eastcheap tomorrow. i'll eat there. farewell.
what, aren't you a christian? the bible says adam dug in the ground. how could he dig without arms? i'll ask you another question. if you can't answer it, 
oh, but i think of him more highly than i say i do, and i wish he looked worse in other women's eyes. i'm like a lapwing, creating a diversion in order to distract predators from my nest. my heart adores him, even though my tongue curses him.
farewell, my lord.
go ahead!
here! go! the desk! money! come on, now! hurry!
i understand all of you. for now, i'll put on the rowdy behavior of your good-for-nothing ways. but in this way, i'll be like the sun, who allows the vulgar, corrupting clouds to hide his beauty from the world. then, when the sun wants to be himself again, he breaks through the foul mists and vapors that seemed to be strangling him.
what do you call a person who builds stronger things than a stonemason, a shipbuilder, or a carpenter does?
how did you lose your breath?
and because people have missed him so much, they are that much more impressed when he finally appears. if every day were a vacation, playing would grow as tedious as working. but when it's rare, it's looked forward to. nothing is as precious as the unexpected occurrence. so when i throw off this wild behavior and accept the responsibilities of being king, a destiny i didn't choose but was born into, i'll suddenly seem like a far better man. in this way, i'll give everyone the wrong expectation of me. like a bright metal on a dark background, my reformation will shine even more brilliantly when it's set against my wicked past. i'll be so wild, i'll make wildness an art form, then redeem myself when the world least expects me to.
the one who builds the gallows to hang people on, since his structure outlives a thousand inhabitants.
by running fast.
i've been too calm and even-tempered, unwilling to react angrily to these indignities. you have discovered this, and so you've walked all over my patience. know this: from now on, i'm going to be my royal self again, powerful and frightening. my natural condition, which was as smooth as oil and soft as feathers, has lost me the respect that powerful people only pay to the similarly powerful.
you're funny, and i like that. the gallows do a good job. but how? it does a good job for those who do bad.
where's your master, dromio? is he all right?
my lord, the percy family worcester, northumberland, and hotspur are all members of the percy family. percy family does not deserve to bear the brunt of your anger and power, especially since we helped you become so powerful in the first place.
now, it's wrong to say that the gallows are stronger than a church. therefore, the gallows may do you some good. come on, your turn.
no, he's in a place worse than hell. a devil in a tough uniform has him, a man whose heart is as hard as steel. a fiend and a goblin, pitiless and rough. a wolf, no, even worse, a man all in tough leather. a backbiting friend, one who grabs people, who patrols the streets and passageways. a hunting dog that runs in
your highness , 
let's see, "who builds stronger things than a stonemason, a shipbuilder, or a carpenter?"
the opposite direction of its prey, yet can follow the scent of the hunt. a man who puts people away before the verdict is announced.
worcester, get out. i see danger and disobedience in your eyes. you carry yourself too boldly and proudly, and royalty should never have to endure a servant's frowning face. you have my permission to leave now. when i need you or your advice, i'll call for you.
that's the question, so answer it.
speak, man, what's the matter?
(to northumberland)you were about to speak.
ah, i've got it!
i don't know what the matter is, but he's been arrested for it.
yes, my lord. the prisoners you asked for, which my son harry percy captured at holmedon, were not kept from you in anger. he's already told you that. whoever told you my son meant to defy you was either mistaken or trying to make trouble. he's done nothing wrong.
go ahead.
what? he's been arrested? tell me, who had him arrested?
sir, i didn't hold back any prisoners. but i remember this: when the battle ended, i was exhausted with rage and exertion. i was out of breath, dizzy and bent over. all of a sudden a man approached me, neat, clean, and tidily dressed, like a bridegroom. his beard was freshly shaven, like a newly plowed field. he wore fancy cologne and he carried a perfume box, which he kept raising to his nose as he smiled and talked on. whenever soldiers walked past, bearing dead bodies, he called them rude hoodlums for bringing a foul, disgusting corpse within breathing distance of him. he interrogated me, with his fancy language, and demanded that i give him my prisoners, to be taken on your behalf. there i was, with the cold aggravating all my wounds, being pestered by this idiot. in my grief and impatience, i gave him some kind of answer. i don't even remember what i said, he could take them, or he couldn't.
damn, i forgot.
i don't know who had him arrested, but the man that arrested him was in a suit of leather. mistress, will you send him bail? the money in the desk?
i was so angry, looking at him all shiny and sweet-smelling, and speaking like a squeamish woman about guns and battle drums and wounds, god almighty! , and telling me the best thing for an injury is parmaceti parmaceti = spermaceti, a medicinal ointment derived from fat taken from a sperm whale's head parmaceti , and that it was a shame that the blameless earth had to be dug up to find saltpeter for the gunpowder, when so many good, brave men had been cowardly destroyed by guns, and that if it hadn't been for those disgusting guns, he would have been a soldier himself. all this trivial, incoherent talk i answered offhandedly, as i've already told you. so i beg you: please don't take his word as evidence that there's anything wrong between you and me, your majesty.
don't beat your brains out over it. you can't make a slow donkey run by beating it. the next time someone asks you this riddle, say "a gravedigger." the houses he makes last till judgment day. now go and get me some booze.
get it, sister.
given the circumstances, my lord, whatever harry percy may have said to a man like that, in a place and time like that, should be allowed to die and never be spoken of again. it should never be used against harry in any way, since he has taken it all back now.
(the gravedigger digs and sings) in my youth i loved, i loved, and i thought it was very sweet to set, ohh, the date for, ahh, my duty oh, i thought it, ahh, was not right.
i don't understand it. how could he be in debt without me knowing it? tell me, was he arrested because of a band a "band" is a bond or debt. dromio hears another meaning: a band of fabric. band ?
but he still won't turn over his prisoners unless he can add these stipulations and exceptions. he wants me, at my own cost, to pay ransom for his brother-in-law, the foolish mortimer, a man who, on my life, willfully betrayed his own men, whom he had led in fighting against that great magician, the damned glendower. and now we hear that mortimer has married glendower's daughter! should the treasury be emptied to ransom a traitor? should i pay for treason, and bargain for a coward, when it was mortimer who lost himself? no. let him starve in the wilderness. no man who asks me to spend one penny on that traitor mortimer can ever be a friend of mine.
doesn't this guy realize what he's doing? he's singing while digging a grave.
not for a band, but for something stronger: a necklace, a necklace! don't you hear it ring?
"that traitor mortimer!" he never faltered, my lord, except through an accident of war. i'll prove it, by speaking about the many wounds he heroically suffered when he spent an hour in brutal hand-to-hand combat against glendower on the grassy banks of the severn river. they broke three times from fighting, and they drank three times from the severn. the river itself was frightened by their horrible looks. its water became discolored with the blood of these brave fighters, and the severn ran off, as if to hide itself in the weeds on its banks. treachery has never used deadly wounds to cover its operations, and mortimer could never have willingly suffered so many injuries. do not let him be slandered by calling him a traitor.
he's gotten so used to graves that they don't bother him anymore.
what, the necklace?
you speak wrongly about him, percy, you speak wrongly! he never fought glendower. i tell you, he would just as soon dare to meet the devil himself as fight glendower. aren't you ashamed of yourself? don't ever let me hear you speak of mortimer again. send me your prisoners as quickly as possible, or you'll hear about it from me, and you won't like what i have to say. northumberland, i give you and your son permission to leave now.
yes, exactly. only people who don't have to work can afford to be sensitive.
no, no, the bell. it's time for me to go. it was two o'clock when i left him, and now it's one.
send your prisoners, or you'll hear about it.
(sings) but old age has sneaked up on me and grabbed me in his claws, and has shipped me into the ground as if i'd never been like that. (he throws up a skull)
time's running backward? i've never heard of that.
even if the devil himself comes screaming for them, i won't send those prisoners. i'm going to go after him and tell him so; it will ease my heart, though it might cost me my head.
that skull had a tongue in it once and could sing. that jackass is throwing it around as if it belonged to cain, who did the first murder! it might be the skull of a politician once capable of talking his way around god, right? and now this idiot is pulling rank on him.
oh, sure. when an hour in shakespeare's time, "hour" could sound like "ower" (someone who owes money) or even "whore," both of whom would run from policemen. hour meets a cop, it turns and runs in fear.
what, drunk with anger? wait a minute. here comes your uncle.
indeed, my lord.
time's not the one in debt. your logic is so foolish.
talk about mortimer? god damn, i will talk about him. and damn my soul if i don't join him! i'll empty out my veins for him, and i'll pour my precious blood onto the ground, drop by drop! and i'll lift this put-upon mortimer as high up as this ungrateful king, this ungenerous, rotten bolingbroke!
or a courtier, who could say things like, "good night, my sweet lord! how are you doing, good lord?" this might be the skull of lord so-and-so, who praised lord such-and-such's horse when he wanted to borrow it, right?
time is always bankrupt: it owes more than it can ever pay back in a season. and time's a thief, too, don't you know the old saying, "time steals along"? so if time is in debt and also a thief, and a cop comes, don't you think time would turn back an hour?
(toworcester ) brother, the king's driven your nephew crazy.
yes, my lord.
here's the money, dromio. take it to your master and bring him home immediately. come, sister, my imagination is too much for me: it both comforts me and depresses me.
who started this trouble after i left?
exactly. and now it's the property of lady worm, its lower jaw knocked off and thwacked on the noggin with a shovel. that's quite a reversal of fortune, isn't it, if we could only see it? are these bones worth nothing more than bowling pins now? it makes my bones ache to think about it.
every person i meet greets me like an old friend, and every one of them knows my name. some of them give me money, some invite me places, some thank me for the kind things i've done for them, some try to sell me things. just now a tailor showed me fabrics he bought especially for me and then started to take my measurements. these are tricks of the imagination, and this place is filled with magicians.
he wants all my prisoners, for god's sake! and when i asked again for him to ransom my brother-in-law, he looked pale, and he shot me a look that could kill. just the mention of mortimer's name makes him shake.
(sings) a pickax and a shovel, a shovel, and a sheet for a funeral shroud, oh, a pit of dirt is what we need for a guest like this one here. (he throws up another skull)
here's the money you wanted, master. hey, have you gotten rid of that adam dromio calls the officer "adam" because, after adam and eve were expelled from eden, adam wore clothing made of skins, llike the officer's leather uniform. adam ?
i don't blame him. didn't the late king richard ii proclaim that mortimer should be next in line for the throne?
there's another. could that be a lawyer's skull? where's all his razzle-dazzle legal jargon now? why does he allow this idiot to knock him on the head with a dirty shovel, instead of suing him for assault and battery? maybe this guy was once a great landowner, with his deeds and contracts, his tax shelters and his annuities. is it part of his deed of ownership to have his skull filled up with dirt? does he only get to keep as much land as a set of contracts would cover if you spread them out on the ground? the deeds to his properties would barely fit in this coffin, and the coffin's all the property he gets to keep?
what gold is this? who's this adam you speak of?
he did; i heard the proclamation. that was when the wretched king richard (may god forgive us for wronging him!) set out to invade ireland. when that was interrupted, he returned to england, only to be deposed and then murdered.
no more than that, my lord.
not the adam from the garden of eden, but the adam from the jailhouse. the one that wears leather clothes. the one that grabbed you and arrested you.
and for our part in his death, the whole world is scandalized by us, and speaks ill of us.
isn't the parchment of a legal document made of sheepskin?
i don't know what you're talking about.
stop a moment, please. did king richard really proclaim that my brother-in-law edmund mortimer was next in line for the throne?
yes, my lord, and calfskin too.
no? it's plain enough. the adam who looks like a cello, in a big leather case. the one who gives tired people "arrest." the one who gives ruined men new suits, law suits. the one who's determined to do more damage with his nightstick than a soldier does with his pike.
he did. i heard it myself.
anyone who puts his trust in such documents is a sheep or a calf. i'll talk to this guy., excuse me, sir, whose grave is this?
you mean an officer?
then i can't blame king henry for wishing for him to starve in the wilderness. but is it right that you, who put the crown on henry's forgetful head, and who carry the accusations of murder for henry's sake, should be the target of the world's curses? when you were only accomplices and instruments? is it right to blame the ropes, the ladder, or the hangman for a man's death? forgive me for mentioning that you two are like those sordid objects, having been exploited by this conniving king. but will you stand by while people today speak of your shame?
it's mine, sir.
yes, the leader of the team; the one that gets you if you can't pay a debt; the one who assumes people are always going to bed and says to them, "have arrest."
while history books record that men of your nobility and power dedicated themselves to as unjust a cause (which, god forgive you, you both did) as the overthrowing of richard, that sweet lovely rose, and the planting of this thorn, this weed, bolingbroke in richard's place? will you listen as people say that you are fools, and that you've been tossed away by the very person you shamed yourselves to help? no. there is still time for you to redeem your reputations and restore your good names in the eyes of the world. take revenge against this king who mocks and scorns you. he thinks constantly about how to repay you for all you did, by putting you to death. so i say, 
(sings) oh, a pit of dirt is what we need for a guest like this one here.
well, sir, stop your joking there. are any ships leaving tonight? can we go?
quiet, nephew; don't say any more. i have a secret for you, which is hidden like a book with a lock. i will open the book and read you a dark, dangerous story that will appeal to your righteous anger. it's full of peril and adventure, as risky as walking across a churning, thundering river while balanced unsteadily on a spear.
i think it really must be yours, since you're the one lying in it.
why, sir, i told you an hour ago that the good ship expedition was leaving tonight, but then the officer got you, and you decided to wait for the little rowboat delay. here's the bail money you sent me to get.
if he falls in, then it's all over, whether he sinks or swims. the honor of the struggle is all that counts, no matter what the danger is or where it comes from. it takes more courage to wake a sleeping lion than to frighten a rabbit!
and you're lying outside of it, so it's not yours. as for me, i'm not lying to you in it, it's really mine.
this fellow's gone mad, and so have i. we're in some kind of dream world. please, somebody, get us out of here!
dreaming about this heroic exploit is driving him past his patience.
but you are lying in it, being in it and saying it's yours. it's for the dead, not the living. so you're lying.
good to see you, master antipholus. i see you've met with the jeweler. is that chain you're wearing the one you promised to give to me?
by god, i think it would be easy to jump up and grab honor off of the moon's pale face, or to dive into the deepest ocean and pull up honor by its hair. then the man who rescues honor can wear her glory alone, without rivals. to hell with sharing the glory!
that's a lively lie, sir, it jumps so fast from me to you.
get away from me, satan! don't try to tempt me!
(to northumberland) he sees a world built by his imagination, but that world is not the one he should be paying attention to. (to hotspur) nephew, listen to me a minute.
what man are you digging it for?
master, is this satan's mistress?
i beg your pardon.
for no man, sir.
she's the devil.
these scotsmen that you've taken prisoner , 
what woman, then?
no, she's worse: she's the devil's mother, and she comes to us disguised as an easy wench. and that's why some women say, "god damn me," which is the same thing as saying, "god make me an easy wench." the bible says the devil looks like an angel of light. but fire also gives off light, and fire will burn you. in other words, easy wenches will burn you. keep away from this one.
i'll keep them all. by god, the king won't get a single scot, even if having a scot would save his soul! i'll keep them, i swear.
for no woman, either.
you and your servant are very funny, sir. will you come with me? can we finish our lunch?
you're off again and not listening to me. you will get to keep the prisoners , 
who's to be buried in it?
master, if you eat with her, bring really long silverware.
yes, i will; there's no doubt about it. the king said he would not pay ransom for mortimer. he forbid me from speaking of mortimer. but i'll find him when he's sleeping, and i'll shout "mortimer!" into his ears. no; i'll get a bird and teach it to say nothing but "mortimer," and i'll give it to the king to anger him forever.
one who used to be a woman but, bless her soul, is dead now.
why, dromio?
listen, nephew, please.
how literal this guy is! we have to speak precisely, or he'll get the better of us with his wordplay. lord, horatio, i've been noticing this for a few years now. the peasants have become so clever and witty that they're nipping at the heels of noblemen., how long have you been a gravedigger?
because of the old saying: "he who eats with the devil needs a very long spoon." you need to keep far away from them.
from now on, all other pursuits i'll cast aside, except for scheming how to aggravate this bolingbroke and his son, the lowlife prince of wales. if it weren't for the fact that i suspect henry doesn't love his son, and that he'd be glad to see misfortune befall him, i'd poison the prince's ale.
of all the days in the year, i started the day that the late king hamlet defeated fortinbras.
(to courtesan) get away, you demon! you talk about eating? you're a sorceress, like everyone else here. i'll conjure you, like a spell: get away from me.
goodbye, nephew. i'll talk to you when you're in a better mood to listen.
how long ago was that?
give me back the ring i gave you at lunch, or give me the necklace you promised in exchange. then i'll be gone, sir, and stop troubling you.
(to hotspur)you are an impatient and short-tempered fool to start nattering on like a woman, not listening to any voice but your own!
you don't know that? any fool could tell you, it was the day that young hamlet was born, the one who went crazy and got sent off to england.
some devils in revelation : , an angel descends from heaven with a chain to bind the devil with. devils ask for nothing more than nail clippings, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin, a nut, or a cherry pit. but this one's greedy: she wants a necklace. be wise, master. if you give it to her, she'll shake the chain and frighten us, like the angel in the bible.
listen, i feel like i'm being whipped with sticks and stung by ants when i hear about this vile politician, bolingbroke. when richard was alive, what is that place called? damn, it's in gloucestershire; it's where that crazy duke's uncle lived, his uncle york. it's where i first met this lying bolingbroke, and bowed to him., shoot!, it happened when you and bolingbroke came back from ravenspurgh.
why was he sent to england?
now listen, either give me my ring or give me the necklace. i hope you're not trying to cheat me.
at berkley castle.
because he was crazy. he'll recover his sanity there. or if he doesn't, it won't matter in england.
be gone, witch! come, dromio, let's go.
right. what great courtesy that flattering dog paid me! "the promise of his childhood has come true," he said. "gentle harry percy," he called me, and "kind kinsman." to hell with liars like him! , i'm sorry. uncle, go on. i'm done.
why not?
accusing us of cheating is like the proud peacock accusing someone else of pride. mistress, you know about that.
no, if you're not done yet, keep going. we'll wait until you're ready.
because nobody will notice he's crazy. everyone there is as crazy as he is.
antipholus has gone insane, no question about it. if not, he'd never behave like this. he has a ring of mine, worth forty ducats, and he promised to give me a necklace in exchange for it. now he won't give me either. the reason i think he's insane, besides the way he just acted, is that he told a senseless story over lunch about being locked out of his own house. his wife probably did it on purpose because she knows what kind of fits he's having. i must go to his house and tell his wife that he came bursting into my place like a lunatic and stole my ring. it's my best option: i can't afford to lose forty ducats.
i'm done. i swear.
how did he go crazy?
don't worry, man, i won't try to escape. when it's time for me to be freed, i'll pay you the fee you're entitled to for arresting me. my wife's in a perverse mood today. she'll be suspicious when the messenger tells her that i was arrested. i tell you, this will make her angry when she hears about it.
then go back to your scottish prisoners. release them at once, without ransom. make friends with douglas, and use his influence to gather an army in scotland. he'll gladly help you for many reasons, which i'll write you about soon. (to northumberland) now you, sir. while your son is busy in scotland, you will strike up a close alliance with the archbishop, that noble, well-beloved churchman.
in a strange way, they say.
here's my servant. i think he's got the money. hello there, sir! do you have what i told you to get?
he is the archbishop of york, no?
what do you mean, "in a strange way"?
yes. and this rope will take care of everybody, i guarantee it.
yes, and he's sorely upset about his brother, lord scroop, whom bolingbroke put to death in bristol. i'm not merely speculating; i'm telling you what i know for a fact has been considered, plotted, and set into motion. they're only waiting now for the right moment to strike.
by losing his mind.
but where's the money?
i get it. and it's good, i bet my life on it!
on what grounds?
why, sir, i spent it on this rope.
look, you've let your dogs slip off of their leashes before the hunt has even begun.
right here in denmark. i've been the church warden here for thirty years, since childhood.
you idiot! five hundred ducats for a rope?
there's no way this excellent plan won't work. and the armies of scotland and york will join with mortimer, right?
how long will a man lie in his grave before he starts to rot?
i can get you five hundred ropes for that price.
yes, they will.
well, if he's not rotten before he dies (and there are a lot of people now who are so rotten they start falling to pieces even before you put them in the coffin), he'll last eight or nine years. a leathermaker will last nine years.
why did i just send you home?
i swear, it's extremely well thought out.
why does he last longer?
to get a piece of rope. and here i am, with that piece.
and we've got good reasons to hurry and save ourselves by raising an army. no matter how hard we try to look like everything's fine, the king will always think he owes us for having helped him take the throne, and he'll worry that we don't feel we've been properly compensated. until he finds a way to pay us for good, by killing us. you can see that he's already begun to distance himself from us.
because his hide is so leathery from his trade that he keeps the water off him a long time, and water is what makes your goddamn body rot more than anything. here's a skull that's been here twenty-three years.
and i'll use that piece of rope to welcome you with. (beats dromio of ephesus)
he has, he has. we'll get revenge!
whose was it?
good sir, calm down.
nephew, farewell. don't do any more than i tell you to do in the letters i'll write you. when the time comes, which will be soon, i'll sneak off to glendower and mortimer. i'll plan it so that you, douglas and all our armies will arrive together. then we can face our future with strength instead of the uncertainty we feel now.
a crazy bastard. who do you think?
you should tell me to calm down, i'm the one who's suffering here.
so long, brother. i believe we'll prevail.
i really don't know.
hold your tongue.
good bye, uncle. oh, i hope it won't be long until battlefields and collisions and groans are witnesses to our game of war!
damn that crazy madman! he poured a pitcher of white wine on my head once. this is the skull of yorick, the king's jester.
no, you should tell him to hold his hands!
i'll be damned if it isn't a.m. already. the big dipper has already risen above the chimney, and our horses aren't ready yet. hey, ostler! ostler = horse attendant at an inn ostler!
this one?
you son of a bitch, senseless villain!
(offstage) just a second!
yes, that one.
i wish i were senseless, sir, so that i wouldn't feel your punches!
hey, tom tom may be the name of either the ostler or the second carrier. tom , give the saddle of my horse, cut, a few whacks to soften it up, and stuff some wool under it, the old nag's got some bad bruises on her shoulders.
let me see. (he takes the skull) oh, poor yorick! i used to know him, horatio, a very funny guy, and with an excellent imagination. he carried me on his back a thousand times, and now, how terrible, this is him. it makes my stomach turn. i don't know how many times i kissed the lips that used to be right here. where are your jokes now? your pranks? your songs? your flashes of wit that used to set the whole table laughing? you don't make anybody smile now. are you sad about that? you need to go to my lady's room and tell her that no matter how much makeup she slathers on, she'll end up just like you some day. that'll make her laugh. horatio, tell me something.
the only thing you can sense are punches, just like an ass.
the feed here's as damp as anything. that's a fast way for a horse to get parasites. this stable's upside down since ostler robin died.
what's that, my lord?
i am an ass, indeed: you can tell by my long ears. i've served this man from the moment i was born until this very instant, and all i've ever gotten from him are bruises. when i'm cold, his beatings keep me warm. when i'm hot, they keep me cool. he wakes me up by beating me, makes me stand by beating me, sends me out of the house and welcomes me back by beating me. seriously, i carry beatings around with me like a beggar woman carries her baby. i figure that once he's crippled me, i'll beg by showing off my beatings.
poor guy. once the price of oats went up, he was never happy again. it killed him.
do you think alexander the great looked like this when he was buried?
that's enough. my wife's coming.
this stable's got worse fleas than any in london. i'm stung like a tench a tench is a type of fish with markings that look like flea-bites. tench .
exactly like that.
mistress, think about your end, beware of your death! or as the parrot says: "beware of the rope's end," and watch out for a hanging.
like a tench? i'm telling you, not even a king could be bitten more than i've been bitten since midnight.
and smelled like that, too? whew! (he puts down the skull)
are you going to keep talking? (beats dromio of ephesus)
they don't even give us a bathroom. so we pee in the fireplace, and you know that urine breeds fleas like nobody's business.
just as bad, my lord.
now what do you think? your husband's mad, isn't he?
hey, ostler! come on already, damn you!
how low we can fall, horatio. isn't it possible to imagine that the noble ashes of alexander the great could end up plugging a hole in a barrel?
this terrible behavior proves it. doctor pinch, you're an exorcist. if you can bring him back to his senses, i'll pay you whatever you demand.
i've got to deliver a ham and some ginger root all the way to charing cross.
if you thought that you'd be thinking too much.
alas, how passionate and angry he looks!
god almighty! the turkeys i'm carrying are starving! hey, stable-boy! curse you! can't you see? can't you hear? if it isn't a good idea to knock you on the head, i'm a fool. come on, damn you! can't we trust you to do your job?
no, not at all. just follow the logic: alexander died, alexander was buried, alexander returned to dust, the dust is dirt, and dirt makes mud we use to stop up holes. so why can't someone plug a beer barrel with the dirt that used to be alexander? the great emperor caesar, dead and turned to clay, might plug up a hole to keep the wind away. oh, to think that the same body that once ruled the world could now patch up a wall! but quiet, be quiet a minute.
look! he's trembling in his fit!
morning, deliverymen. what time is it?
here comes the king, the queen, and the noblemen of court. who are they following? and with such a plain and scrawny ceremony? it means the corpse they're following took its own life. must have been from a wealthy family. let's stay and watch a while.
give me your hand. let me take your pulse.
i think it's two o'clock.
what other rites are you going to give her?
here's my hand. let it feel your ear. (he strikes pinch)
let me borrow your lantern so i can check on my horse in the stable.
that's laertes, a very noble young man. listen.
satan! you are living inside this man! i order you to release him through my prayers and to return immediately to the darkness you came from. i demand this in the name of all the saints in heaven.
no way, by god; just hold on a minute. i know a few tricks like that myself, i swear.
what other rites are you going to give her?
shut up, you doddering old wizard! i'm not possessed!
(to second carrier) please, let me borrow yours.
i've performed as many rites as i'm permitted. her death was suspicious, and were it not for the fact that the king gave orders to bury her here, she'd have been buried outside the church graveyard. she deserves to have rocks and stones thrown on her body. but she has had prayers read for her and is dressed up like a pure virgin, with flowers tossed on her grave and the bell tolling for her.
oh, i wish you weren't, you poor, frightened soul.
sure, whenever. whatever you say. "let me borrow your lantern," he says? yeah, right. i'll see you dead first.
isn't there any other rite you can perform?
listen, hussy, is this man one of your customers? did this fool with the yellow face feast and celebrate in my house today while the guilty doors shut in my face and locked me out of my own house?
sirrah sirrah = term of address used for persons of lower social standing sirrah , what time do you plan to be in london?
no, nothing. we would profane the other dead souls here if we sang the same requiem for her that we sang for them.
oh, husband, god himself knows you ate at home. i wish you had stayed there, avoiding these scandals and this public embarrassment!
at a reasonable enough time. (to first carrier) come on, mugs, old friend. let's wake up the gentlemen. they want to travel in a group because they're carrying a lot of valuables.
lay her in the ground, and let violets bloom from her lovely and pure flesh! i'm telling you, you jerk priest, my sister will be an angel in heaven while you're howling in hell.
ate at home? you there, rogue, what do you have to say about that?
hey, chamberlain! chamberlain = bedroom attendant chamberlain!
(to horatio) what, the beautiful ophelia?
i swear, sir, you did not eat at home.
(offstage) "i'm there for you," shakespeare's line apparently references a popular saying of the time. "i'm there for you," as the pickpockets say!
sweet flowers for a sweet girl. goodbye! (she scatters flowers) i once hoped you'd be my hamlet's wife. i thought i'd be tossing flowers on your wedding bed, my sweet girl, not on your grave.
my doors were locked and i was shut out, right?
that's as good as saying, "i'm there for you,' said the chamberlain." you're only as different from a pickpocket as a supervisor is from a worker; you're the one who sets the plans.
oh, damn three times, damn ten times the evil man whose wicked deed deprived you of your ingenious mind. hold off burying her until i've caught her in my arms once more.
by god, your doors were locked and you were shut out.
morning, mr. gadshill. what i told you last night is still true. there's a rich landowner all the way from kent staying here, and he's got three hundred gold coins with him. i heard him say so to a man at supper last night. that man's some kind of tax collector, and he has plenty of money with him, too. they just woke up and they've ordered breakfast; they'll be leaving soon.
now pile the dirt onto the living and the dead alike, till you've made a mountain higher than mount pelion or mount olympus in greek myth, mt. olympus is home to the gods, and giants piled mt. ossa on top of mt. pelion to climb to heaven. mount pelion or mount olympus .
and she screamed at me, right?
sirrah, if they don't run into some highway robbers today, you can have my neck.
(coming forward) who is the one whose grief is so loud and clear, whose words of sadness make the planets stand still in the heavens as if they've been hurt by what they've heard? it's me, hamlet the dane. (he jumps into the grave)
no lie, she screamed at you.
i don't want it; keep it for the hangman. i know you worship the patron saint of highway robbery, as much as a godless man like you worships anything.
to hell with your soul!
and her cook yelled, mocked, and teased me, right?
why are you taking to me about the hangman? if i hang, i'll make half of a fat pair on the gallows, because if i hang, old sir john will be hanging right with me, and he's not exactly thin. please! our gang has some members you could never guess, and for their own amusement, they're happy to lend the profession of thievery some respect. if we were ever investigated, they would smooth everything over. i've got no wandering highwaymen, no thieves with homemade weapons, no red-faced drunks with crazy mustaches. only men of calm and noble demeanor for me: magistrates and court officials. men who can keep a secret; who'd rather smack you than speak, rather speak than drink, and rather drink than pray., no! that's a lie! they pray all the time to england, their patron saint. or rather, they don't pray to her; they prey on her. they ride her up and down and then make her their boots gadshill means they plunder england, or take her "booty"; the chamberlain puns on the words boots/booty. boots .
that's no way to pray. (they fight) please take your hands off my throat. i may not be rash and quick to anger, but i have something dangerous in me which you should beware of. take your hands off.
she sure did. the kitchen girl mocked you.
make her their boots? why, will she keep their feet dry from muddy water?
pull them apart.
and i departed in a rage, right?
she can, she can. she's been greased with so many bribes that she's waterproof. we thieve in complete safety; we've got a potion that makes us invisible.
hamlet! hamlet!
you truly did. my body can prove it because it felt the power of your anger.
oh, i don't think so. it's the dark of night that makes you hard to see, not a secret potion.
gentlemen!
(to pinch) should i try to soothe him by pretending to agree with his lies?
let's shake hands. you'll get a share of our spoils; i swear on my honor as a true man.
(to hamlet ) please, my lord, calm down.
good idea. his servant here has figured out that agreeing is a good way to cope with his anger.
i'd rather have you swear by your reputation as a dishonest thief.
i'll fight him over this issue till i don't have the strength to blink.
(to adriana) you convinced the jeweler to arrest me.
whatever. i'm a true man, even if i'm a dishonest thief. tell the stable-boy to get my horse. farewell, you fool.
oh, my son, what issue is that?
for goodness sake, i sent money to bail you out. i gave it to dromio, who rushed in for it.
come on, hide, hide! i stole falstaff's horse, and he's rubbed the wrong way; he's fraying like cheap velvet.
i loved ophelia. forty thousand brothers, if you added all their love together, couldn't match mine. what are you going to do for her?
you gave money to me? she might have given me her best wishes, master, but she didn't give me one scrap of money.
stay hidden.
oh, he's crazy, laertes!
didn't you go to her for a purse full of ducats?
poins! poins, damn you! poins!
for the love of god, be patient with him.
he did, and i gave it to him.
quiet, you fat-bellied jerk! what a racket you're making!
damn it, show me what you're going to do for her. will you cry? fight? stop eating? cut yourself? drink vinegar? eat a crocodile? i'll do all that. did you come here to whine? to outdo me by jumping into her grave so theatrically? to be buried alive with her? so will i. and if you rattle on about mountains, then let them throw millions of acres over us. it will be so high a peak that it scrapes against heaven and makes mount ossa look like a wart. see? i can talk crazy as well as you.
and i saw her do it.
where's poins, hal?
this is pure insanity. he'll be like this for a little while. then he'll be as calm and quiet as a dove waiting for her eggs to hatch.
i was sent for a rope! god and the rope maker are my witnesses!
he walked up the hill. i'll go find him.
listen, sir, why do you treat me like this? i always loved you. but it doesn't matter. even a hero like hercules can't keep cats from acting like cats, and dogs like dogs.
mistress, both the man and his master are possessed. i can tell by how pale and deathlike they look. we must tie them up and leave them in some dark room.
i got a raw deal, to be out robbing with him. he stole my horse and tied him up someplace. if i have to walk even four feet more, i'll be totally out of breath. still, i bet i'll die a natural death, if i don't get hanged for killing that jerk, that is. every hour for the past twenty-two years, i've sworn i'd never talk to him again, but i love his company. he must have slipped me a love potion that makes me adore him. damn, that must be it: i have drunk love potions. poins! hal! drop dead, the both of you! bardolph! peto! i'll die if i have to walk another foot. if turning honest and abandoning these jerks weren't the best things i could possibly do for myself, then i'm the worst scoundrel that ever lived. eight yards of rough road is like seventy miles to me, and these hard-hearted crooks know it. it stinks when there's no honor among thieves.
please, horatio, go with him.
(to adriana) tell me! why did you lock me out today? (to dromio of ephesus) and why are you denying that you received the gold?
whew!
(to laertes) don't forget our talk last night, and try to be patient. we'll take care of this problem soon., gertrude, have the guards keep an eye on your son. a monument shall be built for ophelia that will last forever, i promise. we'll have the quiet we need soon. in the meantime, let's proceed patiently.
my sweet husband, i did not lock you out.
the hell with you all! give me my horse, you deadbeats. give me my horse and the hell with you!
that's enough about that. now i'll tell you the other story about my journey. do you remember the circumstances?
and my sweet master, i received no gold. but i agree, sir, that we were locked out.
shut up, fatso! lie down, put your ear to the ground, and listen for the footsteps of travelers.
how could i forget, my lord!
you lying villain! both those statements are false.
do you have a crane to lift me up again once i'm down? damn, i wouldn't walk my fat self this far again for all the money in your father's treasury. what are you doing horsing around with me like this?
there was a kind of war in my brain that wouldn't let me sleep. it was worse than being a captive in chains. sometimes it's good to be rash, sometimes it works out well to act impulsively when our careful plans lose steam. this should show us that there's a god in heaven who's always guiding us in the right direction, however often we screw up, 
you lying slut, everything you say is false. you're scheming with some damned gang, trying to make a fool of me. with my own bare hands, i'll scratch out your eyes, which want to see me humiliated.
you're lying. we can't horse around, because you don't have a horse.
well, of course.
tie him up! tie him up! keep him away from me!
please, my good hal, help me find my horse, you good king's son.
so i came up from my cabin with my robe tied around me, groped in the dark to find what i was looking for, found it, looked through their packet of papers, and returned to my cabin again. i was bold enough (i guess my fears made me forget my manners) to open the document containing the king's instructions. and there i found, horatio, such royal mischief, a precisely worded order, sugared with lots of talk about denmark's well-being and england's too, to cut off my head, without even waiting to sharpen the ax.
we need more help! the devil in him is strong!
later with that! you want me to be your stable boy?
is it possible?
oh, my, poor man! how pale and listless he looks!
go drop dead in your own heir-apparent pants. if i'm arrested, i'll rat you out, too. if i don't get them singing dirty songs in the street about you all, let me be poisoned to death with booze. i hate it when a practical joke gets so out of hand, and with me out of a horse, too!
(he shows horatio a document) here's the document. read it in your free time. but do you want to hear what i did then?
are you trying to kill me? jailer, i'm your prisoner. are you going to let them break me out of jail?
freeze!
yes, please tell me.
gentlemen, let go of him. he's my prisoner and you can't have him.
i am, and i don't like it.
so there i was, caught in their evil net. before i could even start processing the situation, they had started the ball rolling. i sat down and wrote out a new official document with new instructions. i wrote it in a bureaucrat's neat handwriting. i used to think having nice handwriting was for servants, just like our politicians think, and i had to work hard to overcome that prejudice, but it sure came in handy then. do you want to know what i wrote?
tie up the servant, for he is mad as well.
oh, that's the man who planned the whole thing; i recognize his voice, bardolph., what's going on?
yes, my lord.
what are you doing, you stupid officer? do you take some kind of pleasure in seeing a sick man harm himself?
cover your faces, cover your faces. get your masks on. there's tax money coming down the hill, on its way to the king's treasury.
a sincere plea from the king, who commands the respect of england, and who hopes that the love between the two countries can flourish, and that peace can join them in friendship, and other fancy mumbo jumbo like that, saying that, once they read this document, without any debate, the ones delivering the letter should be put to death immediately, without giving them time to confess to a priest.
he's my prisoner. if i let him go, i'll have to pay his bail fees myself.
that's a lie, you clown. it's on its way to the king's bank.
but how could you put an official seal on it?
i'll pay you. take me to the man my husband is in debt to. once i find out what the debt is for, i'll pay it. doctor pinch, please have him brought to my house. what a horrible day!
there's enough to make us all rich.
heaven helped me out with that too. i had my father's signet ring in my pocket, with the royal seal of denmark on it. i folded up the new document, signed it, sealed it, and put it safely back so that no one noticed any difference. the next day we had our fight at sea, and you know what happened after that.
what a horrible slut!
or to get us all hanged.
so rosencrantz and guildenstern are in for it.
master, i'm all tied up for you.
listen, you four confront them in the narrow lane. ned poins and i will wait further down. if they get away from you, they'll run right into us.
man, they were asking for it. i don't feel guilty about them at all. they got what they deserved. it's always dangerous when little people get caught in the crossfire of mighty opponents.
shut up already, you scoundrel! why are you trying to provoke me?
how many of them are there?
what a king claudius is!
you'd rather be tied up for nothing? act insane, good master: scream out, "the devil!"
about eight or ten.
don't you think it's my duty now to kill him with this weapon? this man who killed my king, made my mother a whore, took the throne that i hoped for, and set a trap to kill me. isn't it completely moral to kill him now with this sword, and an easy conscience? and wouldn't i be damned if i let this monster live to do more harm?
oh my god! the poor souls, how strangely they talk!
damn! won't they rob us?
he'll find out soon what happened in england.
get him out of here. sister, come with me.
what, are you a coward, sir john fatstuff?
soon enough. but i have the meantime. a human life is hardly long enough to count to one in. but i really feel bad, horatio, about losing control of myself with laertes. his situation is very much like my own. i'll be nice to him. it was just that the showiness of his grief sent me into a fury.
now tell me. who had him arrested?
well, i'm certainly not john of gaunt falstaff puns on the fact that "gaunt" (henry's grandfather's name) can also mean "skinny." gaunt , your grandfather, but i'm no coward, hal.
hang on a minute, who are you?
angelo, the jeweler. do you know him?
well, we'll see about that.
welcome back to denmark, my lord.
i know him. how much does my husband owe?
jack, sirrah, your horse is there behind the hedge. when you need him, that's where you'll find him. so long, and be brave.
thank you kindly, sir. (speaking so that only horatio can hear) do you know this insect?
two hundred ducats.
i can't hit him. i'd be hanged.
(speaking so that only hamlet can hear) no, my lord.
for what?
(to poins, so others cannot hear) ned, where are our disguises?
(speaking so that only horatio can hear) you're lucky, since knowing him is most unpleasant. he owns a lot of good land. give an animal a lot of money, and he'll be welcome at the king's table. he's a jerk, but he owns a whole lot of dirt, so he's treated well.
for a necklace your husband had him make.
(to prince henry) they're here, close by. now hide.
my lord, if you have a free moment, i have a message from his majesty.
he said he was going to buy me a necklace, but i never saw it.
now, men, here's to happy endings. every man to his station.
i'll hang on every word you say. put your hat back on, where it belongs: it's for your head, not for your hands to hold.
today your husband came to my place, completely furious. he took my ring, which i just saw on his finger, by the way. right after that, i saw him with a necklace.
come on, friend. the boy will lead our horses down the hill while we walk a bit and stretch our legs.
no thank you, my lord. it's very hot.
maybe so, but i never saw it. jailer, bring me to the jeweler. i need to hear the truth about all this.
freeze!
no, i'm telling you, it's very cold, with a northerly wind.
god have mercy on us! they broke loose!
jesus bless us!
it is rather cold, indeed, my lord.
and they've got their swords unsheathed! let's call for help and get them tied up again!
hit them! down with them! cut their throats! yahhhhh! no-good bloodsuckers! overfed morons! they hate young people like us. down with them! rob them blind!
and yet i feel it's very hot and humid, which is bad for my complexion.
let's get out of here! they'll kill us!
oh! we're done for!
yes indeed it is, sir. very humid, i can't tell you how humid it is. my lord, his majesty wanted me to tell you that he's placed a large bet on you. this is what it's all about, 
it looks like these witches are scared of swords.
damn it, you potbellied morons, are you finished? no, you fat misers. i wish everything you owned were here. come on, pigs, come on! what, you idiots! young men have to survive. you're grand jurors refers to the fact that only wealthy men served on grand juries grand jurors , aren't you? well here's some justice for you!
please, i beg you, (he points to osric 's hat)
the one who claims to be your wife just ran away from you.
the thieves have tied up the honest men. if you and i can now rob the robbers and run laughing to london, we would talk about it for a week, laugh about it for a month, and it would be a hilarious story forever.
no, my lord, i'm comfortable like this, thank you. sir, there's someone named laertes who's recently come to the court. he's an absolute gentleman, totally outstanding in so many respects, very easy in society, and displaying all his excellent qualities. if i were to expose my true feelings about him osric's language is vague and blustery, and hamlet's is too when he mimics osric. together they sometimes make almost no sense. if i were to expose my true feelings about him , i'd have to say he's like a business card for the upper classes, he's that wonderful. you'll find that he's the sum total of what a perfect gentleman should be.
go to the centaur and get our stuff. i wish we were safely on board our ship already.
get down. i hear them coming.
sir, your description of him doesn't detract from his good qualities, though i know that trying to list them all would make your head spin, and even so you wouldn't be able to keep up with him.
look, let's stay here tonight. nobody will hurt us. you see how kind everyone is to us, how they just hand us gold. i think this country is so kind that if it weren't for
come on, boys, let's divide up the spoils and then ride off before dawn. if the prince and poins aren't cowards, there's no justice in the universe. poins is about as brave as a duck.
speaking the very truth of high praise, i can honestly say that i find him to possess a soul of such great importance, and so rare and unique in every respect, that, to speak the absolute truth, he can find an equal only when he gazes into a mirror. anyone else is just a pale copy of him.
that mountain of insanity that wants to marry me, i could find it in my heart to stay here and become a witch myself.
(in disguise) give us your money!
you speak absolutely correctly, sir.
i wouldn't stay here tonight for the entire town. go and get our stuff onto the ship.
(in disguise) crooks!
and what's the point, sir? why are we talking about him like this?
i'm sorry that i delayed you, sir. but even though he denies it, i swear he got the necklace from me.
too easy. now we ride off happily. the thieves have scattered, and they're so terrified that they don't even want to run into each other, they'll each think that the other guy is an officer! let's go, ned. falstaff is sweating so hard that he's watering the ground as he walks along. if i weren't laughing so hard, i'd actually feel sorry for him.
sorry, sir?
what's this man's reputation like here in the city?
how loud that fat rogue screamed!
(speaking so that only hamlet can hear) can't you talk to him in a different way?
people think very highly of him. the merchants give him unlimited credit. he's well beloved, second to none in the city. i'd trust him with everything i own.
"as for me, sir, i would be happy to be there because of the love i bear for your family." he would be happy to be here. well, why isn't he, then? he says he loves my family, but he clearly loves his barn more than our house. i'll read on. "your plan is dangerous." that's true, and it's also dangerous to catch a cold, to sleep, to drink. but i tell you, my lord fool, we shall pluck a flower of safety from this thorn of danger. "your plan is dangerous; your allies untrustworthy; your timing poor; and your whole project too weak to counter so powerful an opponent." is that so? is that so? i'll say it once again: you are a stupid, cowardly dog, and a liar. what an idiot this is! by god, our plan is as good a plan as ever hatched, our allies loyal and firm. a good plan, good allies, and very promising; it's an excellent plan, very good allies. what a yellowbellied fool this is! why, the archbishop of york approves of the plan, and how it's progressing. damn! if i were with this imbecile right now, i'd break his head open with his wife's fan. don't we have my father? and my uncle, and me? edmund mortimer, york, and owen glendower? and besides, don't we have douglas? haven't they all sent me letters, promising to meet me with their armies by the ninth of next month? and aren't some of them on their way already? what an unbelievable ass this is! faithless! ha! just watch; he'll run to the king in cold fear and spill our secrets. oh, i could split myself in two and knock my own self senseless for unfolding this important plan to such a coward. to hell with him! let him tell the king; we're ready. i'll set off tonight.
(to osric) what is the significance of referring to this individual?
speak more quietly: i think he's coming this way.
what is it, kate? i must leave you in a few hours.
laertes, you mean?
you're right. and that necklace around his neck is the very one he swore he didn't have! good sir, stay close to me. i'll speak to him. signior antipholus, i can't believe you'd put me to this kind of shame and trouble, not to mention the scandal you've brought on yourself. you swore i never gave you the necklace, but now you're wearing it openly. not only has your lie cost you money, shame, and imprisonment, but you've also mistreated this honest friend of mine. if it hadn't been for this dispute, he would have already hoisted sail and left for sea. you got that necklace from me: can you deny that?
oh, my good lord, why are you alone like this? what have i done to make my harry banish me from his bed these past two weeks? tell me, sweet husband, what has stolen your appetite, your desire, and your sleep? why do you stare at the ground and jump in your skin when you are sitting alone? where is the color in your cheeks? why have you taken all your attention, which should be mine, and given it to this dark mood and terrible sadness? while you sleep so lightly, i've watched you and heard you mumble stories of war. i've heard you give commands to your horse. i've heard you yell, "courage! to the field!" and you have talked of charges and retreats; of trenches, tents; of fences, ramparts, and walls; of all types of cannon; of prisoners' ransoms and of dead soldiers, and of all the movements of a violent battle. your soul has also been at war and has disturbed you in your sleep. beads of sweat have broken out on your forehead, like bubbles in a churning stream. and on your face i've seen strange expressions, like a man who's gulping his breath at an awful, sudden command. oh, what does all this mean? my lord is contemplating some serious matters, and if he doesn't tell me about them, he surely doesn't love me.
(speaking so that only hamlet can hear) all his fancy language has run out finally; his pockets are empty.
i got it from you, i never said i didn't.
you there!
yes, laertes, sir.
yes, you did, sir. in fact, you swore it.
has gilliams left with my letters?
i know you know something, 
who heard me do that?
he has, my lord, an hour ago.
thanks for the compliment, i'm happy you know that. but in fact it doesn't say much. i'm sorry, you were saying?
my own ears heard it, and you know it. to hell with you! it's a shame that you walk the streets with all the honest men.
did butler bring those horses from the sheriff?
i know you know something about how excellent laertes is, 
you're a villain to say this about me. i'll prove that i'm an honest man and a man of honor if you dare defend yourself.
he brought one of them just now.
i can't admit that, since you'd have to compare his excellence to mine. but knowing a person well is a bit like knowing oneself.
i do dare, and i say that you are the villain.
which one? a brown one, right? with its ears clipped?
excellent in fencing, i mean, sir. his reputation in fencing is unrivaled.
(to second merchant) wait! don't hurt him, for god's sake! he's crazy! somebody approach him and take away his sword. tie up dromio, too, and take them to my house.
yes, my lord.
what kind of weapon does he use?
run, master, run. for god's sake, find a house to duck into. this looks like an abbey. go in, or we're done for.
that brown horse will be my throne. i'll mount him in a second. oh, "hope is my comfort!" tell butler to walk him out in the fields.
the rapier and the dagger.
be quiet, people! why have you come here in such a mob?
listen, my lord.
those are only two of his weapons. but, go on.
to get my poor, mad husband out from inside there. let us in so we can tie him up tight and bring him home to recover.
what is it, my lady?
the king has bet six barbary horses, and he has prepared six french rapiers and daggers with all their accessories. three of the carriages are very imaginatively designed, and they match the fencing accessories.
(to second merchant) i knew he wasn't quite in his right mind.
what is it that's got you so carried away?
what do you mean by "carriages"?
(to angelo) now i'm sorry i raised my sword against him.
my horse, my love. my horse.
(speaking so that only hamlet can hear) i knew you'd have to look something up in the dictionary before we were finished.
how long has he been possessed like this?
enough, you crazy fool! not even a weasel is as hotheaded as you are. i swear, i'll find out what you're up to, harry, i will. i fear that my brother, mortimer, is making some kind of move over his claim to the throne, and has asked you to help. but if you go, 
the carriages, sir, are the hangers, where the swords hang.
this week he was sad, moody, and depressed and very different from his usual self. but it wasn't until this afternoon that he broke out into violence.
, such a long way on foot, i'll be tired.
"carriage" makes it sound like it's pulling around a cannon. i prefer to call it a "hanger." but anyway. six barbary horses, six french swords with accessories, and three imaginatively designed carriages, sounds like a french bet against the danish. why has all this been put on the table?
did he lose a lot of money in a shipwreck? has a close friend of his died? has he fallen in love with another woman? that's a sin young men often commit because they allow their eyes to wander. which of these bad things happened to him?
stop it, you little parrot. answer me straight. i swear, harry, i'll break your little finger if you don't tell me everything, and the truth, too.
the king, sir, has bet that in a dozen rounds between you and laertes, he won't beat you by more than three hits. you could get started immediately if you'll give me your answer.
none of them, except the last one. he fell in love, and that made him leave home often.
get away from me, you nag! love? i don't love you. i don't even care about you, kate. this is no time for playing with dolls and jousting with kisses; we'll have bloody noses and broken heads, and spread them around, too. for god's sake, my horse! what, kate? what do you want from me?
but what if my answer's no?
you should have reprimanded him for that.
you don't love me? really, you don't? well, fine then; don't love me. and since you don't love me, i won't love myself. you don't love me? seriously, tell me if you're joking or if you mean it.
i mean, if you'd agree to play against laertes, sir.
i did.
will you see me off? once i'm on my horse, i'll swear i love you till the end of time. but listen here, kate. from now on, i won't have you asking me where i'm going, nor guessing why i'm doing what i'm doing. i must go where i must go. this is final: tonight i must leave you, sweet kate. i know you are wise, but your wisdom doesn't go further than your role as my wife. you may be able to keep a secret, but you're still a woman; and yet no woman can keep secrets like you, because you cannot reveal what you don't actually know. and that is as far as i will trust you, sweet kate.
sir, i'm going to go for a walk in the hall here whether the king likes it or not. it's my exercise time. bring in the swords, if the king still wants to go through with it and if laertes is still willing. i'll have the king win his bet if i can. if not, i'll only have suffered some embarrassment and a few sword hits.
fine, but you weren't harsh enough.
oh really? that far?
shall i quote you in those exact words, sir?
i was as harsh as i could be while still being a lady.
not an inch further. but listen here, kate. wherever i go, you will go too. i leave today, and tomorrow, you. will this make you content, kate?
just get the point across, however flowery you want to be.
you scolded him in private?
it must.
my services are at your command.
and in public too.
ned, come out of that airless room and help me laugh a bit.
thank you.
fine, but not enough.
where've you been, hal?
it's a good thing he's here to recommend himself. no one else would.
it was all we talked about. i kept him awake at night talking about it. he couldn't eat without me talking about it. when we were alone, it was the only thing i talked about, and when we were with other people, i often found a way to mention it. all i ever did was tell him how hurtful and bad it was.
with three or four knuckleheads and a few dozen kegs of liquor. i've been with the lowest of the low. sirrah, i've made great friends with these three bartenders, and i'm on a first-name basis with them: tom, dick, and francis. they swear on their souls that, even though i'm only the prince of wales, i'm the king of niceness. they say i'm no pompous fool, like falstaff, but a good sport, a spirited man, a good boy. when i'm king of england, all the good men of eastcheap will follow me gladly. when you drink deeply, they joke that you have been dyed red; and if you stop for a breath when you're drinking, they yell "cough!" and they command you to keep going. in fifteen minutes, i got so good at being a drinking companion, i could be at ease with any man over a drink, in any setting. ned, you didn't do yourself any favors by missing this. but, sweet ned, i'll sweeten the name ned with this bit of sugar, given to me by an apprentice drawer drawer = tapster; bartender drawer who never spoke any english his whole life, except, "that'll be eight shillings and sixpence," and "you're welcome," and also, "just a second, just a second! bring a pint of bastard bastard = a kind of spanish wine, mixed with honey bastard to the half-moon half-moon is the name of a room at the inn. half-moon room!" but ned, let's pass the time until falstaff gets here. hide in a side room while i ask that little apprentice drawer why he gave me the sugar. keep calling out his name, francis, and don't stop, so that all he's able to say is, "just a second!" step aside, and i'll give you a taste.
that crazy bird's only half-hatched.
and that's why he went crazy. a jealous woman's poisonous ranting is worse than the bite of a rabid dog. you disturbed his sleep with your complaining, which is why he's disoriented. you seasoned his food with screams. stress during mealtime ruins the digestion, and that gave him a raging fever. fever, as we know, is a kind of madness. you spoiled his fun by fighting with him, and when people can't enjoy themselves, they grow moody and dull with melancholy, they come very close to being grim and cheerlessly depressed. next thing you know, all kinds of terrible illnesses break out. ruining his meals, his enjoyment, and his sleep would drive any man or beast mad. what i'm saying is, your jealousy has pushed your husband away from his sanity.
(offstage) francis!
he used to praise his mother's nipple before he sucked it. he's like so many successful people in these trashy times, he's patched together enough fancy phrases and trendy opinions to carry him along. but blow a little on this bubbly talk, and it'll burst. there's no substance here.
she was always gentle when she scolded him, even when he behaved in the worst and wildest ways. (to adriana) why won't you defend yourself against this woman?
perfect.
my lord, osric has told the king about your agreeing to the fencing match. the king wishes to know if you want to play against him right away, or wait awhile.
she has tricked me into seeing my own faults. gentlemen, go in there and grab him.
(offstage) francis!
i'll do whatever the king wants. if he's ready now, so am i. otherwise, i'll do it anytime, as long as i'm able.
nobody goes into my house!
just a second, sir., ralph, make sure everything's okay in the pomegranate room!
the king and queen are coming down with everyone else.
then have your servants bring him out.
come here, francis.
right on cue.
no: he came here for sanctuary in shakespeare's period, people who sought protection in churches and other holy places were considered outside the reach of the law. sanctuary , and that will protect him from you. i'll try to bring him back to his right mind and work to the end of my abilities to do so.
sir?
the queen wants you to chat with laertes, politely, before you begin your match.
it's my place to take care of my husband and nurse him back to health. it is my duty and mine alone. so let me take him home.
how many more years of your apprenticeship do you have, francis?
she's full of good advice.
be patient. i'm not going to let him leave until i've tried every means to cure him. with my healthful potions, drugs, and holy prayers, i'll make him a complete man again. healing is part and parcel of my religious vows; it is a charitable duty my order performs. therefore, depart, and leave him here with me.
truly, five years, which is as long , 
you're going to lose this bet, my lord.
i will not depart and leave my husband here. it doesn't suit your holiness to separate a husband and his wife.
(offstage) francis!
i don't think so. i've been practicing fencing constantly since he went off to france. with the handicap they've given me, i think i'll win. but i have a sinking feeling anyway. oh well.
be quiet and depart. you're not going to take him.
just a second, sir!
wait, my lord, 
go lodge a complaint about this with the duke.
five years! wow, that's a long time to be clinking beer mugs. but francis, are you brave enough to play the coward with your contract? to flash it your heels, as you run away?
i know i'm being foolish, but i have the kind of vague misgiving women often get.
come with me. i'll fall at his feet and lie there until my pleading and crying convinces the duke to come here and force my husband to leave this abbey.
oh lord, sir. i'd swear on a stack of bibles that i'd love to be able to, 
if something is telling you not to play, listen to it. i'll say you're not feeling well.
it's almost five o'clock. the duke will pass by here soon. he always passes here on his way to that melancholy place where criminals are put to death. it's just behind this abbey.
(offstage) francis!
you'll do no such thing. i thumb my nose at superstitions. god controls everything, even something as trivial as a sparrow's death. everything will work out as it is destined. if something is supposed to happen now, it will. if it's supposed to happen later, it won't happen now. what's important is to be prepared. since nobody knows anything about what he leaves behind, then what does it mean to leave early? let it be.
why is he going there today?
just a second, sir!
come shake hands with laertes, hamlet. (claudius places laertes' and hamlet's hands together)
to see an elderly, unlucky merchant from syracuse publicly beheaded for breaking the law and coming here to ephesus.
how old are you, francis?
(to laertes) i beg your pardon, sir. i've done you wrong. forgive me as a gentleman. everyone here knows, and i'm sure you've heard, that i'm suffering from a serious mental illness. when i insulted you it was due to insanity. was hamlet the one who insulted laertes? no, not hamlet. if hamlet is robbed of his own mind, and insults laertes when he's not really himself, then hamlet's not guilty of the offense. who is guilty, then? hamlet's mental illness is.
here they come. we will watch the execution.
let's see, at the end of next september, i'll be, 
and if that's true, then hamlet is the victim of his own illness, his illness is his enemy. sir, with this audience as witness, let me declare that i'm as innocent of premeditated evil against you as i would be if i had happened to shoot an arrow over my house and accidentally hit my brother.
kneel down to the duke before he passes by the abbey.
(offstage) francis!
my feelings are satisfied, even though what you have done to my father and sister should drive me to revenge. yet when it comes to my honor, i can't forgive you so fast. i will accept no apology until experts in matters of honor show me how to make peace with you without staining my own reputation in doing so. until then i will accept your love as love.
one more time, we proclaim this publicly: if anyone will pay this man's bail, he will not be put to death. this is how well we regard him.
just a second, sir! (to prince henry ) wait here a moment, my lord.
i'm grateful for your love. come on, give us the swords, and we will play this friendly fencing match enthusiastically.
duke, the abbess has wronged me and i seek justice.
no, listen to me, francis. the sugar you gave me was worth about a penny, right?
yes, hand me one too.
she's a virtuous and holy lady. she can't possibly have done you any wrong.
oh lord, i wish i could have given you two pennies' worth!
i'm going to make you look sharp, laertes. i'm so bad at the game that your skill will shine like the brightest star in the darkest night.
your highness, you were the one who introduced me to my husband, antipholus, and suggested i marry him. on this terrible day, a most outrageous fit of madness possessed him. it made him run desperately through the streets with his servant, who is just as mad. he angered all the citizens by rushing into their houses and taking rings, jewels, and anything else he felt like. at one point i managed to get him tied up and sent home so that i could make some order out of all the trouble he caused. but somehow, he broke free from his guards. then he and his crazy servant found us and chased us away with swords. we got more help and came back to capture them, but then they fled into this abbey. we tried to go in, but the abbess stopped us. she wouldn't let us get him and she wouldn't send him out. so please, most gracious duke, order her to bring him out so we can get him some help.
i'll give you a thousand pounds for it. ask for it whenever you want it, and it's yours.
you're making fun of me.
a long time ago your husband was a soldier in the wars i led. and when you married him and made him the master of your bed, i gave you my word that i would do everything i possibly could for him.
(offstage) francis!
no, i swear i'm not.
(to his followers) go, knock on the gate and bid the abbess come out here and speak to me. i'll settle this before i go
just a second!
give them the swords, osric. hamlet, you know the bet?
mistress! run and save yourself. my master and his servant broke loose. they've beaten the maids and tied up doctor pinch. then they set fire to his beard and threw sewage to put out the flames. my master keeps telling the doctor to relax, while his servant cuts the doctor's hair in a ridiculous fashion. if you don't send some help, they'll kill doctor pinch.
you want it in a second, francis? no, francis. maybe tomorrow, francis, or thursday, francis, whenever you want it. but, francis.
yes, my lord, quite well. you've bet on the weaker fencer.
shut up, fool! your master and his servant are here. you're telling a lie.
sir?
i'm not worried. i've seen both of you fence. but since laertes is better, we've given him a handicap. he's got to outdo you by three hits to win.
mistress, i swear on my life that it's true. it was just moments ago. he's crying out for you and swears he'll burn your face and disfigure you if he can get ahold of you.
are you ready to rob this man? hal is referring to francis's master, who will be "robbed" if francis breaks his contract. this man? this man, with his leather jacket, fashionable crystal buttons, short hair, agate signet ring, dark stockings, ribboned garters, oily speech, spanish leather pouch, 
this sword's too heavy. show me another one.
listen, listen! i hear him, mistress. run, get out of here!
oh lord, sir, who are you talking about?
i like this one. are they all the same length?
(to adriana) stand with me. don't be scared. (to his men) guards, get your weapons!
well then, it looks like brown bastard hal may be trying to confuse francis, or he may be warning him not to leave his apprenticeship. brown bastard will continue to be your only drink. because listen, francis, your white canvas shirt will get stained out there. even in north africa, sir, you won't get so much.
yes, my lord.
oh, my, it's my husband. look, he can become invisible. just now we put him in the abbey over here, and now he's over there. it's impossible to understand.
excuse me, sir?
put the goblets of wine on that table. if hamlet makes the first or second hit, or gets back at laertes by making the third hit, then let my soldiers give him a military salute. i'll drink to hamlet's health, and into his goblet i'll drop a pearl even more costly than those in the crowns of the last four danish kings. give me the goblets. and now let the drum and the trumpet play, and the trumpet signal the cannon outside to fire, and let the cannon tell the heavens, and the heavens tell all the earth that the king is drinking now to hamlet's health. come on, let's begin. judges, pay close attention.
justice, gracious duke. please bring me justice! a long time ago i did good service to you. i fought in your wars and took deep wounds to save your life. in exchange for the blood i shed for you then, i ask you for justice now.
(offstage) francis!
come on, sir.
(to himself) the fear of death might be making me senile, but i think i see my son antipholus, and dromio.
get going, you good-for-nothing. can't you hear people calling you?
come on, my lord.
sweet prince, i want justice from that woman there. this woman that you urged me to marry has abused me and dishonored me, doing the most injury possible. the things she has shamelessly hurled on me are beyond imagination.
why are you standing there when people are calling you? take care of the customers inside!
that was one hit.
tell me the details. you know i'll be fair.
my lord, old sir john and a half-dozen others are at the door. should i let them in?
no, it wasn't.
today, great duke, she locked me out of my house and feasted there with whores.
leave them out there for a while, and then open the door.
referee!
that's terrible! (to adriana) tell us, woman, did you do that?
poins!
it was obviously a hit.
no, my good lord. i ate with him and my sister. damn my soul if these accusations are true!
just a second, sir!
well, let's go on.
if she's lying, i pray that i never sleep again at night or wake up during the day.
sirrah, falstaff and the rest of the thieves are here. are we ready for a laugh?
give me a goblet., hamlet, this pearl's yours. here's to your health.
oh, lying woman! both of them are liars: the madman accuses them justly.
we'll be happy as crickets, my lad. but listen, what's with this gag you played on the waiter? what's the point?
give him the goblet.
my lord, i know what i'm saying. i'm not drunk, and i haven't gone mad from anger, even though the wrongs done to me today would drive any man insane. this woman locked me out of the house today at lunchtime, and if he weren't conspiring with her, this jeweler could confirm my story since he was with me at the time. he left to fetch a necklace and he promised to bring it to the porcupine, where i was dining with balthasar. he hadn't arrived by the time we finished eating, so i went out looking for him. i met him in the street, he was there with that man. (points to the second merchant) that's when this lying jeweler swore that he had already given me the necklace, which, god knows, he hadn't. he had me arrested for it, and i went with the officer, sending my servant home to get money for the bail. when my servant returned empty-handed, i politely asked the officer to accompany me to my house. on the way, we came across my wife, her sister, and their gang of vile associates. one of them was a man named pinch: a hungry, narrow-faced villain; a skeleton; a fraud; a raggedy magician and fortune-teller; a needy, hollow-eyed, emaciated wretch; a walking corpse. he pretended to be some kind of sorcerer, and he gazed in my eyes and took my pulse. then, with his thin face leering down at mine, he cried out that i was possessed.
i'm up for anything. right now, i'm feeling all the moods that anyone has ever felt, from the old days of adam to this young age, right now, at twelve o'clock midnight.
let me just finish this round. set it down awhile. let's play.
then they all pounced on me, tied me up, carried me away, and left me in a dark, dank cellar in my house. they left me and my servant there, tied together. eventually i chewed through the ropes and freed myself, and i immediately ran to find you, your grace. i beg you: grant me justice for the deep shame i have suffered and the terrible wrongs done to me.
what time is it, francis?
another hit. what do you say?
your highness, i can confirm this much: he was locked out of his house and didn't eat at home.
just a second, sir.
you got me, i admit it.
but did he receive a necklace from you?
this boy has fewer words than a parrot, but he's actually a person! all he does is run up and down stairs, and the only things he can say are the names of the items on your bill. i'm not yet like percy, the hotspur of the north. he kills six or seven dozen scotsmen before breakfast, washes his hands, and then says to his wife, "to hell with this boring life! i need something to do!" "oh, my sweet harry," she says, "how many have you killed today?" "give my brown horse a dose of medicine," he says. and then about an hour later, he answers her: "about fourteen." then he says, "that's nothing, nothing." listen, bring in falstaff. i'll play percy, and that damned fat slob will play his wife, dame mortimer. "bottom's up!" as the drunk says. bring in the meat, bring in blubber.
my son will win.
he did, my lord. and when he ran in here, everyone could see that he was wearing that necklace.
welcome, jack. where've you been?
he's flabby and out of breath., here, hamlet, take my handkerchief and wipe your forehead. the queen drinks to your good luck and happiness, hamlet. (she lifts the cup with the pearl)
besides, i'll swear i heard you confess that you did receive the necklace, even after you swore at the marketplace that you hadn't. that's when i raised my sword against you, and you fled into this abbey, which, i think, you must have escaped from through some kind of trick.
a curse on all cowards, i say, and revenge on them, too! amen to that! give me some wine, boy. i'm not going to keep up this way of life much longer. i'll knit socks, mend them, and fix their feet. a curse on all cowards! give me a cup of wine, you lowlife! isn't there any honesty left in this world? (he drinks)
thank you, madam.
i was never inside this abbey, and you never raised your sword against me. i never saw the necklace, so help me heaven! everything you charge me with is untrue.
did you ever see the sun kiss a dish of butter? hal may be referring to the wine melting down falstaff's hroat; he may also be suggesting that falstaff is hot and sweaty. butter? the tender-hearted sun, melting the butter with its sweet words! if you have, then take a look at falstaff.
gertrude, don't drink that.
why, what a complicated case this is! i think you all must have drunk some kind of potion that's turned you all into animals. (to adriana) if you put him in the abbey, that's where he'd be. if he were insane, he wouldn't be pleading his case so sensibly. you say he
(to francis ) you bastard! somebody put lime lime was added to wine of poor quality to make it sparkle. lime in my wine! all men are cheaters and schemers, but a coward is worse than a glass of wine with lime in it. a miserable coward! go on, old jack, die already. if there's even one real man left on this earth besides me, then i'm as skinny as a herring. in all of england there are only three good men that haven't been put to death, and one of them is fat and growing old. god help us all! it's a bad world, i say. i wish i were a weaver; i could sing psalms while i was sewing. i'll say it again: a curse on all cowards.
excuse me. i'll drink it if i like. (she drinks)
ate at home, but the jeweler says he didn't. sirrah sirrah = term of address for a person of low social standing sirrah , what do you have to say?
what's the matter, you sack of wool? what are you muttering about?
(to himself) that was the poisoned drink. it's too late.
sir, he ate with this woman at the porcupine.
a king's son! if i don't drive you out of the kingdom with a wooden dagger in medieval morality plays, the character of vice carried a wooden dagger. wooden dagger , and send your subjects running before you like a flock of geese, then i'll never grow a beard again. you, prince of wales? what a joke!
i'd better not drink now. i'll drink later.
he did, and he snatched my ring right off my finger.
you fat son of a whore, what's the matter?
come on, let me wipe your face.
that's true, my lord: i did get this ring from her.
aren't you a coward? tell me that. and poins there?
(to claudius) i'll get him now.
did you see him enter this abbey?
dammit, you fat belly. if you call me a coward, i swear, i'll stab you.
i doubt it.
as clearly as i see you, my lord.
i call you coward? i'd sooner see you damned than call you a coward, but i tell you; i'd give a thousand pounds to be able to run as fast as you can. you've got good-enough, ;looking shoulders; you don't care who sees your back! is that what you call backing up your friends? damn anyone who backs up like that! i'd rather have a man who faces me. give me some wine! i'll be damned if i've had anything to drink today.
(to himself) but i almost feel guilty.
this is very odd. get the abbess out here. i think you're all either bewildered or stark raving mad.
liar! you've barely had time to wipe your lips since your last drink.
get ready for the third hit, laertes. you're just playing around. come on, give me your best shot. i sense you're treating me like a child.
mighty duke, please allow me to say something. i think i see a friend who will pay my bail and save my life.
whatever. (he drinks) a curse on all cowards, i still say.
you think so? come on.
feel free to say what you wish, syracusian.
what's the matter?
they're neck and neck.
(to antipholus of ephesus) isn't your name antipholus? and isn't that dromio, the man bound to you?
what's the matter? there are four of us here who stole a thousand pounds this very morning.
take this!
i was bound to him an hour ago, sir, but thankfully he chewed through our ropes. now i'm dromio and no longer attached to him.
where is it, jack? where is it?
separate them. they're overdoing it.
i'm sure you both remember me.
where is it? it was stolen from us. a hundred men against only four of us.
no, come on, one more time.
actually, it's ourselves you bring to mind since just a few moments ago we were tied up, as you are now. you're not one of pinch's patients, are you, sir?
what, a hundred, man?
take care of the queen!
why are you looking at me so strangely? you know me well.
i'll be damned if i didn't fight with a dozen of them for two straight hours. it's a miracle i managed to get away. they stabbed through my shirt eight times. four through my pants. my shield's got holes through and through. my sword's as cut up as a hacksaw. behold the evidence! it was the best fighting i've ever done, but even my all wasn't enough. a curse on all cowards! (points to gadshill, peto and bardolph) ask these men. if they don't tell you the whole truth, they're liars and devils.
both fencers are bleeding, how do you feel, my lord?
i never saw you before in my life.
tell us, men. what happened?
how do you feel, laertes?
oh, grief has transformed me since the last time you saw me. time has the power to deform people, and the sorrowful hours i have spent in his company have put these strange lines and wrinkles on my face. but tell me this: don't you know my voice?
the four of us jumped about a dozen, 
like a mouse caught in my own trap, osric. (he collapses) i've been killed by my own evil tricks.
no.
sixteen at least, my lord.
how's the queen?
don't you, dromio?
and tied them up.
she fainted at the sight of them bleeding.
no sir, trust me, i do not.
no, no. we didn't tie them up.
no, no, the drink, the drink! oh, my dear hamlet! the drink, the drink! i've been poisoned. (she dies)
i am sure you do.
you jerk, we did tie them up, every single one of them, or i'm a jew, a true hebrew jew.
oh, what evil! lock the door.
fine, sir, but i'm sure i don't. and you're in no position to doubt my word.
then, when we were dividing the money, about six or seven other men jumped us, 
we've been betrayed! find out who did it!
you don't know my voice? oh, severe time! have you mangled my tongue so badly in these seven short years that my only son can no longer recognize my weak, sorrow-ravaged voice? it's true: this aged face of mine is hidden by a snow white beard, and the blood is freezing in my veins. but i still have a little memory left, and there's still some fire in my eyes; my dull, deaf ears can still hear a little. all these aging faculties tell me, and i cannot be wrong, that you are my son, antipholus.
and untied the rest, and then all the others showed up.
i'm the one, hamlet. hamlet, you're dead. no medicine in the world can cure you. you don't have more than half an hour to live. the treacherous weapon is right in your hand, sharp and dipped in poison. the foul plan backfired on me. here i lie and will never get up again. your mother's been poisoned. i can't speak anymore. the king, the king's to blame.
i never saw my father in my life.
what, you fought with all of them?
the blade poisoned! then get to work, poison!
you know that we parted only seven years ago, in syracuse. maybe you're ashamed to admit that you know me because i'm a prisoner now.
all? i don't know what you mean by "all." but if i didn't fight with fifty of them, i'm a bunch of radishes. if fifty-two or fifty-three of them didn't attack me, then i'm no man.
treason! treason!
the duke and everyone who knows me in this city can confirm that's not true. i've never been to syracuse in my life.
i pray to god you didn't kill any of them.
protect me, my friends. i've only been hurt, not killed.
i tell you, syracusian. i've been looking after antipholus for twenty years, and during that time he's never been to syracuse. your old age and the prospect of death are making you imagine things.
too late for praying now. i made things hot for two of them; two i'm sure i got, two thugs wearing clothes made of buckram cloth. i'll tell you what, hal: if i'm lying to you, spit in my face and call me a horse. you know my old fighting stance. here's how i stood, and here's how i handled my sword. four thugs in buckram came right at me, 
here, you goddamn incest-breeding danish murderer, drink this. is your little pearl in there? follow my mother.
mighty duke, look here and see a man who's been treated most terribly!
what? four? you said two a second ago.
he got what he deserved. he mixed that poison himself. please forgive me as i forgive you, hamlet. you're not responsible for my death and my father's, and i'm not responsible for yours. (he dies)
either my eyes deceive me, or i see two husbands.
four, hal. i said four.
god will free you from blame. i'll follow you to heaven in a minute., i'm dying, horatio., goodbye, miserable queen., and all you people watching, pale and trembling, speechless spectators of these acts, i could tell you a thing or two if i had the time (though this cruel officer, death, doesn't allow much free time). let it be., horatio, i'm dying. you're alive. tell everyone what happened; set the story straight.
(looks at the antipholus twins) one of these men is the other's genius. (looks at the dromio twins) and the same with these two. but which is the man and which is the spirit genius = attendant spirit, believed to follow a person throughout his life spirit ? can anyone tell?
that's right. he said four.
not for a second. i'm more like an ancient roman than a corrupt modern dane. some of this liquor's still left in the goblet. (he picks up the poisoned cup to drink)
i, sir, am dromio. command this man to leave.
these four threw everything they had right at me. i made no big fuss of it; i just put up my shield and all seven of their swords hit it.
please, give me that goblet, if you love me. let go of it! i'll get it from you, i swear. oh god, horatio, what a damaged reputation i'm leaving behind me, as no one knows the truth. if you ever loved me, then please postpone the sweet relief of death awhile, and stay in this harsh world long enough to tell my story.
i, sir, am dromio. pray, let me stay.
seven? but just now there were only four.
what are these warlike noises?
you are egeon, aren't you? or are you his ghost?
wearing buckram?
young fortinbras, returning in triumph from poland, is firing his guns to greet the english ambassadors.
oh, my old master!, who tied him up?
yes. four in clothes made of buckram.
oh, i'm dying, horatio! this strong poison's overpowering me. i will not live to hear the news from england. but i bet fortinbras will win the election to the danish crown. he's got my vote as i die. so tell him that, given the recent events here, oh, the rest is silence. oh, oh, oh, oh. (he dies)
whoever tied him up, i will loosen the ropes, and with his freedom i will gain a husband. tell us, old egeon: are you the man who once had a wife named emilia, who gave birth to two fair sons? oh, if you are the same egeon, speak now, and speak to that same emilia!
seven, i swear on my sword. if not, i'm a liar.
now a noble heart is breaking. good night, sweet prince. may hosts of angels sing you to sleep., why are those drums approaching?
why, now the story the merchant told me this morning is starting to make sense. these two antipholuses, who look so alike, and these two dromios, who seem to have the same face, and her story of being shipwrecked, why, these two are the parents of these children and have been reunited by accident.
(to poins , so no one else can hear) leave him alone. there'll be more in a minute.
what do i see here?
if i'm not dreaming, you are emilia. if it's really you, tell me what happened to our son, who floated away with you on that deadly raft.
are you listening to me, hal?
what would you like to see? if it's a tragedy, you've come to the right place.
some men from epidamnum rescued me, our son, and dromio. but then a gang of violent fishermen from corinth kidnapped dromio and my son and carried them away. i don't know what became of them. you can see what became of me.
i'm listening, jack.
these corpses suggest mayhem. oh, proud death, what banquet are you preparing that you've needed to knock off so many princes at one stroke?
antipholus, aren't you originally from corinth?
good, because it's worth paying attention to. anyway, these nine guys in buckram that i told you about, 
this is a horrible sight. our news arrives from england too late, since the people that should have heard it are dead. we meant to tell the king that his orders have been carried out, and rosencrantz and guildenstern are dead. who will thank us now?
no, sir. i came from syracuse.
so, two more already.
(indicates claudius) not the king, even if he were still alive to thank you. he never ordered their deaths. but since you've come so soon after this bloodbath, you from battles in poland and you from england, then give your men orders to display these corpses on a high platform, and let me tell the world how all this happened.you'll hear of violent and unnatural acts, terrible accidents, casual murders, deaths caused by trickery and by threat, and finally murderous plans that backfired on their perpetrators. all this i can explain.
wait, don't stand next to each other. i can't tell who's who.
since their points were broken, 
let's hear about it right away and invite all the noblemen to listen. as for me, i welcome my good luck with sadness. i have some rights to claim this kingdom, and by arriving at this moment i have an opportunity to put them into effect.
i came from corinth, your highness.
their stockings falstaff means points as in "swords," but the word can also mean "stocking fasteners." stockings fell down.
i also have a few things to say about that, which hamlet just told me. but let's get down to business, even though people are in a frenzy of grief, to avoid any further plots and mishaps.
and i came with him.
they started to run away, but i followed them closely. and as quick as a thought, i finished off seven of the eleven.
let four captains carry hamlet like a soldier onto the stage. he would have been a great king if he had had the chance to prove himself. military music and military rites will speak for his heroic qualities. pick up the corpses. a sight like this suits a battlefield, but here at court it shows that much went wrong. go outside and tell the soldiers to fire their guns in honor of hamlet.
your renowned uncle, duke menaphon, the famous soldier, brought me here.
unbelievable! eleven buckram men have grown out of two!
which of you two ate lunch with me today?
but as the devil would have it, three wretched bastards wearing green came from behind and ran right at me. it was so dark, hal, that you couldn't see your hand in front of your face.
we want the most beautiful people to have children, so their beauty will be preserved forever, when the parent dies, the child he leaves behind will remind us of his beauty. but you, in love with your own pretty eyes, are letting your beauty burn itself out. you're starving the world of your beauty rather than spreading the wealth around. you're acting like your own worst enemy! right now you're the best-looking thing in the world, the only person as beautiful as springtime. but your beauty is like a new bud, and you're letting it die before it can develop and bring you true happiness. you're a young man, but you act like an old miser, you're wasting your beauty by hoarding it and keeping it to yourself! take pity on the rest of us, or this is how you'll be remembered: as the greedy pig who hogged his own beauty and took it with him to the grave.
i did, kind lady.
these lies are like the man who tells them: huge as a mountain, obvious, and plain as day. you clay-brained fatso, you knuckleheaded fool, you son of a whore, you obscene tub of lard, 
when forty years have gone by and carved deep wrinkles in your forehead, your youthful beauty, which everyone likes to look at now, will be worth little. then, when someone asks you where all your beauty is, all the treasure of your virile youth, if you were to say that it's all there in your withered face and sunken eyes, that would be an all-consuming shame and nothing to be proud of. you'd have a much better excuse if, decades from now, you could say you spent your beauty and youth raising a child. if someone were to ask you why you looked so old, you could say, "the effort i spent raising this beautiful child explains the sorry old state i'm in", and meanwhile your child's beauty would be a new incarnation of your own! having a beautiful child would be like being born again in old age, with the blood that flows coldly in your old veins becoming warm again in his.
and you're my husband, right?
what are you, crazy? are you crazy? isn't the truth the truth?
look in your mirror and tell the face you see that it's time to father a child. your face is fresh and healthy now, but if you don't reproduce it, you'll be cheating the world and cursing a woman who would happily be your child's mother. after all, do you think there's a woman out there so beautiful that she'd refuse to have your child? and what man would be so foolish as to allow his own self-absorption to stop himself from fathering children? you are like a mirror to your own mother, and when she looks at you she can gaze back at the lovely springtime of her youth. in the same way, when you are old and wrinkled, you'll be able to look at your child and see yourself in your prime. but if you choose not to have a child to remember you, you'll die alone and leave no memory of your own image.
no, he's not. i say no to that.
well, how could you know that these men were wearing green when it was so dark you couldn't see your hand in front of your face? go ahead, tell us. what do you have to say to that?
you wasteful lovely person, why are you spending all of your beauty on yourself? nature doesn't give us anything; she only lends us the gifts we get at birth, and, being generous herself, she lends the most to people who are generous themselves. so, you beautiful miser, why do you abuse the bountiful gifts that were given to you to share with others? why do you insist on being such a bad investor, using up the immense treasure you have to offer the world but unable to support yourself or preserve your memory? by only having dealings with yourself, you're cheating yourself out of the best part of yourself. then how, when nature says it's time for you to go, will you be able to give an acceptable account of how you spent your time and beauty? your unused beauty will have to be buried with you. but if you used that beauty now, it would stay behind once you were gone and preserve your legacy.
so do i, although she called me her husband. and this beautiful gentlewoman, her sister, called me brother. (to luciana) if all this is for real, i hope i'll get the chance to make good on all the things i said to you today.
come on, tell us, jack, go on.
the same process that over time shaped your wonderful face, so that now everybody loves to look at you, will eventually destroy that face, making ugly what is now surpassingly beautiful. for never-resting time takes summer by the hand, leads him into horrifying winter, and destroys him there, freezing his sap, removing his full leaves, covering up his beauty with snow, and turning everything bare. if we didn't have perfume distilled from summer flowers to keep in a jar, the effects of summer would vanish at the end of the season. without perfume, we'd have no way of remembering the summer itself or its beauty. but the flowers used to make perfume lose only their outward beauty when winter comes; their beautiful scent lives on sweetly.
that's the necklace i gave you, sir.
what, just because you command me? dammit, if i were being tortured on all the contraptions in the world, i wouldn't speak just because you commanded. speak just because you command! if my reasons were as cheap as blackberries, i wouldn't give away my reasons just because i was commanded. not i.
(continuing from sonnet ) so don't let wintry old age destroy your summer beauty before your essence has been preserved. make some woman pregnant and pass on your beauty before it dies with you. it's unfair to charge exorbitant interest on a loan. but if you lend a woman your body, she'll be only too happy to pay you back with a child. having a child, making another version of yourself, will make you happy. having ten children will make you ten times as happy. what power would death have over you if you left children behind to keep your legacy alive? don't be willful and selfish, you're much too beautiful to be conquered by death, with nothing left of you but a corpse devoured by worms.
i think it is, sir. i don't deny it.
i'm not going to put up with this any longer. this red-faced coward, this flattener of mattresses, this breaker of horses' backs, this huge hill of flesh, 
when the gracious light of the sun rises in the east, each person on earth pays homage to it by gazing upon all its sacred majesty. and even at noon, once the sun has climbed the steep path to the top of the sky, it still looks like a strong young man in his prime and human beings still adore its beauty, watching it pass on its way like a golden king making a pilgrimage. but when the sun grows weary and falls from its highest point, it reels like an old man, and the people who once looked up at it so dutifully stop looking and turn the other way. in the same way, you, wasting your sexual energy in the prime of your life, will die alone and unloved unless you father a son.
and you, sir, had me arrested over that necklace.
dammit! you scarecrow, you skin of an elf, you dried-out ox's tongue, you bull's penis, you salted cod! oh, i wish i had enough breath to tell you all the things you are! you yardstick, you empty sheath, you case for a violinist's bow, you disgusting erect sword, 
you're like music to listen to, so why does listening to music make you sad? delightful and joyful things should complement one another. so why do you love things that make you unhappy and enjoy things that are bad for you? if music played well and in tune sounds bad to you, it's because that music is rebuking you for not playing your own part, not making your own harmony, by getting married and having children. notice how the sound of two strings vibrating together in harmony is like a father and child and happy mother, who all sing one pleasing note together. though their music has no words, the unity of their voices sings this warning to you: if you stay single, you'll be a childless nobody.
i think i did, sir. i don't deny it.
catch your breath for a moment, then start again. and when you've tired yourself with these awful comparisons, listen to me say just one thing.
are you eating up your own life by remaining single because you're afraid your widow will cry when you die? ah, if you happen to die childless, the entire world will mourn for you like a wife who's lost her husband. the world will be your widow and weep forever about the fact that you didn't leave a copy of yourself. but if you had left a wife behind, she'd have had her children to look at and remind her of her husband. a person who wastes his money is just shifting money around, at least the money's still in the world. but if beauty is wasted, the world loses it forever: if a beautiful person doesn't use his beauty, he destroys it. the person who would commit such a murderous outrage on himself has no love in his heart for others.
i sent dromio to you with money for bail, but i don't think he brought it to you.
listen closely, jack.
if you have any sense of shame, admit that you don't have any love in your heart for anyone, since you're so unwilling to care about yourself. i'll admit, if you like, that many people love you, but it's also obvious that you love no one. for you are so possessed with murderous hatred that you have no problem plotting against yourself, seeking to destroy the house that you should want to repair. oh, change your way of thinking, so i can change my mind about you. should hate have a more beautiful home than love? be gracious and kind, like your appearance, or at least be kind-hearted to yourself. have a child out of love for me, so your beauty will live on in your children, if not in you.
no, he didn't get any by me.
the two of us saw you four jump four men, tie them up and take their money. now listen to how the simple truth will shame you. then the two of us jumped the four of you. and with just a word, we stole your prize from you. now we have it, and we can show it to you right here in the bar. and falstaff, you ran away as quickly and as lightfootedly, as a cow from the slaughter, screaming for mercy, as you ran and screamed. what a lowlife you are, to hack up your sword and say it happened in a fight! what outrageous story, what trick, what hiding place can you possibly find to hide you from your open and obvious shame?
as fast as you will decline, you could grow again just as fast, through one of your children. the youth and vigor that you would pass on to a child now that you're still young, you could call your own when you're no longer young. in marriage and childbirth lie wisdom, beauty, and reproduction. without them you have only foolishness, age, and the cold decay of death. if everyone thought like you, the human race would end, and in sixty years there'd be no more world. let the people who aren't good enough to preserve, the rough, ugly, poor people, die childless. nature gave abundantly to the people whom she endowed with beauty, and you should cherish her gifts by being generous with them. nature made you her stamp, to serve as a template for all human beauty. she meant for you to make copies of yourself, so that the original, you, wouldn't die.
i got this purse full of money from you, and my dromio brought it to me. it seems that we kept running into each other's servants all day. and everyone thought i was him, and he was me, and that's how all these errors came about.
come on, let's hear it, jack. what trick have you got now?
when i look at the clock and notice time ticking away, and see splendid day sink into hideous night; when i see the violet wilt and curly black hair turn white with age; when i see tall trees that once provided shade for herds now barren of leaves, and the summer's crops tied up and hauled to the barn as if summer itself were an old man being carried off to his grave, then i have doubts about the fate of your beauty, since you too will have to undergo the ravages of time. sweet and beautiful creatures don't stay that way; they die as fast as they see others grow. and there's no defense against time's destructive power, except perhaps to have children, to defy time when he takes you away.
i want to use this money to set my father free.
by god, i knew it was you the whole time, like i was your own father! listen to me, men: would it be right for me to kill the heir-apparent? should i have attacked the true prince? look, you know i'm as brave as hercules hercules was a greek hero renowned for his bravery. hercules , but you must listen to your instinct. it's like that old superstition, about how a lion will never attack a true prince. instinct is a powerful thing; i was only a coward by instinct. from now on, i'll have to think of myself as a brave lion, and you as a true prince. but good god, men, i'm glad you have the money. hostess! lock the doors; we'll celebrate tonight and pray tomorrow. gentlemen, lads, boys, hearts of gold, i'll call you every good name i can think of, all at once! hey! shall we have some fun? shall we stage a little play?
oh, how i wish you were yourself! but, my love, your identity will only last as long as you're alive. you should make preparations in anticipation of your inevitable death and pass on your beautiful appearance to someone else. that way, your beauty, which you've only borrowed, wouldn't have to end. then, even after you died, your beautiful body would be renewed in your children. who would let such a beautiful house fall into disrepair when prudent maintenance might make it outlast the stormy gusts of winter and the frustrating barrenness surrounding death? only the most irresponsible spender could do such a thing, you know, my dear love. you had a father, let your son be able to say the same.
that's not necessary. i'm going to let him live.
of course, and the play will be about you running away.
i don't base my judgments on the stars, and yet it does seem to me i know astrology. i can't foresee good or bad events, predict plagues, famines, or what a season will be like. nor can i predict down to the minute what each person's misfortunes are going to be. nor can i tell princes whether things will go well for them by looking at the heavens. but i can forecast the future by looking in your eyes. i see by those reliable guides that truth and beauty will thrive if you would only pass your attributes on to a child. otherwise, this is what i predict: when you die, truth and beauty will die with you.
sir, i must get that diamond ring back from you.
oh, let it go, hal, if you love me.
when i think about the fact that every living thing is perfect only for a brief time, that the whole world is one big stage on which the stars secretly control the action; when i see that men grow like plants, encouraged and then thwarted by the same sky, exulting in their youthful vigor and then declining just when they're at their height, vanishing until their glory is no longer even remembered; when i think about the whole world's instability, then i think of you, a youth enjoying so many of nature's rich gifts. in my mind, i see time and decay debating with each other about how to corrupt your sunny youth, how to convert it to old age and night. out of love for you, i wage war against time: as he takes away your youth, i continually recreate you in these poems.
there, take it, and thanks for taking such good care of me.
oh, jesus, your majesty!
(continuing from sonnet )but why not take advantage of a stronger way to fight against this bloody tyrant, time, and strengthen yourself in your old age in a happier way than with my useless sonnets? now your capacity for pleasure is at its peak, and many virtuous maidens would love to marry you and bear your children, who would recreate your image much better than any artificial reproduction such as a painting or poem. the faces of your children will renew your life. time created you and brought you to your present state of perfection, but it cannot preserve your inner worth or outer beauty, and neither can my poetry. having a baby would preserve your image and ensure that you live on by your own design.
renowned duke, please join us in the abbey, where we will discuss at length all that has happened to us. everyone assembled here who has been troubled by the day's events join us as well, and we will straighten everything out. my sons, waiting to hear news of you has been like a second childbirth: this time, my labor lasted thirty-three years, and i am only now delivered of my heavy burden. duke solinus, my husband, and both my children, and you two dromios, who marked the day of my sons' births with your own, come into the abbey with me for a new christening. after such a long period of grief, we will have such a celebration!
hello there, my lady the hostess! do you have something to say to me?
who in the future will ever believe my poetry if i praise you as you deserve? though, i have to admit, my poetry is like a tomb that actually hides what you are really like and doesn't manage to show even half of your true qualities. if i could capture in my writing how beautiful your eyes are and create new verses to list all of your wonderful attributes, decades from now people would say, "this poet lies. no human face was ever so divine." in this way, my poems (yellowed with age), would be scorned, like old men who talk too much without saying anything true, and what is really your due would be dismissed as a poet's madness, the false verses of an old song. but if some child of yours were still alive then, you would live twice: in the child, and in my poetry.
with all my heart, i'll join you.
indeed, my lord. there's a nobleman from the royal court at the door, and he wants to speak with you. he says your father sent him.
shall i compare you to a summer day? you're lovelier and milder. rough winds shake the pretty buds of may, and summer doesn't last nearly long enough. sometimes the sun shines too hot, and often its golden face is darkened by clouds. and everything beautiful stops being beautiful, either by accident or simply in the course of nature. but your eternal summer will never fade, nor will you lose possession of your beauty, nor shall death brag that you are wandering in the underworld, once you're captured in my eternal verses. as long as men are alive and have eyes with which to see, this poem will live and keep you alive.
(to antipholus of ephesus) master, should i go get your luggage off the ship?
give him some coins and send him right back to my mother.
devouring time, go ahead and blunt the lion's paws. make the earth swallow up her own creatures. pluck the sharp teeth out of the fierce tiger's jaws, and burn the long-lived phoenix in its own blood. make happy and sad times as you fly by, and do whatever you want, swift-footed time, to the wide world and all its vanishing delights. but i forbid you to commit one heinous crime. oh, don't carve wrinkles into my love's beautiful forehead, and don't draw lines there with your old pen. let him pass through time untainted, to serve as the model of beauty for men to come. but do your worst, old time. despite your wrongs, my love will stay young forever in my poetry.
dromio, what stuff of mine did you put on a ship?
what kind of man is he?
your face is as pretty as a woman's, but you don't even have to use makeup, you, the man (or should i say woman?) i love. your heart is as gentle as a woman's, but it isn't cheating like theirs. your eyes are prettier than women's, but not as roving, you bless everything you look at. you've got the good looks of a handsome man, but you attract both women and men. when mother nature made you, she originally intended to make you a woman, but then she got carried away with her creation and screwed me by adding a certainthing that i have no use for. but since she gave you a prick to please women, i'll keep your love, and they can enjoy your body.
the stuff you had at the centaur, sir.
an old man.
i'm not like that other poet who writes about a woman who's pretty because she wears a lot of makeup. in his verses, he compares her to heaven itself, and to every other beautiful thing, the sun and moon, the rich gems of earth and sea, the first flowers of april, and all the rest of the precious things on the face of the earth. since i really am in love, i just want to write the truth, and when i do, believe me, my lover is as beautiful as any human being, though maybe not as bright as the stars. whoever actually likes those love-poem clichs can say more; i'm not trying to sell anything, so i won't waste time with praise.
he means me. i'm your master, dromio. come inside with us: we'll deal with that later. embrace your brother there, and rejoice with him.
what is an old man doing out of bed at midnight? do you want me to talk to him?
i won't believe my mirror when it tells me i'm old, as long as you're still young. but when i see you with wrinkles, then i'll know death is on its way, because your beauty is as close to my heart as beautiful clothing to a body. put another way, my heart beats in your chest and yours in mine. but if that's true, then how can i be older than you? therefore, my love, take care of yourself just as i will take care of myself, not for my own sake, but because i have your heart inside of me, which i will protect as carefully as a nurse her baby. don't expect to get your heart back from me when mine is dead. you gave it to me forever, never to be returned.
you have a fat friend at your master's house: she took care of me in the kitchen today, thinking i was you. i guess now she's going to be my sister-in-law and not my wife.
please do, jack.
like an actor who hasn't learned his lines perfectly and forgets his part because of stage fright, or like some raging animal or human whose excessive passion makes it weak, so i, because i can't trust myself, forget to say the things a lover should say to his darling; just when my love is strongest it seems to be getting weak. so let my writings speak for my heart instead. they plead for love better than i could if i spoke, even if i said more and more eloquently. oh, read in these silent lines the love i cannot express in speech. love will give you the insight to read between the lines.
i think you're my mirror, not my brother. and i can see by looking at you that i'm a pretty good-looking fellow. do you want to go in and join the party?
truly, i'll send him on his way.
my eye sonnet is very difficult to follow even when translated. we are meant to picture the speaker and the addressee staring into each other's eyes and each seeing his own reflection. the speaker is able to see through the eye of his own reflection into his own heart, where the image of the addressee is enshrined. eye has acted like a painter and engraved your beautiful image on the canvas of my heart. my body is the frame that holds this picture; to draw that picture with perspective, realistically representing depth, is the highest skill a painter could have. only via this painter, my eye, can you find the image of you that dwells continually in my heart: your own eyes are the windows into my heart. now look at the favors our eyes have done for each other: my eyes have drawn your shape, and your eyes are windows into which i can look to see my own heart, into which the sun also likes to look, taking a peep at your reflection. yet my eyes lack a certain skill that would grace the others they already have: they can only draw what they see; they don't see into your heart.
after you, sir. you're older than me.
now, men: by god, you fought well. so did you, peto, and you, bardolph. you must be lions, too, since your instinct told you to run away. you wouldn't touch the true prince; no, indeed!
let fortunate people boast about their prizes and their titles, while i, who am not lucky enough to get such rewards, experience unexpected joy in what i honor most: your love. those courtiers who enjoy high status because they're the favorites of great princes are like marigolds. they bloom as long as the sun shines on them, but their pride is fragile, one frown will kill them. and once a famous warrior who has painfully endured and won a thousand battles is defeated, he's stripped of all his honors, and all of the successes that he worked for are forgotten. how much happier am i, who love and am loved in a place i cannot leave and from which others cannot remove me.
that's a good point. how can we tell which of us is the oldest?
honestly, i ran when i saw the others run.
my love, i am your absolute servant; your worth compels me to serve you loyally. i'm sending you this message to show my devotion to you, not to show that i can write well. my skills are so poor that i may make my obligation to you, which is great, seem meager. i don't have the words to express it properly. but i hope that in your heart you'll form an idea of what i mean and the idea will enrich your sense of what i owe you. when the star that guides me shines on me favorably, giving me the inspiration to dress up my tattered love for you in clever words that prove i'm worthy of your sweet respect, that's when i'll dare to boast about how much i love you. until then, i won't show my face anywhere that you can put me to the test.
we'll draw straws. meanwhile, after you.
okay, now tell me the truth. how did falstaff's sword get broken like that?
weary from work, i hasten to my bed, the sweet place of rest for a body tired out from laboring. but then i start to go on a journey in my head, making my mind work after my body's work is finished. because when i go to bed, my thoughts begin the trip from where i am, far away from you, to where you are. they keep my weary eyes wide open, staring at the darkness like blind people do. except, in my imagination, i see your image, though it's too dark to see anything else. like a shining jewel hanging in the terrifying night, your image makes that old, black night look beautiful and young. see, because of you, my body does not rest in the daytime and my mind finds no peace at night.
no, i'll tell you what. we came into the world as brother and brother, so now let's enter hand in hand, not one before the other.
he hacked away at it with his dagger. he said he would swear up and down to make you believe that it happened in a fight, and he made us do the same.
(continuing from sonnet ) so how can i return in a cheerful state of mind when i'm prevented from getting any rest? when the oppression i experience during the day isn't relieved by any sleep at night, but instead my sleepless nights oppress me during the day and my wearisome days oppress me at night? and though day and night are natural enemies, they've shook hands and made a bargain to both torture me, the day with labor, the night with thoughts of how far away you are as i labor over thoughts of you. i try to please the day by telling him how bright you are, so bright that you take the sun's place when clouds cover the sky. in the same way, i use you to flatter black night, telling him how you brighten the evening sky when stars don't shine. but they both, day and night, only prolong my sorrows, and night by night this prolonged grief grows stronger.
yes, and he made us rub our noses with rough weeds until they started to bleed, then smear our clothes with the blood and swear that it was from the men we fought. when he told me the crazy things he wanted us to do, i did something i haven't done in seven years: i blushed.
when i'm in disgrace with everyone and my luck has deserted me, i sit all alone and cry about the fact that i'm an outcast, and bother god with useless cries, which fall on deaf ears, and look at myself and curse my fate, wishing that i had more to hope for, wishing i had this man's good looks and that man's friends, this man's skills and that man's opportunities, and totally dissatisfied with the things i usually enjoy the most. yet, as i'm thinking these thoughts and almost hating myself, i happen to think about you, and then my condition improves, like a lark at daybreak rising up and leaving the earth far behind to sing hymns to god. for when i remember your sweet love, i feel so wealthy that i'd refuse to change places even with kings.
no, our general's infatuation is out of control. his eyes used to glow with pride when he reviewed his troops. now his eyes devote themselves exclusively to a certain brown-skinned face. his heart used to burst the buckles on his breastplate in great fights, but now he's lost all temperance and dedicates his heart to satisfying the lust of an egyptian whore.
liar! you stole a cup of wine eighteen years ago, got caught in the act, and you've been blushing ever since. you had your fiery-red face and your weapons going for you, but still you ran away. what instinct made you do that?
when i sit alone in silence and remember the past, i get depressed about all the things i don't have that i once strived for, and i add to old griefs new tears for all the valuable time i've wasted. then i can drown my eyes, which are not usually wet from crying, in tears for precious friends who are dead, and i can weep again for hurts in loves that are long since over and moan about the loss of many things i'll never see again. then i can grieve about grievances i had let go of and sadly recount each woe that i'd already cried about in the past, feeling the pain all over again, as if i hadn't suffered over these things already. but if i think about you, my dear friend, while i'm doing all of this, i get back everything i'd lost, and all my sorrows end.
look at them. take a good look, and you'll see that one of the three men who rule the world has turned into a whore's jester. look and see.
sir, do you see these red welts on my face? do you see these swellings?
you have the love of everyone who used to love me, people who i supposed were dead because i didn't have their love anymore. love reigns in your heart, both everything belonging to love and all those friends who i thought were dead and buried. how many tears of devoted love have i shed at funerals, in payment to the dead, when now it appears they had only gone to hide in your heart. you're like a grave where dead lovers come alive again, decorated with mementos of those lost loves who gave you all the love i owed to each of them. all the love i owed to many is now yours alone. i see these lovers in you, and you, who contain everyone i have ever loved or was loved by, have all of me.
if what you feel is really love, tell me how much.
i do.
if you survive me, living on after dust covers my bones, and you should happen to read over again these poor, crude sonnets written by the man who once loved you, remember that things have improved since my day. so even though any poet today could write better sonnets, keep my poems for the sake of my love, not for my skill, which luckier men have far surpassed. and grant me this loving thought: "if my friend's inspiration was paired with the advantages today's poets have, his love would have brought forth better poems than these, to rank alongside those of today's better poets. but since he died, and poets are better now, i'll read their poems for their style, his for his love."
it would be a pretty stingy love if it could be counted and calculated.
what do you think they mean?
i've seen many beautiful mornings in which the sun beautifies the mountaintops, kissing the green meadows with its golden face and making streams sparkle as if by magic. but then it suddenly permits the nastiest clouds in sonnets , , the speaker uses the image of the sun being covered by clouds as a metaphor for his being betrayed by the young man he loves. clouds to ride across its heavenly face, and it hides from the forlorn world, sneaking off to the west in disgrace. in exactly this way, early one morning my sun shone on my face with triumphant splendor, but alas he was only mine for one hour. the clouds have hidden him from me now. but i don't fault him for this at all. golden men like him can disgrace themselves as much as the real sun does.
i want to measure the extent of your love, to see how far it stretches.
that your temper is hot and your wallet is empty.
sun, why did you make it look like today was going to be such a beautiful day, so that i went out without my cloak, only to let nasty clouds overtake me on my way, hiding your radiance behind their poisonous mist? it's not enough that you broke through the clouds and dried the rain off my storm-beaten face, because no man can be satisfied with a cure that heals the physical injury but doesn't take away the disgrace. nor does it comfort me that you're ashamed, because even though you regret what you did, i have still lost out. when someone takes something away from you, their being sorry doesn't help much. ah, but those tears you're shedding out of love for me are like pearls, very valuable ones, and they make up for all your bad deeds.
then you would have to go beyond heaven, beyond earth.
it means anger, sir, you interpret it correctly.
don't be upset anymore about what you did. everything has its bad side: roses have thorns, sparkling fountains have mud, the sun and the moon are periodically covered up by clouds and eclipses, and disgusting worms live in the sweetest flowers. all men do bad things, even me, right now: as i excuse your transgression by comparing it to other things, i corrupt myself by making excuses for your misdeeds (more excuses for these little sins than they even require). because what i'm doing is taking your sins, which were just physical urges, and putting my mind to work on their behalf. the person you've hurt is now advocating for you, i'm now pleading the case against myself. i'm so conflicted between love and hate that i can't resist helping that sweet villain who bitterly injures me every hour.
i have news from rome, my good lord.
it means you'll be hanged if the authorities catch you.
i acknowledge that the two of us have to part, even though we're united in love. that way i can take those disgraces that we've incurred together all onto myself, bearing them without any help from you. our love for one another gives us common cause, despite this awful situation that forces us apart, which, though it can't prevent us from being united in love, still robs us of sweet hours of pleasure together. i can never greet you openly again, because my guilt would bring shame upon you. nor can you ever honor me with public kindness without dishonoring your own reputation. but don't do that. i love you so much that i value your good reputation as my own.
which irritaties me. give me a summary.
here comes skinny jack; here comes the bag of bones. what's going on, now, my sweet windbag? how long has it been, jack, since you saw your own knees?
just as a decrepit father takes pleasure in seeing his active child engaging in youthful activities, so i, whom misfortune has injured and crippled, take all the comfort i can in your good worth and fidelity. for whether beauty, nobility, wealth, and intelligence, or any one of these, or all of them, or more than these, are your princely attributes, i'm attaching my love to them. i'm not lame, poor, or despised, as long as this fantasy of mine lets me take so much satisfaction in your good luck and i can live off part of your glory. whatever is best, that's what i wish you to have. since i have this wish, i'm lucky ten times over.
no, listen to it, antony. perhaps fulvia fulvia is marc antony's wife. fulvia is angry with you. who knows, maybe the baby-faced caesar octavius caesar was only in his twenties at this time, about twenty years younger than antony. baby-faced caesar has orders for you: "do this, do that; conquer that kingdom, liberate this one. do it or we'll condemn you."
my own knees? when i was your age, hal, my waist was as skinny as an eagle's talon; i could have crawled through a councilman's thumb ring. but damn all that sighing and sadness! it blows a man up like a balloon. there's bad news out there. that was sir john bracy, sent by your father. you have to go to court in the morning. percy, that mad man from up north, and that welshman who gave amamon amamon = the name of a devil amamon a beating, and stole lucifer's wife, and made a pact to be the devil's master, what's his name again?
how could i lack things to write about while you're alive? you pour inspiration into my poetry by giving me the sweetest subject to write about: yourself, too excellent a subject for ordinary writers to describe. oh, give yourself the credit if you see anything in my writing that's worth reading. for who is so speechless that he can't write to you, when you yourself provide the creative spark? you should be the tenth muse, worth ten times more than those other nine invoked by poets. and whoever calls on you for inspiration, let him write eternal verses, to outlive even the farthest reaches of time. if my little bit of inspiration happens to please today's demanding readers, the painful work can be mine, but the praise shall be yours.
what, my love?
oh, glendower.
how can i celebrate your worth in my poems without appearing conceited, given that you're my better half? what good does it do me to praise myself, and am i doing anything besides praising myself when i praise you? for this reason, let's live apart. and though we love each other dearly, let's lose our common identity; by this separation, i can give you the praise that you deserve by yourself. oh, absence, you would be such a torment if it weren't for the fact that you give me the chance to fill up the lonely hours with thoughts of love, which make the time pass so sweetly, and that you teach me how to divide my love and me in two, as i, here, praise my friend while he remains elsewhere.
maybe? no, most likely. you can't stay here any longer. caesar has sent your dismissal, so pay attention, antony. where's fulvia's summons, excuse me, i should have said caesar's. or do fulvia and caesar both beckon you back to rome? call in the messengers and we'll find out. as surely as i am the queen of egypt, antony, you're blushing, which means you're caesar's servant. or that that bitch fulvia still has the power to humiliate you. call the messengers!
owen, owen, that's the one. and his son-in-law mortimer, and old northumberland, and douglas, that lively scot of scots, who can ride a horse straight up a wall, 
take all my loves, my love, yes, take them all: take my love for you, take away your love for me, and take a lover from me. what do you have now that you didn't have before? my love, you haven't acquired true love, because my true love was yours to begin with, before you took this extra from me. if, instead of accepting my love, you make love to the person, love, i can't blame you, because you're only taking advantage of my love. but, you should be blamed if you deceive yourself by taking from one person what you won't take from another, if you willingly make love to one person while refusing to make love to me. i forgive you for stealing from me, gentle thief, although you're taking the little i have. and yet every lover knows that it hurts more to be injured by a lover than by an enemy. you, who are gracious even when succumbing to lust, you in whom everything bad looks good, even if you kill me with injuries, let's not become enemies.
let rome be washed away in the tiber rome was built on the river tiber. let rome be washed away in the tiber and let the great empire fall. my place is here. kingdoms are only dirt. the soil feeds animals as well as people, so how does having a kingdom separate humans from beasts? the noblest thing is to do what we're doing, particularly when the couple is as well matched as we are. i demand that the world admit we are the perfect couple or else suffer the consequences.
the man who can ride at high speeds, then kill a flying sparrow with his pistol.
those charming little infidelities that you commit when i'm away from you for awhile are understandable given your youth and beauty, since you're continually tempted wherever you go. you're noble and distinguished, so women see you as a prize catch. you're beautiful, and therefore women pursue you aggressively. and when a woman is the pursuer, what man will rudely refuse her to get his point across? but, oh my, you might at least stay away from my mistress and keep your beauty and youthful urges in line, as they're leading you into debauchery, which breaks two bonds: my mistress's fidelity to me, which your beauty tempts her to break, and your bond with me, which your beauty, again, lets you break.
(to herself) what an enormous lie! why did he marry fulvia if he didn't love her? i'll pretend to be a fool and believe him. he'll never change.
you've hit it; that's him exactly.
the fact that you now have my mistress isn't the only reason i'm hurt, though it's true that i loved her dearly. what makes me cry the most is that now she has you, a loss of love that hurts me even more. you two criminals in love, here's how i'll rationalize the pain you've caused me: you, friend, love her because you know i love her. and she loves you for the exact same reason, putting up with your praises and lovemaking for my sake, because she knows you're my friend. if i lose you, it's a win for my mistress. and if i lose her, you will have found what i've lost. both of the people i love find each other, and i lose them both, and both cause me this pain. but here's what makes me happy: my friend and i are one person. how gratifying!, it turns out my mistress loves only me.
(overhearing the last sentence) unless he is moved and inspired by cleopatra. now, since we love the feeling of being in love, let's not spoil the mood with serious discussion. we shouldn't spend a minute without some kind of amusement. what shall we do tonight?
i may have hit it, but owen never hit the sparrow.
my eyes work best when i'm asleep, because all day they look at things i don't care about. when i sleep, my dreaming eyes alight on you and glitter brightly in the dark, having found your bright image there. given that your shadowy dream-image brightens even the dark, how bright might you appear in daylight, when your own light is so much clearer? how bright, when your shadow shines so brightly to my eyes blinded by darkness? what good would it do my eyes to see you in the daytime when they already look at your beautiful image in the dead of night, as i sleep? every day is as dark as night until i get to see you again, and every night is as bright as day when i see you in my dreams.
meet with the ambassadors.
well, that rascal has bravery in him; he won't run away.
if i were made of thought instead of slow, dull flesh, this wicked distance between us wouldn't keep me from where i wanted to be. no matter the distance, from the farthest possible regions, i would bring myself to where you are. it wouldn't matter that my feet were standing on the spot on earth farthest from you: thought is nimble enough to jump over both sea and land as quickly as it can think about the place it wants to be. but, ah, it's killing me to think that i'm not made of thought and can't leap over the many miles when you are gone. instead my body is made of so much earth and water the speaker alludes to the belief that all matter is made up of four ele earth, water, air, and fire. earth and water were believed to be the heaviest, most tangible elements. earth and water that i have to fill the long time without you with my moans. the leaden, deep earth and slow, wet water of which i am made give me nothing but heavy tears.
shame on you, stubborn queen! everything you do is attractive, scolding, laughing, crying, every emotion seems admirable when you express it. i won't see any messengers but yours. tonight we'll wander through the streets and observe the people. come, my queen. that's what you wanted to do last night. (to the messenger ) don't talk to us.
why, you rascal! you just praised him for running!
the other two elements this sonnet, like sonnet , is based on the idea that matter is composed of the four ele earth, water, air, and fire. two elements , weightless air and purifying fire, both remain with you, wherever i may be. air is my thoughts, and fire is my desire. the two of them slide back and forth between us swiftly and effortlessly. normally i am made up of all four elements, but when my air and fire are off on their errand of love to you, i sink into depression and slide toward death, until air and fire return to restore the proper balance the speaker refers to the renais sance notion that melancholy, or depression, is caused by an imbalance of substances within the body. balance within me. even now, they have returned from you to tell me that you're well and in good health. i rejoice to hear this but then immediately grow gloomy from missing you, so i send them back to you and immediately grow sad again.
does antony have so little respect for caesar?
he'll run on his horse, you cuckoo. but when fighting on foot, he'll never budge.
my eye and my heart have gone to war with each other. they're fighting over who gets to control your image. my eye wants to bar my heart from the image that it formed, while my heart wants to keep my eye away fromits image. my heart insists that your image lies safely hidden inside of him, protected from eyes, which give everything away. but my eye, the defendant, denies the charges and argues that your beauty resides in him. to decide whose claim is right, i have assembled a jury consisting of my thoughts, all of which owe allegiance to the heart. and they have delivered a verdict to determine which portion of your image belongs to the eyes and which precious portion to the heart. this is what they say: my eyes have the rights to your outward appearance, and my heart has the right to love you and be loved by you.
sir, sometimes he's like a different person, a person who can't measure up to the former antony.
yes he will, jack. by instinct.
my eye and my heart have reached an agreement, and now each does the other favors. when my eye is starving to take a look at you or my heart smothers itself with sighs of love for you, then my eye feasts on a painting of you and invites my heart to join in the banquet and stare at the painting too. on another occasion, my eye is the guest with whom my heart shares some of his thoughts of love. so when you are gone, you're still present with me, either through your painting or in my love for you: you can't travel farther than my thoughts, and i'm always with them, and they are always with you. even if my thoughts go to sleep, your painting will wake up my heart and delight both heart and eyes.
i'm sad to say this confirms the stories being told about him in rome, which i had taken to be lies. well, i'll hope things change for the better soon. have a good night!
you're right, by instinct. well, he's there, and a man named mordake, and a thousand scottish soldiers besides. worcester snuck out of london tonight, and your father's hair turned white when he heard. the price of land has dropped as low as a bucket of stinking fish.
i used to be so careful when i'd travel to secure all my trivial possessions with the most reliable locks available so criminals wouldn't tamper with them. but you, so much more precious than my jewels and my greatest comfort, have become my greatest sadness and worry, because you're vulnerable to any common thief. i haven't locked you up in any chest, other than in my own chest, where my heart is, and you're not really there, even though i feel that you are. you can come and go from my heart as you please, and i'm afraid you'll be stolen from there, because even an honest man would turn thief to get such a rich prize.
lord alexas, sweet alexas, most anything alexas, almost the most consummate alexas, where's the fortuneteller you recommended so highly to the queen? oh, i only wish i knew the name of that husband you said he predicted will have a cheating wife!
if that's the case, then when the weather gets hot and the civil war hal is referring to the common wartime practice of rape. civil war has really broken out, we can buy women's virtues the way other people buy nails: by the hundreds.
in anticipation of the time, if it ever comes, when i will see you frown at my defects; when mature reflection tells you that you've come to the end of your love for me; in anticipation of that time when you will pass by me like a stranger, barely even acknowledging me with a glance of your brilliant eye; when your love for me isn't love anymore and you're guided only by somber judgment, in anticipation of that time, i'm establishing myself here, knowing how little i really deserve, and i'm giving testimony against myself to defend the justice of your future actions. you have every right to leave poor me, all the laws of reason back you up, since i can't offer any justification for your loving me.
(calling) fortuneteller!
by god, lad, you tell the truth. we'll probably have good luck in that area. but hal, aren't you scared? you're the heir apparent. can you imagine three worse enemies than that demon douglas, that spirit percy, and that devil glendower? aren't you horribly scared? isn't your blood running cold at the thought?
i feel very depressed as i go on my journey, because i know when i get where i'm going i'll have time and leisure to rest, and when i have that time to rest i'll have nothing to think about except "i'm this many miles away from my friend." the horse that carries me, affected by my sadness, plods slowly on, bearing the weight of my emotions, as if by some instinct the poor creature knew that i didn't want to move quickly away from you. i can't provoke him to go any faster with the bloody spur that i sometimes thrust into his hide in anger. he only answers me with a groan, which hurts me more than my spur hurts him, because it reminds me that my grief lies ahead of me and all my joy is behind me.
what can i do for you?
not in the least, truly: i don't have your instinct.
(continuing from sonnet ) this is how my love for you excuses my horse's slow plod as i journey away from you: "why should i hurry away from you?" until i return, there's no need to rush. but what excuse will my poor horse have for his slowness then, when even the most extreme swiftness will seem slow to me? on the return journey i'd use my spurs even if the animal rode like the wind. even if my horse had wings i'd feel like we were standing still. no horse could keep up with my desire then. my desire, made of the most perfect love, will race toward you like a horse made of fire, not neigh like a slow, dull horse made of flesh and blood. but, my love, out of love i'll excuse my horse like this: since he deliberately went slowly as he was leaving you, i'll run back to you and forget about the horse altogether.
(to alexas ) is this the man you recommended? (to the fortuneteller ) are you the man who knows the future?
well, you'll be rebuked horribly when you see your father tomorrow. if you love me, practice a response.
i'm like a rich man who has the key to a great treasure chest, but who resists opening it every hour, because he doesn't want to spoil his pleasure by getting too used to the treasure. that's why holiday feasts are so infrequent: spaced out across the year, they're like precious jewels placed evenly across a crown. in the same way, the time that keeps us apart is my treasure chest, or it's like a closet that hides a beautiful robe, the closet makes a special occasion even more special when it is opened to reveal its hidden splendor. you are blessed with such great worth that those who are with you feel triumphant, and those who are not with you hope to be.
i can understand a few of nature's infinite secrets.
you pretend to be my father; ask me about the details of my life.
what is your true essence, what are you made of, that there should be millions of reflections of you? every person has only one image, but you, though you're only one person, lend something to everyone else's image. if an artist tries to depict adonis adonis: a mythological youth who was so beautiful that venus, the goddess of love, fell in love with him adonis , he'll wind up creating an inferior imitation of you. if he were to paint helen helen: a famously beautiful woman over whom the trojan war was begun helen as beautifully as possible, he would again wind up with a picture of you, decked out in greek costume. praise the spring and the abundant harvest season, but the spring is only a faint shadow of your beauty, and the fall a faint imitation of your abundance. we recognize you in every blessed sight that we see. you are part of every beautiful thing, but you're not like any of them, you're incomparable, in the constancy of your heart.
(to charmian ) give him your hand to read.
really? excellent! this chair will be my throne, this dagger my scepter, and this cushion will be my crown.
beauty seems so much more beautiful when it comes with honesty and integrity. roses are beautiful, but we think they're even more so because of their sweet scent. wildflowers have as deep a color as fragrant roses; their thorns are the same, and their beauty broadcasts just as loudly when summer opens their buds. but because their only virtue is their looks, no one wants or respects them and they die unnoticed and alone. sweet roses don't suffer that fate. when they die, the most fragrant perfumes are made from their corpses. the same is true of you, beautiful youth. when you fade away, my poems will preserve your essence.
(to the servants) bring the dessert in right away, and make sure there's enough wine to toast cleopatra's health.
your throne is a wooden stool, your gold scepter is a dagger of lead, and your precious, expensive crown is a lousy bald head.
neither marble nor the gold-plated monuments of princes will outlive this powerful poetry. you will shine more brightly in these poems than those stones that crumble to dust, blackened by time. when devastating war overturns statues, with its battles uprooting buildings, neither the god of war nor his quick-burning fires shall destroy this record of you. despite death and ignorant enmity, you shall continue on. all those generations to come, down to the weary end of time, will devote space to praising you. so until judgment day, when you are raised up, you will live in this poetry, and in the eyes of lovers who read this.
(giving her hand to the fortuneteller ) kind sir, give me a good fortune.
if you still have a shred of divine grace in you, you'll be moved by this. give me some wine to make my eyes bloodshot, so that it looks like i've been crying. i must speak with passion, and i'll do it like king cambyses king cambyses was a character in a play, known for being loud, melodramatic, and over the top. king cambyses .
sweet love the speaker is addressing love the emotion, not an individual. love , be as strong as you used to be. don't let people say that love is less keen and persistent than lust, which may be satiated today but then comes back tomorrow just as strong and sharp as ever. that's how you should be, love. although today you see so much of your love that you want to shut your eyes, look again tomorrow: do not kill your affection by making yourself perpetually dull and lethargic. let this sad period of separation be like an ocean that lies between two opposite shores; two newly betrothed lovers come every day to the opposite banks hoping to see each other, and when they do, the sight feels especially blessed. or call this time winter, which, being full of misery, makes us wish for summer three times more than if it didn't feel so rare.
i don't make fortunes; i only see them.
well then, i'll bow to you.
since i'm your slave, what else should i do but wait on the hours, and for the times when you'll want me? i don't have any valuable time to spend, or any services to do, until you need me. nor do i dare complain about how agonizingly long the hours are while i watch the clock for you, my king, or how bitter your absence is after you've said goodbye to your servant. nor do i dare ask jealous questions about where you might be, or speculate about your affairs, but like a sad slave i sit still and think about nothing except how happy you're making whomever you're with. love makes a person such a faithful fool that no matter what you do to satisfy your desires, he doesn't think you've done anything wrong.
then see a good one for me.
and i'll speak to you. step aside, gentlemen.
(continuing from sonnet ) whatever god decided to make me your slave, may he never allow me to so much as think about having any control over when you see me, or asking you to account for how you've been passing the hours. i'm your slave, after all, and forced to wait until you have time for me. oh, while i wait for your summons, let me suffer patiently the prison of this lengthy absence from you as you do whatever you want. and let me control my impatience and quietly endure each disappointment without accusing you of hurting me. go wherever you want, you're so privileged that you may decide to do whatever you like. you have the right to pardon yourself for any crime you commit. and i have to wait, even if it feels like hell, and not blame you for following your desire, whether it's for good or bad.
your beauty will be even greater than it is now.
oh, jesus! this is an excellent game, truly!
if it's true that there's nothing new and everything that now exists existed in the past, then we are really fooling ourselves when we struggle to write something new, winding up, after much exhausting, painful labor, with a tired imitation of an imitation! if only i could look back into the records, even as far as five hundred years ago, and find a description of you in some old book, written when people were just beginning to put their thoughts in writing, so i could see what the old world would say about your amazingly beautiful body. then i could see whether we've gotten better at writing or worse, or whether things have stayed the same as the world revolves. oh, i'm sure the witty writers of the past have devoted praise and admiration to worse subjects than you.
(to the others) he means i'll get fat.
don't cry, sweet queen; your trickling tears do no good.
as the waves move toward the pebbled shore, so do the minutes we have to live hasten toward their end, each moment changing place with the one before, striving to move forward with successive efforts. everything that has been born, though it once swam in that broad ocean of light that exists before birth, crawls its way up the shores of maturity, where it faces cruel obstacles to its glory. time, which gives everything, now destroys its own gift. time pierces the beauty of youth, drawing wrinkles in beauty's forehead. time devours the choicest specimens of nature; nothing exists that it won't mow down with its scythe. and yet my verses will last into the future, praising your worth despite time's cruel hand.
no, he means you'll use makeup when you're old.
oh lord, look how well he's keeping it up!
was it your intention that i should stay awake all night thinking about you? do you want my sleep to be interrupted while i'm tantalized by mental images of you? are you sending your spirit far from its home to pry into my dealings, to find out the shameful things i've been up to in idle hours? are you jealous? oh, no: though you love me a great deal, you don't love me that much. it's my love for you that's keeping me awake. my own true love keeps me from sleeping, staying up worrying about you. i stay up for you, while you are awake somewhere else: far away from me, but all too close to certain other people.
may my wrinkles forbid that!
for god's sake, gentlemen; take my queen away from here. the floodgates of her eyes are being overwhelmed by her tears.
the sin of self-love controls everything i see, and my entire soul, and every part of me. there's no way to get rid of this sin, it's so deeply rooted in my heart. i think that no one's face is as gracious as mine, no body so evenly proportioned, no one's integrity of such high worth. i calculate my value such that i surpass everybody else in everything. but when my mirror shows me how i really look, beaten and cracked by age and the sun, i come to an opposite conclusion: for myself to love myself so much would be a sinful error. it's you i'm praising when i praise myself, ornamenting my old age with the beauty of your youth.
don't joke about his predictions. pay attention.
my god! he's just as good as those silly old professional actors!
in anticipation of the time when my love shall be as i am now, crushed and worn out by time's damaging hand; when time has sapped his vigor and filled his forehead with wrinkles; when his youthful morning has moved on to the difficult night of old age, and all of those forms of beauty that he now possesses are disappearing, or already gone, robbing him of the treasures of his youth, in anticipation of that time, i'm now defending myself against the cruel knife of time, ensuring that he never cuts from my memory the beauty of my sweet love, even if he takes my lover's life. my lover's beauty will remain visible in these black lines of poetry, and these lines shall survive, and he will live on in them, still young.
quiet!
quiet, little ale pot. quiet, little booze-brain. (to prince henry) harry, i am not only amazed at where you are spending your time, but whom you're spending it with. they say that stepping on a chamomile plant will make it grow faster. but when it comes to youth, the more it is wasted, the faster is wears away. i know you are my son. your mother says so, i believe so, and the wicked glint in your eye and foolish expression on your face prove it. if it's true that you are my son, then here is my point: why, since you are my son, do so many people point at you? should the blessed sun in heaven waste its time eating blackberries? that is not a question worth asking. should the son of the king of england become a thief and steal wallets? that is worth asking. harry, you've heard of a substance known as pitch. pitch pitch = sticky tar pitch , as the wise men tell us, makes one filthy, and so does the company you keep. harry, i speak to you not drunk but weeping, not in happiness but in anger, not just in words but also in sadness. and yet, there is a very good and pious man whom i've often seen you with, but i do not know his name.
now that i have seen time's terrible hand deface the costly and splendid monuments of buried men from ages past, and once-lofty towers torn down; now that i have seen even hard brass subject to perpetual destruction by human beings; now that i have seen the hungry ocean swallow up the land and firm land seize territory from the ocean, so that each one's loss is the other's gain; now that i have seen that all things constantly change into something else or fall into decay, all this destruction has taught me to think: the time will come in which time will take my love from me. this thought feels like death, and makes me weep over what i have that i'm afraid of losing.
you will love more than you are loved.
what kind of man, your highness?
since neither brass nor stone nor earth nor the limitless ocean is strong enough to resist the sad force of mortality, how can beauty possibly resist death's rage when beauty is no stronger than a flower? how could your beauty, which is as fragile as the sweet breath of summer, hold out against the destructive assaults of time when neither invulnerable rocks nor gates of steel are strong enough to resist its decaying power? what a frightening thing to think about! alas, where can i put your beauty, time's most precious creation, to hide it from time itself? whose hand is strong enough to slow time down? who will forbid its destruction of your beauty? oh, no one, unless this miracle proves effective: that in the black ink of my poetry, the one i love may still shine bright.
i would rather get passion from drink passion was thought to originate in the liver, which could be stimulated by drink. i would rather get passion from drink than from love.
a stout man, truly; and overweight. he has a cheerful expression, a handsome look, and a noble bearing. i think he is about fifty years old, or perhaps closer to sixty. now i remember! his name is falstaff. if that man has a bad character, then i have been fooled. harry, i see goodness in him. if one can tell a tree by its fruit, and a fruit by its tree, then let me come right out and say this: there is goodness in that falstaff. stay with him, but get rid of everyone else. now tell me, you naughty boy, tell me; where have you been for the past month?
because i'm tired of all of these things, i cry out for restful death: deserving people destined to be beggars, and worthless people dressed up in fancy clothes, and sacred vows broken, and rewards and honors shamefully bestowed on the wrong people, and chaste women turned into whores, and people perfectly in the right disgraced with slander, and the strong disabled by authorities who are weak, and artists silenced by authority, and fools controlling the wise like a doctor does the sick, and simple truth mistaken for simplemindedness, and good enslaved by evil. i'm tired of all these things and would like to escape them, except that if i die i'll be leaving the person i love all alone.
just listen to him.
you think you sound like a king? you play me, and i'll play my father.
(continuing from sonnet ) ah, why should the man i love have to live in the midst of all this corruption, gracing sinners with his presence so they can take advantage of their association with him? why should portrait painters and makeup artists be allowed to imitate his face, making lifeless copies of his vibrant beauty? why should those less beautiful than he imitate roses by false means, when he is a true rose? and why should he live, now that nature has degenerated so much that she can hardly infuse anyone with vigor and beauty? because she has no fund of beauty now except him and, having so many children to provide for, needs to borrow from his store. oh, nature keeps him alive in order to show the wealth of beauty she had long ago, before these recent bad days came.
be kind now and tell me some excellent fortune. tell me that i'll marry three kings before noon and be widowed by all of them. tell me i'll have a child when i'm fifty who will be honored even by herod of judea herod was the roman governor of israel at the time of christ's birth. in an attempt to kill jesus, prophesied to become king of the jews, herod ordered the slaughter of all the infants in bethlehem. herod of judea . let me marry octavius caesar and become my queen's equal.
you're overthrowing me? if you play him even half as well as i did, half as majestically, then hang me up like a rabbit for sale in a butcher shop.
(continuing from sonnet ) so his face is the incarnation of how things were in the old days, when beautiful people lived and died as commonly as flowers, before these illegitimate signs of beauty were created, or anyone dared to put them on a living human being. that was before the golden locks of corpses, which belong in graves, were cut off and made to live a second life on a second person's head. it was before the hair of a beautiful corpse served to make another person happy. you can see the old-fashioned youthful beauty of his face: no wig to ornament it, the real thing in all its honesty, not borrowing someone else's youth nor stealing from the old to look new again. nature preserves him as a map, to show cosmetics what beauty used to be.
you will outlive the queen.
i'm all set.
those parts of you that are visible to the world lack nothing, and no one could imagine improving them. everybody admits this unreservedly, though they're only saying what's obviously true, what even your enemies praise you for. thus, your outside is rewarded with public praise. but the same people who give you the praise your beauty deserves take quite another tack once they've looked beyond the surface. these people examine the beauty of your mind and character, and they guess at what's in there by observing your actions. then, though they judged your appearance kindly, their harsh thoughts tell them that although you appear beautiful you smell corrupt. so, if you don't smell as good as you look, this is the reason: you're hanging out with lowlifes.
oh, excellent! i love long life better than figs figs were thought to resemble female genitalia. figs .
as am i. (to the others) judge us, everyone.
the fact that people say bad things about you won't be held against you, because beautiful people have always been the target of slander. beautiful people are always the objects of suspicion, a black crow darkening heaven. as long as you're good, you're a target of temptation; slander just proves how worthy you are. for vice, like a worm, loves to devour the sweetest buds the most, which makes you, in your prime, pure and unstained, a perfect target. you've escaped the traps that usually endanger young men, because either no one tempted you or you resisted the temptation. however, this praise i've given you won't inflate your reputation so much that it keeps envious people from talking, because they always will. if your beauty weren't masked by at least some suspicion of evil, you'd be the most beloved person in the world.
you have already had better fortune than the future will bring.
now, harry, where are you coming from?
when i am dead, mourn for me only as long as you hear the funeral bell telling the world that i've left this vile world to go live with the vile worms. no, if you read this line, don't remember who wrote it, because i love you so much that i'd rather you forgot me than thought about me and became sad. i'm telling you, if you look at this poem when i'm, say, dissolved in the earth, don't so much as utter my name but let your love die with me. otherwise, the world, in all its wisdom, will investigate why you're sad and use me to mock you, now that i am gone.
then my children will probably be illegitimate. tell me, please: how many boys and girls will i have?
from eastcheap, my noble lord.
(continuing from sonnet ) oh, in case the world challenges you to recite what merit i possessed that would justify your loving me, forget about me entirely after i die, dear love. for you won't find anything worthy to say about me unless you make up some generous lie, which makes me sound better than i deserve, and attach more praise to my dead self than accords with the stingy truth. oh, to prevent your true love from becoming false, as it will, in part, if you make false statements out of love for me, let my name be buried with my corpse and no longer bring shame to you or me. for i'm ashamed of what i produce, and you should be, too, to love such worthless things.
if every time you wished for a child you could have had one, you would have a million children.
the complaints i have heard about you are very serious.
when you look at me, you can see an image of those times of year when the leaves are yellow or have fallen, or when the trees have no leaves at all and the bare branches where the sweet birds recently sang shiver in anticipation of the cold. in me you can see the twilight that remains after the sunset fades in the west, which by and by is replaced by black night, the twin of death, which closes up everyone in eternal rest. in me you can see the remains of a fire still glowing atop the ashes of its early stages, as if it lay on its own deathbed, on which it has to burn out, consuming what used to fuel it. you see all these things, and they make your love stronger, because you love even more what you know you'll lose before long.
get out of here, you fool! since you're a fortuneteller i won't bring charges of witchcraft against you.
for god's sake, my lord, they are lies. (to the others) i'll make you laugh by playing a young prince, i truly will.
(continuing from sonnet ) but don't be upset when death arrives to carry me off where no one can release me. my life will continue to some extent in these lines, which you'll always have to remember me by. when you reread this, you'll be seeing again the precise part of me that was dedicated to you. the earth can only have the earthly part of me, which is what belongs to it. my spirit, the better part of me, is yours. so when i'm dead you'll have only my body, the dregs of my life, the part that worms eat, the only part of me that cowardly, wretched death could kill, the part that's too worthless for you to remember. what gives my body its worth is the spirit it contains, and that spirit is this poem, and this poem will remain with you.
you seem to think no one outside of your bedroom knows what you wish.
are you swearing, you ungracious boy? from now on, do not even look at me. you have been violently turned away from goodness; there is a devil that haunts you, in the shape of an old, fat man. a ton of man is your companion. why do you associate with that trunk of bodily fluids, that sifting bin of beastliness, that swollen sack of disease, that huge jug of wine, that stuffed suitcase of guts, that roasted ox crammed with pudding, that ancient vice vice, a familiar character from medieval morality plays, led people into immorality. vice , that gray-haired immorality, that father criminal, that aged vanity? what is he good for, besides tasting wine and drinking it? what does he do skillfully, besides carving chickens and eating them? what's he smart about besides schemes? what does he scheme about besides crime? what is he criminal about besides everything? what is he good for besides nothing?
i need you the way living things need food or the grass needs rain, and to attain the peace that only you can give me, i fight with myself the way a miser struggles with his wealth. one moment he enjoys his wealth proudly, and the next he's worried that someone from these thieving times will steal his treasure. one moment i think it's best to be alone with you, but then i think it would be better if the rest of the world could see my pleasure. at times i feel oversatisfied from looking at you excessively, but a little later i'm starving to get a look at you. i can't experience or pursue any enjoyment except what you can give me or i can take from you. that's why i suffer and feel hungry day after day, because i either get too much of you or none at all.
(to fortuneteller ) never mind. tell iras's fortune.
i wish your highness would help me follow your meaning. who do you mean, your grace?
why is my poetry so lacking in new ornaments, so determined in avoiding variation and change? why don't i, like everyone else these days, take a look at the new literary styles and weird combinations of other writers? why do i always write the same thing, always the same, and always in the same distinctive style, so that almost every word i write tells you who wrote it, where it was born, and where it comes from? oh, you should know, sweet love, i always write about you, and you and love are continually my subjects. so the best i can do is find new words to say the same thing, spending again what i've already spent: just as the sun is new and old every day, my love for you keeps making me tell what i've already told.
we'll all want our fortune told.
that criminal, loathsome corrupter of youth: falstaff, that old, white-bearded devil.
your mirror will show you how your beauty is wearing away; your clock how your precious minutes are slipping away; the pages of this blank notebook will record your thoughts; and you may learn the following things from those thoughts: the wrinkles that your mirror will show you will remind you of open graves. by the hands of your clock, you'll learn how time keeps stealing away to eternity. write down whatever you can't remember on these blank pages, and later, when you encounter those thoughts again, the children of your brain, they'll have grown up, nourished by your continued reflection. they'll be like a new acquaintance. doing these things often, looking in the mirror and at the clock, and writing in the book, will benefit you and greatly enrich your book.
my fortune, like that of many of us tonight, is to go drunk to bed.
my lord, i know the man.
i have cited you as my source of inspiration so often, and you've helped my poetry so much, that every other writer has adopted my habit of addressing poems to you, and now they all write their poetry in your name. your beautiful eyes are such a source of inspiration that they've helped the mute sing high notes, raised the ignorant to new heights of intelligence, helped the educated soar even higher, and enhanced the gracefulness of the graceful. yet your greatest pride should be in my accomplishment, because it's done under your influence and inspired by you. with other writers, you only improve their style, adding an extra sheen to the skill they already have. but without you i have no skill at all; you lift up my utter ignorance so that i am well-educated.
(giving her hand to the fortuneteller ) there's a palm that will predict a chaste life, if nothing else.
i know you do.
when i was the only writer who looked to you for inspiration, only my poetry received all of the benefits of your noble grace. but now the poems i write under your inspiration have gotten worse, and i'm forced to make room for someone else. i admit, my sweet love, that such a lovely subject as you deserves to have a better writer working for you. but whatever your new poet says about you, he's only stealing the ideas from you and giving them back to you. he says you're virtuous, but he only learned that word from watching your behavior. he says you're beautiful, but he only found out about beauty from your face. he has no praise to give you except for what he finds in you already. so don't thank him for what he says about you, since you're paying for everything he gives you.
like the overflowing nile the nile river overflowed its banks every year, irrigating the surrounding farmland and guaranteeing a good harvest. overflowing nile predicts famine.
but to make me claim that he's any more harmful than i am, well, i can't claim that. yes he's old, and it's a shame: his white hair proves it. but that he's a, forgive me, pimp? that i absolutely deny. if drinking wine and sugar is a fault, then god forgive us all. if being old and merry is a sin, then i know a lot of old men who are going to hell. if being fat means you should be hated, than we should all love pharoah's lean cows in the bible, pharoah's dream of seven emaciated cows prophesies famine for egypt. pharoah's lean cows . no, your highness. get rid of peto, get rid of bardolph, get rid of poins. but as for sweet jack falstaff, kind jack falstaff, honest jack falstaff, brave jack falstaff, and therefore even more brave, given that he is old jack falstaff, do not get rid of him. do not get rid of him. if you get rid of him, you'll be getting rid of the whole world.
i get very discouraged when i write about you, knowing that a superior writer is writing about you too. he uses all of his powers of praise to make me tongue-tied when i write about your glory. but since your worth is as big as the ocean, able to support the smallest boat as well as the biggest ship, my impudent little boat, which is far inferior to his, stubbornly makes an appearance on your waters. even at your shallowest, you keep me afloat, while he sails out over your measureless depths. and if i wind up being wrecked, i'm only a worthless little vessel, whereas he's a tall ship, something to be proud of. so if he does well and i find myself shipwrecked and discarded, the worst i can say is this: i was destroyed because of my love for you.
oh stop it, you lusty bed-hopper. you can't see the future.
i do. i will.
either i will live to write your epitaph after you die, or you will survive me when i'm rotting in the grave. death cannot take away your memory, but it will cause everything to do with me to be forgotten. your name will live eternally, but once i'm gone, i'll be dead to the world. i'll only be granted an ordinary grave, but your tomb will be where everyone can see it. your monument will be these tender poems of mine, which future generations will read and talk about, when everyone who's now living is dead. my pen has such power that you'll not only stay alive, you'll live where the essence of life resides: in the breath and voices of men.
well, if a moist palm isn't a clear sign of promiscuity, then i can't scratch my own ear. (to fortuneteller ) please, tell her an ordinary fortune.
oh sir, sir! the sheriff and a frightening group of officers are at the door.
i admit that you weren't married to my poetry, so you're not doing anything wrong if you read what other writers say about you in the books they dedicate to you, you, the beautiful subject that blesses their books. you are as knowledgeable as you are beautiful, and you see that i'm incapable of praising you sufficiently, so you're forced to look again for some newer, fresher writer in these days of literary improvements. go ahead and do so, my love. yet while these writers have invented whatever elaborate stylistic devices they can borrow from rhetoric, you would be more truthfully represented, since you're truly beautiful, by the true, plain words of your truth-telling friend. and the overblown praise of these other writers might be more appropriately applied to people who need to be beautified. for you, such rhetorical excess is misused.
your fortunes are the same.
wait, you ass! we'll finish the play: i have much to say on behalf of that falstaff.
it never seemed to me that you needed to be praised, so i never described your beauty with profuse or elaborate rhetoric. i could see (or i thought i could see) that you were better than any praise a poet could give you. therefore, i haven't exerted myself to describe you, so that you yourself, since you're still alive, could show everybody how much more worthy you are than my commonplace writing style can describe. you decided that this silence on my part was a fault, but i'm particularly proud of my muteness. by remaining silent, at least i don't damage your beauty, whereas other writers try to bring you to life in their writing, and kill you instead. you possess more life in one of your beautiful eyes than all of your poets could invent by praising you.
but how? how is that possible? give me details.
jesus! sir, sir!
which writer says the most about you? which of them can say anything more to praise you than that only you are you, and that all beauty is stored in you, so that there's nothing to compare you to but yourself? only a very poor writer is unable to improve the subject he's writing about at least a little, but whoever writes about you will have given his writing dignity simply by reporting that you are you. if that writer simply describes you accurately, managing not to mess up what nature made so perfectly, he'll have created such an image that his writing skills will become famous, his style admired everywhere. for all of the beauty you're blessed with, you curse yourself by loving to hear yourself praised so much, because then people write worse praise trying to flatter you.
i've said what i have to say.
well, look here! all this mess over nothing! what's the matter?
my mute poetry politely remains silent, while commentaries praising you pile up, capturing the essence of your character in golden words and precious phrases inspired by all the muses. i think good thoughts about you while other people write good words, and like an illiterate parish clerk i continually cry "amen" parish clerks told the church congregation when to respond and when to say "amen" during services. "amen" to every poem of praise that capable poets produce about you in their polished and refined style. when i hear you praised, i say, "that's right, that's true," and add a little something to their utmost praise of you. what i add is only in my own mind, but in my own mind i know i love you the most, though i speak the least. so respect others for the words of praise they offer you, but respect me for my silent thoughts, which express themselves only in actions.
isn't my fortune just a little better than hers? by an inch, even?
the sheriff and the officers are at the door. they've come to search the place. should i let them in?
was it the ambitious and impressive poem that my rival wrote for you that discouraged me from writing my own poem, killing my thoughts before i could put them into words? was it his creative power, aided by the spirits the ghosts who visit the rival poet at night, both helping and tricking him, are very difficult to explain. they seem to refer to something in shakespeare's time that is now unknown. spirits of all the dead authors he's read so that he writes better than any mortal should, that stunned me into silence? no, it was neither him nor those friends of his who visit him at night and help him, who silenced me with amazement. neither he nor that friendly little ghost that tricks him with false information each night can boast that they're responsible for my silence. i wasn't sick because of any fear of them. but when you looked favorably on his writing and thus made it even better, then i suddenly had nothing to say, and you made my writing feeble.
well, if you could have just an inch of better fortune than me, where would you like the improvement?
do you hear that, hal? this line is ambiguous; falstaff may be saying that, though he seems to be a scoundrel, he is a really a good man, and therefore should not be turned over to the watch. hal? be careful about calling a piece of real gold a counterfeit; you are genuine, even though it may not seem so.
goodbye; you're too valuable for me to hold onto, and you probably know exactly what you're worth. your high value gives you the right to leave me; you have severed the ties that bind me to you. for what hold do i have over you except the hold that you choose to give me, and how do i deserve such a treasure? there's nothing in me to justify such a beautiful gift, so my right to possess you is reverting back to you. when you gave yourself to me, you didn't know your own worth, or else you were mistaken about me, the person you gave yourself to. so the great gift you gave me, being based on a false estimate, goes back to you now that you're able to make a better judgment. thus, the time in which i had you was like a flattering dream; while i was asleep, i thought i was a king, but when i woke up, i found that was not the case.
not in my husband's nose.
and you are a genuine coward, with no instinct.
when you feel inclined to think little of me and make other people scorn me, i'll take your side and argue against myself, demonstrating that you're virtuous even while you're lying about me. since i know my own weaknesses better than anyone, i can tell a story about my hidden faults (in which i reveal myself as morally tainted) that will have people thinking better of you for not being with me anymore. and i, too, will gain by turning all my loving thoughts to you: whatever injuries i do to myself will help you, which will help me doubly. i love you so much, belong to you so totally, that to get you everything you're entitled to, i will take every wrong upon myself.
may heaven save us from indecent thoughts! alexas! (to the fortuneteller ) come and tell his fortune. let him marry a woman he can't satisfy, dear isis isis was egypt's primary female deity, generally associated with the earth, the moon, and fertility. isis , i pray! and then let her die, and give him someone worse. then let her die, and let her replacement be even worse. and so on until the last one, who is unfaithful with at least fifty other men and laughs at him until he dies. i beg you to grant my prayer, good isis, even though it means you deny me something more important for myself. good isis, i beg you!
i deny that. and if you'll deny the sheriff, then please do; otherwise, let him in. if i don't look as good on the hangman's cart arras = tapestry hung on a wall hangman's cart as any other man, then a curse on my upbringing. i'm as willing to be hanged as any man.
(continuing from sonnet ) if you tell people you left me because of some fault of mine, i will expand upon whatever you say i did wrong. say i'm lame, and i'll start limping immediately, without trying to defend myself against your accusations. my love, in finding a reason to justify leaving me, you can't disgrace me half as badly as i'll disgrace myself, as soon as i know what you want. i'll pretend i don't know you and act like a stranger. i won't go where i might run into you. and i won't mention your beloved name anymore in case i'd dirty it by reminding people that we used to be acquainted. for your sake, i'll vow to be my own enemy, because i must not love someone whom you hate.
amen, dear goddess. listen to our prayer. if it's sad to see a handsome man with a cheating wife, it's a tragedy to see an ugly thug with a wife who's faithful. therefore, dear isis, do the right thing and give him the fortune he deserves.
go, hide behind the arras. the rest of you, go upstairs. now, my men. here's wishing for an honest face and a clear conscience.
(continuing from sonnet ) so hate me when you want to, but if you're ever going to, do it now, now while the world is determined to frustrate everything i try to do. add to my misfortune, make me collapse under it, don't hit me with this later, after i've already endured so many other blows. ah, do not let me think i've avoided the sorrow of losing you, then come and reject me, right after i've been defeated by another grief. don't turn my windy night into a rainy tomorrow, prolonging the defeat you intend to give me. if you're going to leave me, don't wait until the end, after other little sorrows have done their damage. leave me at the beginning, so i experience the worst misfortune first. then other hurtful things, which seem painful now, won't seem so, compared with losing you.
amen.
i've had both of those, but their shelf-life has expired. i'd better hide. (he hides behind the arras)
some people are proud of the social status they've inherited; some people of their abilities; some of their wealth; some of how strong they are; some of their clothes, though the clothes are trendy and weird; some are proud of their hawks and hounds; some of their horses; and every individual temperament has its particular pleasure, something the person enjoys above everything else. but i don't measure happiness by any of these things. there's something else that's better than them all. to me, your love is better than high social status, more valuable than wealth, more worth being proud of than expensive clothes, and more enjoyable than hawks or horses. and having you, i have something better than what other men are proud of, except i'm wretched in this one respect: you can take all this away from me and make me completely wretched.
(to himself) see! if they could make me a cuckold, they'd whore themselves in order to see it done.
call in the sheriff.
(continuing from sonnet ) but go ahead and leave me, do your best to hurt me. i'm sure to have you as long as i'm alive, because i will only be alive as long as you love me: my life depends on your love. now i don't have to worry about all the terrible things you might do to hurt me; as soon as you hurt me even a little, i'll die. i realize now that i'm in a better position than i would be if i were dependent on your affections. you can't worry me with the idea that you're fickle, since my life would be over as soon as you changed your mind about me. oh, what a happy position i'm in: i'm happy to have your love, but also happy to die! but what situation is so perfectly blessed that it breeds no worries? you might be unfaithful to me without my knowing it.
quiet! here comes antony.
now, sheriff, what is it you want from me?
(continuing from sonnet ) in that case, i'll live like a deceived husband, assuming you're faithful. then your face will still show that you love me, even though you don't, your looks will stay the same, but your heart will be somewhere else. as your face could never have a hateful expression, i couldn't ever know a change of heart from looking at it. many people express their unfaithfulness in their faces, in moody looks and frowns and strange wrinkles. but when heaven created you, it decided that your face would always express sweet love. whatever your thoughts or desires, your looks never express anything but sweetness. in fact, your beauty becomes much like eve's apple when you're not as sweet and virtuous as you look.
it's not him; it's the queen.
first, please forgive me, my lord. a group of citizens followed some criminals into this bar.
those whose beauty gives them the power to hurt others, but who refuse to; those who look very sexy but won't have sex; who attract other people but are themselves like stones, cold, unemotional, and difficult to tempt, those are the ones who will rightly inherit heaven's blessings and keep nature's treasures from being wasted. those who have self-control truly own their beauty; the rest are only administering their beauty for others' use. the summer flower seems sweet to us in summer, though the flower itself may feel that it's only living and dying. but if that flower lets itself be infected by a parasite, the lowest weed will be better, for the sweetest things have the capacity to turn the sourest by acting wrongly. lilies that rot smell a lot worse than weeds.
have you seen my lord?
what men?
you make the flaw that's ruining your reputation (like a worm infecting a rosebud) look so sweet and lovely. oh, you cover up your sins with such a sweet exterior! the person who accuses you of wild lust somehow manages to turn his criticisms into praise: your name makes bad actions look good. oh, the vices you have inside you live in a beautiful house. your beauty serves as a veil that makes every bad thing you do seem good! but be careful, dear heart, with this great privilege that your beauty gives you. if you abuse it, it will stop working, like a knife that loses its edge from misuse.
no, lady.
one of them is well known, my gracious lord. a huge, fat man.
some say your fault is your youth, others that the problem is your lustfulness. some say your youth and playfulness are charming. both important and unimportant people love your charms and your faults too. you turn your faults into sources of charm. just as a worthless jewel is regarded as valuable when a queen is wearing it, so the sins that people see you commit are turned into good characteristics and regarded as good. how many lambs could the grim wolf trick if he could make himself look like a lamb? how many people might you lead astray if you seduced them with the full force of your beauty and social position? but don't do that. i love you so much (since you are mine) that your reputation extends to me as well.
wasn't he here?
as fat as butter.
my separation from you has felt just like winter, since you're what makes the year pleasurable! i've felt very cold, and the days have seemed very dark, and everything has been as barren as in december! and yet the time we've been apart was actually summer, then fall, the harvest-time when nature gives birth to crops planted in the spring the speaker personifies the spring as a dead father because the season is gone even while the crops planted during its duration remain. spring like a woman giving birth after her husband has died. and these abundant fruits of nature seemed like hopeless orphans to me, because summer and summer's pleasures all depend on you, and, with you away, even the birds are silent. or if they sing, they do it so dismally that the leaves grow pale with fear, dreading the fact that winter's almost here.
no, madam.
i promise you, that man isn't here, since he's currently running an errand for me. sheriff, i give you my word that by lunchtime tomorrow i'll send him to you, or anyone else you need to see. he'll answer to anything he may be accused of. so please, i'd like you to leave this tavern.
i was away from you during the spring, when splendid april in all its finery made everything feel so young that even saturn, the god of old age and gloominess, laughed and leaped along with it. but neither the songs of birds nor the sweet smell of all the various flowers could make me feel like it was summer or inspire me to go flower picking. i wasn't amazed by how white the lily was, nor did i praise the deep red of the roses. they were only sweet, only pictures of delight, drawn in imitation of you, the archetype of spring. it seemed like it was still winter and, with you away, i played with these flowers as if i were playing with your reflection.
he was in a good mood, and then suddenly he started thinking of rome. enobarbus?
i will, my lord. there are also two gentlemen who, in this robbery, lost three hundred marks a mark is a unit of currency. marks .
(continuing from sonnet ) this is how i scolded the presumptuous violet: "sweet thief, where did you steal your sweet smell from if not from my beloved's breath? you obviously got that purple color you're so proud of by dying yourself in his blood." i condemned the lily for stealing its whiteness from your hand and the marjoram buds for stealing your curly hair. the roses stood by anxiously, the red one blushing in shame, the white one pale with despair, knowing they were guilty of stealing your colors too. a third rose, neither red nor white, had stolen both red and white from your complexion, and added to his robbery the smell of your breath. but as punishment for his theft, a vengeful worm destroyed the rose just at its proudest growth. i noticed other flowers, and i couldn't see any that hadn't stolen its sweetness or color from you.
madam?
it's possible. if he did it, he'll answer for it. and with that, farewell.
where have you been, muse, that you have forgotten for so long to inspire me to write about the person who gives you all your power? are you using up your inspiration on some worthless poem, eclipsing your true powers by making unworthy topics seem brighter? return, forgetful muse, and make up for the time you've wasted by inspiring me to write some gentle verses. inspire poems addressed to my beloved, the person who actually likes your songs, and who gives you both poetic skill and a topic to write about. get up, sleepy muse: examine my beloved's sweet face to see if time has engraved any wrinkles on it. if there are any, then satirize aging and make everybody despise time's destructive powers. make my beloved famous faster than time can destroy his life; prevent time's knife from cutting my beloved down.
find him and bring him here. where's alexas?
good night, my noble lord.
(continuing from sonnet ) oh truant muse, how are you going to make amends for neglecting my beloved, the embodiment of truth bound up with beauty? both truth and beauty depend upon my beloved. you depend on, and are dignified by, him too. answer me, muse; perhaps you'll say, "truth doesn't need to be embellished when it's already attached to beauty. beauty doesn't need to be poetically described in order for its truth to be apparent. whatever is best is best when it's not mixed with anything else." but just because my beloved needs no praise, will you be silent? you can't excuse this silence, as you have the ability to make him live longer than a golden tomb and win the praise of future ages. then do your job, muse. i'll teach you how to make him look in the distant future like he does now.
here, at your service. here comes my lord.
i think it's good morning, isn't it?
my love is stronger, though it seems weaker. i don't love less, but i show my love less. when a person broadcasts how he loves and how richly he esteems the person he loves, he turns his love into a commodity. our love was still new when i used to write poems about it, just as the nightingale sings at the beginning of summer, then stops singing as the summer progresses. it's not that summer is less pleasant now than the nights when the nightingale sang. it's just that every tree branch is filled with songbirds, and when things are common they're less delightful. therefore, like the nightingale, sometimes i keep silent because i don't want to bore you with my song.
i won't see him. in the original text, cleopatra refers to herself in the plural to denote her royal status. i won't see him. everyone come with me.
yes, sir. i think it's two o'clock.
alas, i'm a poor poet, since even with such a great subject to write about (you), the subject is worth more by itself than with my praise added to it. don't blame me if i can't write anymore! look in the mirror, and you'll see a face that quite overwhelms my limited poetic skills, making my lines stupid and thereby disgracing me. it would be a sin, wouldn't it, if in trying to improve my poetry, i messed up their subject, which was perfectly fine before? for the only things i write about are your charms and your wonderful qualities, and your own mirror will show you far, far more of these than i can possibly fit into my poetry.
your wife, fulvia, mustered her army first.
this oily rascal is as famous as st. paul's cathedral. go, call him out here.
you'll never be old to me, beautiful friend, for your beauty seems just the same as it was when i first saw your lovely eyes. since then, three cold winters have stripped the leaves off three proud summers; three beautiful springs have turned to three yellow autumns, all in the course of the seasons. three aprils, full of perfumed flowers, have all burned up into three hot junes since the first day i saw you in your freshness, and you're still fresh and green. ah, but beauty, like the hand of a clock, creeps away from the person it's attached to so slowly no one can see it. in the same way, your sweet beauty, which seems to be standing still, is actually changing, and my eye may be deceived. in case it is, hear this, future generations: before you were born, the greatest example of beauty was already dead.
against my brother lucius?
falstaff! (pulls back the arras) fast asleep behind the arras, and snoring like a horse.
let no one call my love idolatry the humor of this sonnet is that while defending himself against the charge of idolatry, the speaker echoes language traditionally used by christians to describe god. idolatry or say that i treat my beloved as an idol, since all of my poems and praises have been addressed to one person, are about one person, and always will be. my love is kind today, will be kind tomorrow, always constant in wondrous excellence. therefore, since my poetry is confined to a subject that's always the same, it always expresses the same thing, never including anything different. the subject of my poems is the beautiful, kind, and faithful. i write about the beautiful, kind, and faithful in various ways, and this is the task that i expend all of my creativity on, three themes rolled up in one person, which offers an amazing scope for poetic invention. beauty, kindness, and fidelity have often been divided into different people, but the three of them were never together in one person until now.
yes. but that war ended as soon as circumstances made it advisable for them to join together against caesar. but in their very first battle, caesar won and drove them out of italy.
listen, how heavily he breathes! look in his pockets.
when in accounts of historic times i come upon descriptions of very beautiful people and read the beautiful poems inspired by them, in praise of ladies now dead and lovely knights; when i see the poems catalog their beauty, their hands, feet, lips, eyes, foreheads, i realize that these ancient writers were trying to describe the same kind of beauty that you possess now. so all the praises of these writers are actually prophecies of our time; all of them prefigure you. if the writers hadn't been divinely inspired with this gift of prophecy, they wouldn't have had the skill to describe your worth. those of us who live now may be able to see your beauty firsthand and be amazed by it, but we lack the poetic skill to describe it.
well, give me the worst news.
what did you find?
neither my own fears nor the speculations of the rest of the world about the future can continue to keep me from possessing my beloved, who everybody thought was doomed to remain in prison. the moon this sonnet is puzzling because it seems to refer to actual events in shakespeare's time, but it's impossible to know for certain which events it refers to. one possibility is that it alludes to queen elizabeth's death (represented by the moon's eclipse, described in line ) and the subsequent release from prison of the earl of southampton, whom some readers believe to be the young man of the sonnets. however, even in shakespeare's time, this sonnet was probably somewhat mysterious. moon , which was always mortal, has finally been eclipsed, and the gloomy fortune-tellers now laugh at their own predictions. things that once seemed doubtful have become certainties, and peace has come to stay. now, with the blessings of these times, my beloved looks fresh again and death itself submits to me, since in spite of death i'll live on in this poor poem while death only exults over the stupid and illiterate peoples that he's overcome. and you will find this poem to be your monument when tyrants reach the end of their reigns and tombs of brass fall into decay.
the bearer of bad news is often blamed for it.
nothing but some papers, my lord.
what could i possibly write that i haven't written already to show you how constant and faithful my soul is? what else is there to say, what new thing can i invent, that would express either my love or your value? there's nothing, sweet boy. and yet, just as with prayers to god, i have to keep saying the same thing over and over again each day, without thinking that these old praises are old. you're mine, i'm yours, just like when i first honored your name in writing. my love for you, which is everlasting, doesn't care about the effects of age, nor does it acknowledge your wrinkles, but always inspires me to describe my feelings as if they were still young. i see in you the original source of my love for you, even though your age and appearance would suggest that the reason for that love is dead.
only if the hearer is a fool or a coward. go on. as far as i'm concerned, what's past is done. it's like this: as long as a person tells me the truth, even though it means my death, i will listen as though he praised me.
let's see what they are. read them.
oh, never say that i was unfaithful to you in my heart, even though my absence from you suggested that my love had weakened. i can't separate myself from my feelings for you anymore than i can separate myself from myself. you are my home, and if i strayed away from you, like a traveler i have returned again, right at the appointed time, with my feelings unchanged, so i'm making up for my misdeed. even though i have the same weaknesses in my nature as everyone made of flesh and blood, don't ever believe that i could be so morally compromised as to leave someone as good as you in exchange for something worthless. the entire universe except for you, my love, means nothing to me. you're everything to me.
the news is disturbing. labienus quintus labienus was a roman general charged with subduing parthia, a hostile country in asia minor, and garnering parthinian military support in the war against antony and octavius caesar. when cassius and brutus were defeated, labienus led the parthians in a war against rome, conquering some of the roman territories in asia along the way. labienus , with the army he led in parthia, has conquered all of asia, all the way to the euphrates river, including syria, lydia, and ionia, while, 
(reads) first, a chicken , two shillings and two pence. second, sauce , four pence. third, wine, two gallons , five shillings and eight pence. fourth, anchovies and dessert wine , two shillings and six pence. fifth, bread , a halfpenny.
alas, it's true, i have gone here and there, and made myself look foolish, and allowed my thoughts to be divided, and acted as if the most valuable thing were worthless, and used my new friends to commit the old infidelities i've committed before. it's very true that i've treated true love strangely and with disdain. but i swear by heaven, these moments when i've swerved aside have made my heart young again, and by trying out other people i've proved to myself that you're the best person i love. now i've finished with everything except for our love, which will have no end. i will no longer whet my appetite for new lovers, causing suffering to my old friend, the god of love to whom i'm now limiting myself. so welcome me back into your pure and loving heart; to me, you're the next best thing to heaven.
"while antony . . ." is what you want to say.
oh horrible! a halfpenny's worth of bread against this enormous amount of wine? hang onto everything else you found; we'll read it when we have time. let him sleep there till tomorrow. i'll go to court in the morning. we're all off to the wars, and you will have honorable positions. i'll put this fat rogue in charge of an infantry company, and a quarter mile's march will be the end of him. the money we stole will be repaid with interest. meet me early in the morning; and with that, good morning, peto.
i know you curse my bad luck for having no better way to make a living than in front of the public the speaker's reference to his public profession is usually interpreted as referring to shakespeare's profession as an actor. public , which has had a bad effect on my morals and behavior. this is why i have a bad name, and coming into contact with the public so much has polluted my very nature, just like a cloth-dyer's hand becomes stained with his dye. so take pity on me and hope that i can go back to being the way i would have been if i hadn't been contaminated by the public; meanwhile, i'll drink bitter medicines made of vinegar to cure myself of this infection. i won't think that the medicine's bitter no matter how bitter it is, nor will i protest at having to do double penance to try to undo the bad influence. so pity me, dear friend, and i assure you: your pity alone is enough to cure me.
oh, my lord!
good morning, my good lord.
(continuing from sonnet ) your love and pity make up for the damage popular opinion has done to my reputation, since what do i care who calls me good or bad as long as you gloss over what's bad about me and acknowledge my good? you're the entire world to me, and i have to strive to learn what's good or bad about me from what you say. no one else matters to me, and i matter to no one else alive. your opinion editors are unsure what line actually means. the italicized translation represents this editor's best guess. opinion is so powerful with me that it determines what's right and wrong. i care so little about what other people say that it's as if i threw their voices into a bottomless pit, that's how deaf i am to their flattery and criticism. notice how i disregard the fact that the rest of the world neglects me. you matter so much to me that you're dead to the rest of the world.
speak plainly. don't tone down what the people are saying. call cleopatra what the romans call her. use fulvia's abusive language. freely scold me for my faults with as much severity as an enemy with truth on his side. it's easy to err when left to our own devices, but criticism helps us to see our faults and correct them.
these commitments are reliable, our allies are solid, and the beginning of our project bodes well.
since i left you, i'm so absorbed in my own thoughts that i partly see where i'm going and partly don't. for my vision doesn't focus on the shapes of birds or flowers or anything else it lands on. my mind simply isn't on the living things that my eyes show it, nor do i remember the things i see. for whether i see the rudest or gentlest sight, the sweetest-looking or the most deformed creature, the mountain or the sea, the day or the night, the crow or the dove, my vision shapes them so they look like you. incapable of seeing anything else and filled with your image, my faithfulness to you is making me see everything wrongly.
good-bye for a while.
lord mortimer, and kinsman glendower, won't you please sit? and uncle worcester, dammit! i forgot the map!
(continuing from sonnet ) is it the case that my mind, flattered by your love, has become susceptible to pleasurable delusions? or is it the case that my eyes are seeing accurately, and my love for you has given me magical powers to turn monsters and shapeless things into angels that look like your sweet self, transforming every bad sight into the best and most perfect thing as fast as it comes into my field of vision? oh, the first is true: my eyes are deluded, and my mind accepts these delusions like a king accepts flattery. my eye knows perfectly well what i like to see, and it shows me what it knows i'll enjoy. though its visions are poisoned by falsehood, my eye can be partially excused by the fact that it likes these false visions too and consumes them first, like a servant who tastes the king's food to see if it's poisoned.
i'll be at your service.
here it is. sit, kinsman percy. sit, good cousin hotspur. for that is the name king henry calls you, and whenever he says it, he grows pale, and with a sigh he wishes you were in heaven.
i lied in those poems i wrote before where i said i couldn't love you any more than i did already. back then i had no reason to think that my love, which was already burning intensely, could burn any brighter. instead, i was depending on the fact that the passage of time, together with the millions of unexpected events that can come between lovers' promises and change even the decrees of kings, might darken a lover's sacred beauty, take the edge off of a lover's keenest intentions, and force the strongest minds to adapt to changing circumstances. alas, why didn't i say back then, when i was worried about time's destructive power, "i love you best now"? i was so certain of my feelings despite the uncertainty, and i was ready to say my present happiness was complete, though i had doubts about everything to come. love "love itself is a baby": cupid, the god of love, was traditionally depicted as a baby boy. love itself is a baby, so wouldn't it have been natural for me to have said that my love for you was fully grown, though it keeps growing?
what's the news from sicyon sicyon is the town in greece where antony left fulvia. sicyon . tell me.
and you in hell, whenever he hears someone say "owen glendower."
i hope i may never acknowledge any reason why minds that truly love each other shouldn't be joined together. love isn't really love if it changes when it sees the beloved change or if it disappears when the beloved leaves. oh no, love is a constant and unchanging light that shines on storms without being shaken; it is the star that guides every wandering boat. and like a star, its value is beyond measure, though its height can be measured. love is not under time's power, though time has the power to destroy rosy lips and cheeks. love does not alter with the passage of brief hours and weeks, but lasts until doomsday. if i'm wrong about this and can be proven wrong, i never wrote, and no man ever loved.
the man from sicyon, 
i don't blame him. the sky was full of fiery meteors and comets when i was conceived, and when i was born, the entire earth shook like a coward.
accuse me like this: say that i've neglected every opportunity to repay the great obligation i owe you; that i've forgotten to invoke your precious love, though every day i'm more and more bound to you. say that i've spent too much time with strangers, giving away the time that you have a right to spend with me. say that i've let every wind blow me as far away as possible from you. write a list of all the stubborn and wrong things i've done, and put together a lot of speculations about my other misdeeds based on what you already know. get ready to frown at me, but don't frown at me because of what i've done to awaken new hatred in you, since i did it all to test the constancy and strength of your love.
is he here?
why, the same thing would have happened if your mother's cat had given birth to kittens that day, whether you'd been born or not.
just as we like to sharpen our appetites by eating pungent combinations of food or make ourselves vomit in order to ward off future illness, so, in the same way, because i was so full of your sweetness (not that it's ever cloying), i decided to switch from you to a more bitter diet. and because i was tired of being so healthy, i decided it would be good to make myself sick this is a reference to the renaissance practice of "purging," which was thought to be healthy. sick , using other people to keep from getting sick of you. with this wise relationship strategy, which i adopted in anticipation of problems that didn't exist, i actually became used to cheating on you. i applied medicine to a relationship that was healthy to begin with, attempting to cure something totally good by applying evil to it. but i learned from this, and i think what i learned is true, that the drugs i used are poisonous to me, since i'm so lovesick over you.
he's waiting outside.
i say there was an earthquake when i was born.
(continuing from sonnet ) i've given myself medicines that seemed seductively sweet but in reality were foul as hell. i forced myself to doubt the things i was hopeful about and to be hopeful about what i should have worried about, always losing just when i expected myself to win! my heart committed wretched errors right at the moment when i thought i had never been more blessed! my eyes have popped out of their sockets in the delirium of this fever! but, oh, the benefits that evil brings! now i see it's true that good things can be made even better through evil, and that when you ruin love and then rebuild it, it grows more beautiful than it was at first, as well as stronger and greater. so, having been rebuked for my mistake, i return to the person who makes me happy, and because of my evil deeds i get back three times what i spent.
have him come in.
and i say that if you think the earth shook because it was afraid of you, then the earth and i do not agree.
the fact that you were once cruel to me helps me now. because of the sorrow that you made me feel then, i would have to be made of steel not to be bowed down to the ground with guilt over how i've hurt you. for if you've felt my unkindness to you the way i felt yours to me, you've endured a time in hell and i've acted like a cruel tyrant, never taking the time to think about how i once suffered when you committed the same crime against me. oh, how i wish that your earlier sorrow had reminded me of how hard true sorrow hits, so that i would have apologized to you as fast as you apologized to me, giving you the medicine that an injured heart needs most! but your earlier offense against me can now compensate you for what i've just done. my offense cancels out yours, and yours must cancel out mine.
(to himself) i must break cleopatra's powerful hold over me or else i'll lose myself in foolish infatuation.
the heavens were all on fire, and the earth trembled.
it's better to be vile than to have people think you're vile, especially when they accuse you of being vile and you're really not, and then you don't even get to enjoy doing the thing that people say is vile but that you don't think is. for why should people who are corrupt themselves get to wink knowingly at my lustful inclinations? and why should people who are even weaker than i pry into my weaknesses, deciding that what i think is good is bad? no, i am what i am, and the people who accuse me are only revealing their own corruptions. maybe i'm straight, and they're the ones who are crooked; you can't measure my actions by their foul thoughts, unless they're willing to believe that all men are bad and thrive in their badness.
what's your message?
oh! then the earth trembled when it saw the heavens on fire, and not in fear of your birth. when nature is diseased, strange eruptions can break forth. often, the earth is pinched with a kind of colic, and troubled by gas in her belly. when that gas struggles to be released, it shakes old mother earth, bringing down steeples and moss-covered towers. when you were born, our mother earth was ill and shook with pain.
in my mind, i've already filled up the blank book this sonnet can be read two ways: either the speaker was given a notebook in which the addressee had already written, or he was given a completely blank book. (this translation adopts the second reading.) blank book you gave me with words that will remain in my memory longer than they would in that flimsy little book. in my memory, what i wrote about you will outlast any date, even to eternity. or at least this record of you won't be lost as long as my brain and heart survive, until each of them is forced to give up its part of you and pass into oblivion. that poor little notebook couldn't hold as much as my memory can, and i have no need to keep notes to remember how much i love you. therefore i was bold enough to give away your notebook, trusting in my own memory to keep a better record of you. for me to use an aid to remember you would imply that i'm forgetful.
your wife, fulvia, is dead.
kinsman, i don't take this kind of contrary behavior from many people. with your permission, i'll say one more time that when i was born, the heavens were full of shooting stars. the goats ran down from the mountains, and herds of animals stampeded strangely through the fields. these signs marked me as an extraordinary person. all the events of my life prove that i should not be counted with ordinary men. is there a man who lives anywhere within england, scotland, or wales who can say i learned from him, or that he taught me? and bring forward one human who can follow me in the complicated ways of magic, or keep up with me in my obscure experiments.
no! time, you're not going to boast that i change. these new enormous buildings that are being erected don't seem novel or strange to me at all, they're just replicas of what's existed before. our lives are brief, and therefore we admire whatever is old, acting like it was made just for us rather than admitting we've heard it described before. i defy you and your records. i'm not interested in the present or the past, because both your records and the things we see around us lie. they are raised up and destroyed by your continual swift passage. i make this vow, and it shall always be true: i will be faithful despite you and your destructive power.
where did she die?
well, nobody speaks better welsh to the english, welsh often sounded like a barbaric language; hotspur implies that no one speaks better nonsense then glendower. welsh . i'm going to lunch.
if my great love for you had simply been created by circumstances, it might be rejected as illegitimate because changing circumstances could destroy it. it would be subject to whatever's in fashion at the moment, rejected with worthless things or plucked up with other fashionable flowers. no, my love was created where it can't be touched by the unpredictability of events. it's not helped by the approval of authority, nor is it crushed along with the malcontents who resist authority, as these times tempt us to do. my love isn't afraid of the political scheming and conniving engaged in by immoral people, which only has a short term effect, but stands by itself, independent and enormously wise, neither growing during times of pleasure nor killed by misfortune. to attest to what i'm saying, i call as witnesses all those fools who died repentant and seeking goodness after living lives dedicated to crime.
in sicyon. in this letter you'll find details of her illness and other, more serious matters that concern you.
stop now, kinsman percy. you will upset him.
would it matter at all to me to carry the ceremonial canopy of a monarch in a procession, honoring the display of power with my appearance? or would i think it worthwhile to lay the foundations of supposedly eternal monuments, which actually last only as long as decay or ruin permit? haven't i seen those who focus on appearances and covet the favors of the powerful lose everything, and more than everything, by spending too much on their obsessions? such pitiful strivers give up simple pleasures for the sake of lavish meals, using up all their resources on their fickle desires. no, i shall be obedient and faithful to you only, and you shall accept my offering. it is simple but freely given, contains nothing second-rate, no unnecessary additions, only mutual surrender: myself for yourself. get out of here, you paid spy the "suborned informer" (paid spy) whom the speaker addresses in the last sentence is mysterious. editors are unsure whom this figure is supposed to represent. paid spy : when a faithful person like i am is accused, someone like you has no power over them.
leave me.
i can summon spirits from the deep ocean.
oh, my lovely boy, you seem to have power over time itself, immune to its capacity to cut things down. you've only grown more beautiful as you've aged, revealing in the process how withered i, your lover, have become. if nature, which has power over destruction, has chosen to hold you back from decay, she's doing so for this reason: to disgrace time and kill its effects. yet in spite of this, you should fear her, though you're nature's best-loved pet. she can preserve you for a time, but she can't keep you, her treasure, always. nature will eventually be called to offer her accounts, and though she can delay this, she has to do it, and the way she'll pay her debt to time is with you. ( ) ( ) the parentheses appear in the original printed edition of the sonnets, perhaps indicating silence where we would expect the final couplet. ( )
(to himself) a great spirit has gone from the world! this is what i wanted. once it's gone, the very thing we reject becomes what we desire. what's enjoyable one day becomes the opposite as time rolls around. now that she's gone, i want her. now i would call her back, though i pushed her away. i have to break from this beguiling queen. the time i've wasted here has caused ten thousand more problems than the ones i know about. (calling) are you there, enobarbus?
why, so can i, and so can any other man! but will they come when you summon them?
in the olden days, dark complexions weren't considered attractive or, if they were, no one called them beautiful. but now darkness is officially accepted as beautiful, and the fair complexions that used to be called beautiful have gotten a bad reputation. for since everyone has seized the power to make themselves beautiful (which used to belong to nature), and ugly people can be beautiful by artificial means, no one can legitimately be called beautiful. beauty has no special home but is commonplace or even lives in disgrace. therefore my mistress's eyes are as black as a raven, well suited to today's fashion, and in their blackness they seem to be lamenting those people who were born ugly but make themselves beautiful, giving beauty a bad name by faking it. but her black eyes lament so beautifully that everyone now says all beautiful eyes should look like hers.
what would you like, sir?
why, kinsman, i can teach you to command the devil.
very often, when you (my greatest source of delight) play music by moving those wooden keys on the keyboard of the virginal the virginal is a keyboard instrument similar to a harpsichord. virginal with your sweet fingers, confusing my ear with the harmony of those plucked strings, i envy the keys. they leap up and kiss the tender underside of your hands, while my poor lips, who ought to be doing the kissing, stand by, blushing at the boldness of the keys. to be tickled like those keys are, my lips would gladly be transformed into wood and change places with the keys, over which your fingers gently walk, blessing the dead wood more than my living lips. since the keys are so happy to touch your fingers, let them have the fingers, but give me your lips to kiss.
i have to leave right away.
and i can teach you, kinsman, how to shame the devil, by telling the truth! "tell the truth and shame the devil," as the old saying goes. if you do have the power to call him up, then bring him here. and i'll swear i have the power to shame him into leaving. oh, for goodness sake, tell the truth and shame the devil!
sex is a way of squandering vital energy while incurring shame. in anticipation of sex, lust makes people murderous, violent, blameworthy, savage, extreme, rude, cruel, and untrustworthy. no sooner do people enjoy sex than they immediately despise it. they go to absurd lengths in its pursuit only to hate it out of all proportion once they've had it, insisting it was put in their path on purpose to make them crazy. they're extreme when they're pursuing sex, extreme when they're having it, and extreme once they've had it. it's blissful while you're doing it and, once you're done, a true sorrow. while you're anticipating it, it seems like a joy; afterward, like a bad dream. the world knows all this very well, yet no one knows enough to avoid the heavenly experience that leads us to this hell.
that will kill our lovers. we know how much they suffer if we are unkind to them. if we leave, it will feel like nothing less than death to them.
enough already; stop this useless talking.
my mistress's eyes are nothing like the sun. coral is much redder than the red of her lips. compared to the whiteness of snow, her breasts are grayish-brown. poets describe their mistresses' hair as gold wires, but my mistress has black wires growing on her head. i have seen roses that were a mixture of red and white, but i don't see those colors in her cheeks. and some perfumes smell more delightful than my mistress's reeking breath. i love to hear her speak; yet i know perfectly well that music has a far more pleasant sound. i admit i never saw a goddess walk; when my mistress walks, she treads on the ground. and yet, by heaven, i think my beloved is as special as any woman whom poets have lied about with false comparisons.
i must be gone.
three times now, henry bolingbroke has raised an army against mine. and three times, i turned him back from the banks of the river wye, and the sandy-bottomed river severn. i sent him home, bootless bootless = unsuccessful bootless and beaten by foul weather.
even looking like you do, you're as much of a tyrant as those women whose beauty makes them proud and cruel. for you know quite well that to me, who dotes on you, you're the most beautiful and precious jewel. yet some people say, in all honesty after looking at you, that your face simply does not have what it takes to make someone groan with love. i wouldn't dare be so bold as to tell them they're wrong, though to myself i swear they are. and to prove to myself that i'm right, i groan a thousand times just thinking about your face. these groans, coming one after the other, testify to the fact that your dark complexion is the most beautiful one to my eyes. there's nothing black about you except your actions, and i think that's the reason people spread this lie about your looks.
if it's that important, then let the women die. it would be a pity to throw them away for nothing, but if it's a matter of choosing between them and a great cause, then they're worthless. if cleopatra hears even a breath of this, she'll die immediately. i've seen her claim to be dying twenty times before, and for far less reason. i think there must be something invigorating about death, since she dies with such enthusiasm.
you sent him home without his boots, and in foul weather? how in the devil's name did he avoid catching fevers?
i love your eyes, and they seem to pity me, knowing i'm tormented by your disdain. in black, they look like mourners at a funeral, gazing at my pain with pretty compassion. and to tell the truth, the morning sun doesn't look as good in the gray eastern sky, nor does the evening star look half as good in the western twilight, as those two mourning eyes look in your face. oh, then i hope it would be just as beautiful for your heart to pity me, too, since mourning suits you so well, and for you to pity me with every other part of you to match. if you take pity on me, i'll swear beauty itself is black, and everyone who doesn't have your dark complexion is ugly.
she's more cunning than anyone can imagine.
all right, here's the map. shall we divide up our territories according to our three-way agreement?
curse you for making me suffer by hurting both my friend and me. isn't it enough to torture me alone without making my friend your slave too? because of your cruel attractions i'm no longer my own man, but my friend, who's like my second self, you've enslaved even more cruelly. so i've been abandoned by him, by myself, and by you; being frustrated like this is a triple torment multiplied by three. go ahead and keep me as your prisoner, but then let me use myself to bail out my friend. whoever you assign to watch me while i'm in this jail, let me be in charge of guarding my friend, then you can't torment me in my prison because i'll have my friend to keep me happy. and yet you will torment me, because i belong to you, so everything that's in me is yours, and since my friend is in my heart, he's yours too.
alas, sir, no, her feelings come from pure love, not cleverness. her sighs and tears are like great winds and floods. she has more storms and tempests in her than a weather almanac. her temper is not a trick or a skill, if it is, she can make it rain as well as jove king of the roman gods; commands thunder, lightning, and rain jove .
the archdeacon the archdeacon isn't mentioned anywhere else in the text, but according to the historical chronicle, this meeting took place at the home of the archdeacon of bangor. archdeacon has divided the land into three very equal parts. all of england southeast of the trent and severn rivers goes to me.
(continuing from sonnet ) so now i've admitted that he's yours, and i'm legally bound to satisfy your desires too. i'll give myself up to you if you'll let go of my friend, so he can come back and comfort me. but you won't let him go, and he doesn't want to be free, because you're greedy and he's kind. he only became your slave because he was trying to bail me out, like someone co-signing a loan, but now he's just as much under your power as i am. you're going to insist on taking what your beauty entitles you to, you loan shark, you loan your body to everybody, and then you go after my friend, who only took you up on it for my sake. so i lose my friend because i allowed him to get tangled up with you. i've lost him; you have both him and me; he's giving you all the sex you're owed, but i'm still not free.
i wish i'd never seen her!
all of wales, and everything west of the severn, including all the fertile land within those boundaries, goes to owen glendower. and, my dear kinsman, you get everything that remains to the north, coming up from the trent. our agreement is drawn up in triplicate. we can all sign it tonight, and then, kinsman percy, tomorrow you, me, and worcester will set off to meet your father and the scottish army at shrewsbury, as planned. my father-in-law glendower isn't ready yet, but we won't need his army for another two weeks. (to glendower) by that time, you will have raised an army of the farmers on your land, your allies, and your neighbors.
other women may have their little desires, but you have your will the speaker is named will, but the woman he's addressing has another lover who is also named will. in this sonnet, the word will is used thirteen times, meaning "william," "sexual desire," "penis," or "vagina," depending on the context (and it usually means more than one of these things at once). will , and another will as well, and more will than you need. i, who am constantly pestering you for sex, am more than enough to satisfy you, adding another willing penis to the will you already have. since your sexual desires (and vagina) are both so enormous, won't you agree just once to let me put my desire inside yours? are you going to be attracted to everyone else's will (penis), but reject mine? the sea is entirely made of water, but it still accepts additional water whenever it rains. so you, who already have a william, should in addition to your lover william accept my will (penis), making your sexual appetite (or vagina), which is already huge, even huger. don't kill an eager seducer by being unkind to him. treat all your lovers as a single lover, and accept me (and my part) as part of that lover.
then you'd have missed an amazing piece of work, sir, and your trip would have been poorer for the loss.
i'll be ready sooner than that, my lords; and i'll bring your wives along with me. you should sneak away from them now, and leave without saying goodbye. otherwise, they'll cry an ocean of tears when you leave them.
(continuing from sonnet ) if it's bothering your blind conscience that i keep pressing you for sex, just tell it that i'm will as in , will the speaker addresses a woman who has another lover named will and puns on the word will in the sense of "william," "penis," and "sexual desire." will , your lover, your conscience knows that will is allowed in your bed. out of charity, give in to my request at least that much. will will fill your sweet love-treasure until it's full. yes, he'll fill it full of penises, and mine will be one of them. with things that can hold a lot (like your vagina), it's clear that one of anything is never enough. so among your vast number of lovers, let me be included without counting me. consider me to be nothing, as long as you consider the nothing that i am to be sweet to you. just love my name and love it always, and then you'll love me, because my name is will.
fulvia is dead.
i think my share, north of burton here, isn't as big as any of yours. look how this river swoops in. it cuts out a huge chunk of my best land, in the shape of a half-moon. i'll have a dam built. i'll re-route the trent river so it won't go winding so far into my land and rob me of a fertile valley.
love the speaker personifies the emotion love. love , you blind fool, what are you doing to my eyes that's keeping them from accurately seeing what i look at? my eyes know what beauty is, and they see who has it, yet they decide that the worst woman is the best. love, if my vision has been distorted because i look at her with too much bias, spending all my time staring at this woman who sleeps with every man, why have you used my misperceptions as a trap to fool my heart, so that i love the wrong person? why should my heart think that she could belong to one man when my heart knows she's available to the whole world? or why should my eyes witness her promiscuity but act like it's not true, putting a good face on an ugly truth? my heart and my eyes have been completely mistaken about the truth, and now they both love this unfaithful disease of a woman.
pardon me?
it won't go winding? it will. it must. you see that it does.
when my mistress swears that she's completely truthful, i believe her even though i know she lies, so that she'll think that i'm some nave young man who's ignorant about the world and the tricks people play. i pretend to stupidly believe her lies while fooling myself into thinking that she thinks i'm young, even though she knows i'm past my prime. in this way, both of us suppress the simple truth. but why doesn't she say she's a liar? and why don't i say that i'm old? oh, because it's easiest to love someone who seems to be trustworthy, and old people who are in love hate to hear their age discussed. therefore, i sleep with her, and she sleeps with me, and we both flatter ourselves by lying about each other's faults.
fulvia is dead.
yes, but look how the trent runs its course and winds a similar distance into my share. it cuts out the same amount of land from my side as it does from yours.
oh, don't ask me to justify the cruel infidelities with which you have hurt me. don't hurt me by stealing glances at other men; hurt me by telling me about them to my face. use your power openly, don't kill me with subtle tricks. tell me you love other people, but when you're in my sight, dear heart, don't glance at other men. why would you need to hurt me with cunning, when your power over me is already too much for me to defend against? but i'll make an excuse for you: ah, my love knows perfectly well that her looks can kill me, so she looks away from me to kill my enemies instead. but don't do that. since i'm almost dead already, kill me outright with your looks, and put me out of my misery.
fulvia?
yes, but a small sum of money will pay to dig a trench, which will reclaim this bit of land on the north side. then it will run straight along.
be as wise as you are cruel: don't torture me too much with your disdain, in case sorrow forces me to speak, and i express how pitiless you are in hurting me. if you'll let me teach you some skill, it would be better if you told me you loved me even if you don't, as when short-tempered patients close to death get only good news from their doctors. because if i start to despair, i'll go mad, and in my madness i might speak ill of you. this world has gotten so bad with its lies and rumors that crazy people believe the lies that crazy people tell. to prevent my going crazy and your being lied about, keep your eyes where they should be, even when your heart's wandering where it wants.
dead.
i'll do that. it will only take a little money.
i swear, i don't love you with my eyes: they notice a thousand flaws in you. rather, it's my heart that loves what my eyes despise; despite what you look like, my heart dotes on you. nor are my ears delighted by the sound of your voice. nor do i want to abuse my delicate sense of touch by groping you. nor do my sense of taste or smell want to be invited to any feast of the senses in which you're the main course. but neither my brain nor my five senses can dissuade my foolish heart from being your servant. my body stands here like an empty shell with no one to control it, while my heart goes off to be your slave and wretched property. i gain one thing from being plagued with love for this woman: the same woman who's making me sin rewards me with pain.
then you should offer the gods a sacrifice to show your thanks. when a man's wife dies, he can be comforted by the knowledge that there are replacements to be found. if fulvia were the last woman on earth, there would be a reason to grieve. but in this way, grief and comfort appear together. the only kind of tears you should shed in this case are the kind you might get from holding an onion to your nose.
i won't have it changed.
loving you is my sin, and your precious virtue consists in hating my sin, a hate grounded in your own sinful loving. but compare my moral state with your own, and you'll see i don't deserve to be reprimanded, or if i do, not from those lips of yours, which you've dishonored by using too much. your lips have kissed as many people and made as many false promises as mine have, and both of us have cheated on our partners, giving away sexual favors where they don't belong. if i may be allowed to love you the same way you love those other men whom you seduce with your glances, have a little pity for me; then you'll deserve to be pitied yourself. if you want people to take pity on you and sleep with you, but you don't show pity for me, you might be turned down because of your own example.
i must go and continue the business fulvia started.
you won't?
like an anxious housewife who runs to catch one of her chickens that's run away, setting down her baby to follow it while her neglected child chases after her and cries out to get her attention, she focusing all of her mind on trying to catch the chicken that's flying in front of her, not caring about her infant's distress, in the same way, you're running after someone who's running from you, while i, your baby, chase after you from far behind. but if you catch the one you're hoping for, turn back to me and act like a mother. kiss me, be kind. if you'll turn back and stop my loud crying, i'll pray that you'll get to have your will as in sonnets and , the speaker's mistress loves a man named will who is not the speaker. will .
the business you began here needs you as well, especially the business with cleopatra, which only you can attend to.
no, and neither will you.
i love two people. one comforts me and the other makes me despair. like two spirits both constantly point me in different directions. the better angel is a beautiful, fair-haired man. the bad one is an evil-looking woman. to help put me in hell sooner, my evil female tempts my angel away from my side. she hopes to make my saint into a devil, seducing him to impure acts in her foul and self-assured way. and though i can suspect him, there's no way i can tell directly whether my angel has turned into a fiend. but since the two of them are away from me and friendly with each other, i'm guessing that one angel is inside the other, and in hell with her. yet i'll never know this for sure, instead living in doubt until my bad angel fires the bad angel's "fire" suggests the burning sensations of venereal disease. fires the good one out of hell.
enough of this frivolous talk. give our officers notice of our intentions. i'll tell the queen the reason for our quick departure and get her permission to leave. fulvia's death and the pressing concerns related to it are not the only reasons i am eager to go; friends in rome have also sent many letters advising my return. sextus pompeius has challenged caesar. his fleet controls the sea. our fickle citizens, who never reward service until that service is over, are now giving all the rights and honors won by pompey the great to his son, sextus. sextus has great honor and power, and his spirit and energy are even greater, all of which makes him the most formidable soldier in the empire. the empire may be in danger if he's not restrained before he reaches his full potential. there are many troubles brewing now that have yet to become full-fledged threats. like horse's hairs dropped in a bucket of water, they come alive like snakes but as yet they bear no poison. this sentence refers to a popular belief of the time. like horse's hairs dropped in a bucket of water, they come alive like snakes but as yet they bear no poison. relay our intentions to the officers who will be in charge of the move.
who's going to stop me?
those lips that look like they were made by the goddess of love herself breathed forth the words, "i hate", and she was talking to me, the man who's pining with love for her. but when she saw how unhappy she'd made me, mercy came into her heart and she chided her sweet tongue, which is usually so gentle and merciful, and taught it to speak something else to me. she changed "i hate" by adding a few words the way day follows night, that fiend flying from heaven to hell: she took hatred away from "i hate," saving my life with "not you."
i will.
why, i will.
my poor soul, you're the very center of this sinful world, my body, which rebels against you. why do you starve yourself inside me and suffer from a shortage of supplies while you dress your outside in such expensive finery? why do you spend so much on your aging body when you get to occupy it for such a short time? all of this expenditure on a body that is eventually going to be eaten by the worms, do you want what you spend to be devoured by worms? is this what your body was intended for? in that case, soul, feed yourself by starving your body; let it pine for food while you accumulate the riches. buy time in heaven by giving up worthless time wasted on earth. feed your inner self; let your body be poor. by starving your body, you will eat up death, which eats up men, and once death is dead, there's no more dying then.
where is he?
well, say it in welsh then, so i can't understand you.
my love is like a fever, always making me yearn for what will prolong my disease. it lives on whatever will preserve the illness, in order to prop up my fickle desire. my reasoning has acted as doctor and treated my love, but then it left me because i wasn't following its instructions. now that i'm finally desperate enough, i realize that sexual desire, which was against the doctor's orders, is lethal. now that my mind is past caring, i'm past the point where i can be cured, and i've gone frantically crazy and grown increasingly restless. my thoughts and speech are like a madman's, pointlessly expressing random untruths. for i have sworn that you're beautiful and thought you radiant when you're actually as black as hell and as dark as night.
i haven't seen him recently.
my lord, i can speak english just as well as you. i was brought up in the english court. there, in my youth, i composed many english songs for the harp, lending the language lovely ornaments of music. that is an accomplishment you have never achieved.
oh, me! what kind of eyes has love put into my head that i don't see anything accurately? or if my eyes do see correctly, what's happened to my judgment to make me wrongly criticize what they see? if the woman i love to look at is beautiful, why does the rest of the world say she's not? if she's not, then a person in love doesn't see as accurately as others. no, how can a lover see right? oh, how can a lover's eye work properly when it's so distressed by staying awake and crying? it's no wonder then that i'm wrong about what i see; the sun itself doesn't see anything until the sky is clear. oh, ingenious love, you keep me blind with tears so i won't discover my lover's foul faults, as i would if my eyes worked properly.
(to alexas ) find out where he is, who's with him, and what he's doing. don't tell him i sent you. if he's sad, tell him i'm dancing. if he's happy, say that i've suddenly taken sick. hurry, and come back.
indeed, and my whole heart is glad for that. i'd rather be a kitten and say "meow" than be a courtly balladeer.
oh, you cruel woman, can you say i don't love you when i take sides with you against myself? don't i think about you even when i've forgotten about myself, and all for your sake, you tyrant? who hates you that i would call my friend? who do you frown at that i grovel on and flatter? no, if you scowl at me, don't i immediately punish myself by moaning? which quality do i see in myself that would make me too proud to be your servant? all of the best in me worships the worst in you, and you can command me with a glance. but, my love, go on hating me, because now i know your mind. you love people who can see, and i'm blind.
madam, i think if you love him so much, you aren't using the best way to get him to reciprocate.
i'd rather hear a piece of brass turned on a lathe, or a ungreased wheel grind on its axle. nothing sets my teeth on edge so as much as finicky poetry; it's like the lurching steps of a lame horse.
oh, what is the source of this mighty power you have, which controls my affections despite your inadequacies, making me disbelieve what my eyes truly see until i'm so turned around i swear that daylight isn't bright? where did you get this capacity to make bad things look good in you, to perform the most worthless actions so skillfully that i think your worst is better than anyone else's best? who taught you how to make me love you more, the more i hear and see good reasons to hate you? oh, even though i love what other people despise, you shouldn't despise my love the way other people do. since your unworthiness made me love you, i'm the person who deserves your love.
what should i do that i'm not doing?
fine. change the trent's course.
cupid is too young to know right from wrong, but doesn't everybody know that love is what gives you a conscience? in that case, gentle cheater, don't criticize me too harshly for my mistake, because your sweet self might turn out to be guilty of the same faults. because you betray me, i betray my soul to my dumb, rebellious body. my soul tells my body that it can have its way in love. my flesh doesn't wait to hear any more, but at the sound of your name it rises up and points you out as its prize. my flesh, proud of having you, is happy to be your poor worker, to stand up to do your business and fall down beside you afterward. do not assume my conscience is lacking just because the woman i call "love" makes my flesh rise and fall for her love.
always give him his way. never contradict him.
i don't care. i'd gladly give away three times as much land to any friend who deserved it. but when it comes to negotiating a deal, mark my words: i'll haggle over the smallest fraction of a hair. are the agreements drawn up? are we ready to leave?
i know i'm breaking a promise by loving you, but you, swearing you love me, are breaking two promises: cheating on your husband by leaving his bed, then breaking your promise to your new lover by vowing to hate him. but why am i accusing you of breaking two oaths when i break twenty? i am perjured the most, because all of my vows are only made to mislead and exploit you; i'm no longer true to you. for i have sworn great oaths about how kind you are, oaths about your love, your faithfulness, your constancy. and to make you look better i blinded myself, swearing to the opposite of what i actually saw. for i have sworn that you are beautiful; my eye is doubly a liar, offering such a foul lie after swearing to tell the truth.
you advise me like a fool. that's the way to lose him.
the moon is bright; you can leave during the night. i'll tell the man writing up our documents to hurry, and i'll tell your wives you're leaving. i'm afraid my daughter will go mad because she loves mortimer so much.
cupid put down his torch and fell asleep. one of the nymphs who serve diana diana is the goddess of chastity and virginity, so the nymphs devoted to her are opposed to cupid and erotic love, represented by his torch. diana took advantage of this situation and quickly plunged cupid's love-inducing flame in a nearby cold spring, which thus acquired a never-ending heat and became a bubbling hot bath that men still use to cure diseases. but at a glance from my mistress, cupid's torch fired up again, and cupid decided to test whether his torch was working by touching my heart with it. i became sick with love sonnets and are full of double entendres of sexual intercourse followed by venereal disease. sick with love and wanted the bath to ease my discomfort. i went to the spring as a sad, sick guest but found no cure. the only thing that could help me is the thing that gave cupid his new fire: a glance from my mistress's eye.
don't push him too far. i wish you'd be patient. we come to hate that which controls us.
damn, kinsman percy! how angry you make my father-in-law!
once, while sleeping, little cupid put down his love-inducing torch while many of diana's nymphs, who had all made lifelong vows of chastity, came tripping by. but the most beautiful of diana's nymphs picked up that fire that had warmed the hearts of legions of faithful lovers. in this fashion, the commander of hot desire was disarmed by the hand of a virgin as he was sleeping. she quenched this torch in a cool spring nearby, and the spring took a perpetual heat from love's fire. it turned into a hot bath and healthy remedy for diseased men. but when i, enslaved by my mistress, went to the bath to be cured, this is what i learned: love's fire heats water, but water doesn't cool love.
but here comes antony.
i can't help it. he makes me angry with all his talk. moles and ants, merlin and his prophecies, dragons, a fish with no fins, a griffin without wings, a raven without feathers, a crouching lion and a cat rearing up to pounce. he talks so much mumbo-jumbo that i don't know what to believe anymore. i'll tell you this: he kept me awake last night for at least nine hours, listing the names of all the devils that serve him. i said, "hmm," and, "how interesting," but he didn't hear a word. oh, he's as tedious as a tired horse or a nagging wife; he's worse than a smoke-filled house.
i am sick and sullen.
i'd rather live in a windmill and eat nothing but cheese and garlic than in a luxurious home eating delicacies, if it meant i had to listen to him talk.
to be honest, i don't know why i'm so sad. i'm tired of it, and you say you're tired of it too. but i have no idea how i got so depressed. and if i can't figure out what's making me depressed, i must not understand myself very well.
i'm sorry to have to say this, 
truly, he's a worthy man. he's exceedingly well-read, and proficient in the occult; he's as brave as a lion, incredibly charming, and as generous as the jewel mines of india. and do you know what, cousin? he holds you in great respect. he restrains his temper when you do something to put him in a bad mood. i promise you, there isn't a man alive who could have challenged him as you have, and gotten away without being hurt or punished. but don't try it too often, i beg you.
you're worried about your ships. your mind is out there getting tossed around on the ocean with them. but they're fine. they're like huge parade floats on the sea. they're so big they look down on the smaller ships, which all have to bow and then get out of the way. your ships fly like birds past those little boats.
help me away from here, dear charmian! i shall faint. i won't be able to go on this way much longer. human nature isn't built to withstand this.
(to hotspur) truly, my lord, you are to blame in your stubbornness. since you arrived, you have done enough to test his patience. you must learn, sir, to correct this fault. sometimes it demonstrates greatness, courage, strength, and that honors you. but often it reveals fury, bad manners, lack of self-control, pride, arrogance, conceitedness, and contempt. in a gentlemen, the least of these qualities will make you lose people's affections. it stains your beautiful qualities, making it impossible for them to be noticed.
yes, believe me, if i had such risky business ventures in other countries, i'd be sad too. i'd worry about it every second. i'd constantly be tossing blades of grass into the air to find out which way the wind was blowing. i'd be peering over maps to figure out the best ports, piers, and waterways. everything that made me worry about my ships would make me sad.
now, my dearest queen, 
well, i have had my lesson. may good manners bring you success! here come our wives; let's say our goodbyes.
i'd get scared every time i blew on my soup to cool it, thinking of how a strong wind could wipe out my ships. every time i glanced at the sand in an hourglass i'd imagine my ships wrecked on sandbars. i'd think of dangerous rocks every time i went to church and saw the stones it was made of. if my ship brushed up against rocks like that, its whole cargo of spices would be dumped into the sea. all of its silk shipments would be sent flying into the roaring waters. in one moment i'd go bankrupt. who wouldn't get sad thinking about things like that? it's obvious. antonio is sad because he's so worried about his cargo.
please, stand farther away from me.
this is the bad luck that angers me: my wife speaks no english, and i speak no welsh.
no, that's not it, trust me. thankfully my financial situation is healthy. i don't have all of my money invested in one ship, or one part of the world. if i don't do well this year, i'll still be okay. so it's not my business that's making me sad.
what's the matter?
my daughter is weeping: she doesn't want to be parted from you. she wants to be a soldier and join you in the war.
well then, you must be in love.
i can see in your eyes there's been some good news. what, does your wife say you can come home? i wish she'd never let you come. don't let her say i kept you. i have no power over you. you belong to her.
father-in-law, tell her that she and lady percy will come with you after us.
oh, give me a break.
the gods know, 
she's desperate now; a cranky, selfish hussy. nobody can change her mind.
you're not in love either? fine, let's just say you're sad because you're not in a good mood. you know, it'd be just as easy for you to laugh and dance around and say you're in a good mood. you could just say you're not sad. humans are so different.
oh, never has a queen been so betrayed as i have been. i knew from the first it would be this way.
i understand you by the look on your face. those pretty welsh tears streaming from your heavenly eyes i understand perfectly; i'd answer in the same language, if it weren't shameful for a man to cry.
some people will laugh at anything, and others are so grouchy they won't even crack a smile when they hear something hysterically funny.
cleopatra, 
i understand your kisses and you mine; that's a conversation of emotion. i'll study continuously, my love, until i learn your language. your voice makes welsh sound as sweet as the most eloquently written songs, sung by a fair queen in a garden of summer flowers, with a gorgeous accompaniment on her a lute.
here comes your cousin bassanio. and gratiano and lorenzo too. goodbye, then. we'll leave you to talk to them. they're better company.
how could i have ever thought that you would be faithful and true, even though your vows of love shook the heavens themselves, you, who were unfaithful to fulvia? it was wild insanity to believe promises made by the mouth and not the heart. such false vows are broken as soon as they are spoken.
no, if you start to cry, you'll drive her mad.
i would've stayed to cheer you up, if your nobler friends hadn't shown up.
most sweet queen, 
oh, i have no idea what she's saying!
you're both very precious to me. but i understand. you need to leave to take care of your own business.
no, please don't try to excuse your departure. just say good-bye and go. when you begged to stay, that was the time for words. you didn't want to go then! you saw eternity in my lips and eyes, and happiness in the arch of my eyebrows. then, all my parts seemed angelic to you. my features are still that beautiful, or else you, the greatest soldier in the world, have become the greatest liar by overpraising them.
she wants you to lie down on the rush-covered floor and rest your head in her lap. she'll sing whatever song you like, and she'll lull you to sleep. she'll bewitch you into a pleasant heaviness, halfway between waking and sleeping; like the hour just before the sun begins its golden rise in the east.
(to bassanio, lorenzo, and gratiano) good morning, gentlemen.
what do you mean, lady?
i'll gladly sit and hear her sing. by the time she's done, i think our documents will be prepared.
(to salarino and solanio) hello, friends. when are we going to have fun together again? just name the time. we never see you anymore. does it have to be that way?
i wish i were as big and strong as you. then you'd see the courage that lives in the queen of egypt.
do so. the musicians who are going to play are now floating in the air a thousand leagues from here. they'll be here shortly; so sit, and listen.
let us know when you want to get together. we're available.
listen to me, queen. there is an emergency i must take care of, but my whole heart will remain here with you. my italy is full of civil war. sextus pompeius is sailing toward the port of rome. when two domestic opponents are equally matched, as we are against pompey, factions will form on the smallest of pretexts. when a formerly hated man grows powerful, he suddenly finds himself with many supporters. pompey, who was once condemned, now wields his father's power, and all the citizens who have grievances against the government are joining him. pompey's numbers are steadily growing, and the government is ready to do something desperate. but my personal motivation, and that which should move you most to sanction my departure, is that fulvia is dead.
kate! you're good at lying down. come quickly, so that i can put my head in your lap hotspur puns on the slang meanings for "head" ("penis") and "lap" ("vagina"). head in your lap .
bassanio, we'll say goodbye for now, since you've found antonio. but don't forget, we're meeting for dinner tonight.
i may not have outlived the foolishness of my youth, but i'm not that childishly nave. is it possible fulvia is dead?
stop it, you silly goose.
don't worry, i'll be there.
she's dead, my queen.
now i see that the devil understands welsh; it's no surprise he's so moody. by god, he's a good musician.
you don't look well, antonio. you're taking things too seriously. people with too much invested in the world always get hurt. i'm telling you, you don't look like yourself.
look at this. take your royal time and read about the quarrels she encouraged. and saving the best for last, read when and where she died.
then you should be incredibly musical, for you're the moodiest man alive. lie still, you thief. listen to the lady sing in welsh.
for me the world is just the world, gratiano, a stage where every person has a part to play. i play a sad one.
oh, unfaithful lover! you should be filling vials with your tears. ancient romans often placed vials of tears inside their friends' funerary urns. you should be filling vials with your tears. seeing how you take fulvia's death, i can see how you would react to mine.
i'd rather hear lady, my dog, howl in irish.
then i'll play the happy fool and get laugh lines on my face. i'd rather overload my liver with wine than starve my heart by denying myself fun. why should any living man sit still like a statue? why should he sleep when he's awake? why should he get ulcers from being crabby all the time? i love you, and i'm telling you this because i care about you, antonio, there are men who always look serious. their faces never move or show any expression, like stagnant ponds covered with scum. they're silent and stern, and they think they're wise and deep, important and respectable. when they talk, they think everybody else should keep quiet, and that even dogs should stop barking. i know a lot of men like that, antonio. the only reason they're considered wise is because they don't say anything. i'm sure if they ever opened their mouths, everyone would see what fools they are. i'll talk to you more about this some other time. in the meantime, cheer up. don't go around looking so glum. that's my opinion, but what do i know? i'm a fool., let's go, lorenzo., goodbye for now. i'll finish my lecture after dinner.
stop arguing and listen to my plans. whether i go ahead with them or not is completely up to you. i swear by the sun that when i leave here, it will be as your faithful servant. i will make either peace or war, whichever you prefer.
do you want your head broken in?
all right, we'll see you at dinnertime. i must be one of these silent so-called wise men gratiano's talking about, because he never lets me get a word in.
cut my corset laces, charmian, so i can breathe. hurry! no, leave it alone. i waver easily between sickness and health. just as antony loves.
no.
if you hang around me for two more years, you'll forget the sound of your own voice. i won't ever let you speak.
control yourself, my precious queen, and concede that my love is true. it has endured many genuine trials.
then be still.
goodbye. after that lecture of yours, i'll start talking a lot.
that's what fulvia told me. i beg you, turn away and cry for her. then say good-bye to me and tell me those tears were for my benefit. good. now perform a scene for me, using your excellent skills of playacting, and pretend that you're being honorable and righteous.
never; that's a womanly trait.
thank you. the only tongues that should be silent are ox-tongues on a dinner plate and those that belong to old maids.
you'll make me angry. no more of this.
now god help you, 
is he right?
i know you can do better than that, but it'll do for now.
into the welsh lady's bed!
gratiano talks more nonsense than any other man in venice. his point is always like a needle in a haystack, you look for it all day, and when you find it you realize it wasn't worth the trouble.
i swear by my sword, 
what did you say?
so, who's this girl, the one you said you were going to take a special trip for? you promised to tell me.
swear by your shield, too! (to charmian ) he's getting better, but still it's not his best. see, charmian, how well this mighty roman portrays anger?
quiet! she's singing.
antonio, you know how bad my finances have been lately. i've been living way beyond my means. don't get me wrong, i'm not complaining about having to cut back.
i'll leave you, lady.
come on, kate. i want to hear your song, too.
i just want to be honorable and pay off the big debts that piled up when i was living the high life. i'm in debt to many people, and i owe most to you, antonio, both money and gratitude. and because you care about me, i know you'll let me tell you my plan to clear all my debts.
polite sir, let me say one thing. sir, you and i must part company, no, that's not it. sir, you and i were lovers, no, that's not it, either. you already know all that. there's something i'd like to, oh, i've forgotten what i wanted to say. just as antony has forgotten me.
not mine, darn it.
please let me know your plan, bassanio. as long as it's honorable, you can be sure that i'll let you use all my money and do everything i can to help you.
if you weren't the queen of immaturity, i'd think you were immaturity itself.
not yours? darn it? honestly! you swear like a candymaker's wife. "not you, darn it." and "i swear on my life," and "god forgive me," and "as plain as day." your curse words are smooth as silk. you'd think you'd never gone further than finsbury in your life. swear like the real lady you are, kate. let loose a good mouthful of curses; leave "darn" and such watered-down cursewords to those citizens, trimmed in velvet and wearing their sunday best. come on, sing.
back when i was a schoolboy, if i lost an arrow i would try to find it by shooting another arrow in the same direction, watching the second arrow more carefully than i had the first. by risking the second arrow, i'd often get both of them back. i'm telling you this story for a reason. i owe you a lot, and like a spoiled kid i've lost what i owe you. but if you'd be willing to shoot another arrow the same way you shot the first, i'll watch your arrow more carefully this time. either we'll get back all the money i owe you, or else we'll get back what you lend me this time, and i'll just owe you what i already owe you.
it's difficult to have such immaturity so close to my heart, but bear with me. even the traits that become me most kill me when you don't approve of them. your honor is the reason you are leaving. so i beg you not to listen to my foolishness. may the gods be with you. may your sword be victorious and everything you do succeed.
i will not sing.
you know me better than that. you're wasting your breath. all of this talk means you have doubts about my friendship. that's worse than if you bankrupted me. just tell me what to do, and i'll do it. tell me.
let's go. come with me. our imminent separation so occupies our thoughts that even though you stay here, you come with me, and even though i leave here, i stay with you.
it's the quickest way to become a tailor; tailors love to sing. or you could teach songs to birds. if our agreements are drawn up, i'll be gone within two hours; come find me whenever you want.
there's a girl in belmont who's inherited a huge amount of money, and she's beautiful and, even better, she's a good person. i think she likes me. sometimes the expression on her face tells me she likes me. her name is portia. she's as rich as that famous roman heroine portia, the daughter of cato and wife of brutus. her wealth is world-famous. famous and important men have come in from all over the world to try to marry her. the hair that hangs down on her forehead is like gold, calling every adventurer to belmont like a gold rush. antonio, if i only had enough money to hold my own against those suitors, i know i could win her!
now you'll see, lepidus, that i don't disdain our noble ally because of a personal whim. here's the news from alexandra: antony fishes, drinks, and celebrates all night. he's become as frivolous and self-indulgent as ptolemy ptolemy was pharaoh of egypt and cleopatra's husband, now dead. (he was also her younger brother.) ptolemy 's queen, cleopatra. he rarely attends to his duties or acknowledges he has partners to be considered. here's a man who is the epitome of all the vices known to man.
come now, mortimer. you're as reluctant to leave as percy is on fire to go. our agreements are drawn up by now. we'll sign and then go straight to our horses.
you know right now all my money's tied up in that cargo that's still at sea. i can't give you the cash you need because i don't have it. but go ahead and charge things to me on credit, as much credit as i can get in venice. i'll use all my lines of credit to help you get to belmont, to portia. go see who will lend money, and i'll do the same. i'm sure i can get something either as a business loan, or as a personal favor.
i can't believe there could be enough vice in the world to outshine all the good in him. his faults stand out because they must be compared to all his virtues, like stars that shine brightly against the dark night sky. they're more likely to be the result of inherited weakness than independent choice.
i go with all my heart.
oh nerissa, my poor little body is tired of this great big world.
you're too forgiving. let's say, for argument's sake, that it's not improper to fool around with ptolemy's wife, or to trade a kingdom for a joke. that it's fine to engage in drinking matches with inferiors, or stumble drunkenly through the streets in the middle of the day, or get into fist fights with sweaty servants. even if we said that this behavior suits him, though only a man with a perfect character could avoid being disgraced by such antics, there's no excuse for the extra work we've had to take on while he's been off amusing himself. if he's been spending his leisure time in lustful pursuits, then he'll be punished with venereal diseases, and that's his business. but he's wasting time and resources vital to our cause and endangering both his position and ours. he should be chastised, like any boy who knows what's right but chooses to satisfy his desires regardless.
gentlemen, please leave; the prince of wales and i must speak in private. but stay close by, for i'll need you in a moment.
you'd be tired, madam, if you had bad luck rather than wealth and good luck. but as far as i can tell, people with too much suffer as much as people with nothing. the best way to be happy is to be in between. when you have too much you get old sooner, but having just enough helps you live longer.
here's more news.
i don't know whether god decided, because of some displeasing crime i have committed, to turn my own flesh and blood into a punisher and a plague upon me. the course of your life has me convinced that you are only meant for one purpose in this world: to be god's vengeance against me for all my misdeeds. why else would such disorderly and low desires, such poor, such wretched, such lewd, such despicable actions, such wasteful pleasures, and such vulgar company become associated with your high-born self, and call themselves equals with a prince like you?
good point, and well said.
we've followed your commands, lord caesar. you shall have hourly updates regarding the situation at sea. pompey has a strong navy. all the people who only stayed with you out of fear are gathering at the port to join him, in the opinion he's been treated unfairly.
your majesty, i wish i could be proven innocent of all those accusations, for i can certainly clear myself of many of them. but let me beg one favor of you: if i can demonstrate that i'm not guilty of the false charges of these smiling flatterers and wretched gossips (the kinds of stories that are always told about great men), then you will forgive me when i confess to the youthful indiscretions i actually did commit.
it would be better if you actually applied it to your life.
i should have known it. it's been this way ever since the first government was organized. people will transfer their support to a strong figure until he becomes their actual leader. then they will value their former leader, even though the loss of their support has made him powerless. the common crowd changes like the tide, to and fro, serving whoever is on the rise. their power is worn away by their fickleness.
let god forgive you! but i'm amazed, harry, at your inclinations, which run completely contrary to those of your ancestors. your vulgar behavior has cost you your place on my council, a position now held by your younger brother. you have almost completely alienated yourself from the good graces of the courtiers and the other members of the royal family. the hopes of your youth are now ruined; every man, in his heart, thinks he can see your downfall. if i had been so publicly visible, so overly familiar to people, so freely accessible, so cheap and available to the common hordes, then public opinion (which helped me get the crown) would have stayed loyal to king richard. i would have stayed a banished man, with no reputation and no promise of success. but because i was so rarely seen in public, people were amazed by me when i did appear; they acted as if i were a comet. men would tell their children, "that's him!" others would ask, "where? which one's bolingbroke?" i was more gracious than heaven; i acted so modestly that i won the allegiance of their hearts, and the shouts and salutes of their mouths. they even did so when the king himself was present. this is how i kept myself fresh and new. i was like a priest's ceremonial vestments: rarely seen, but admired. i appeared seldomly, but marvelously, like a feast made all the more impressive by its rarity. now, ridiculous king richard pranced about with vapid clowns and superficial wits, quickly lit and just as quickly burnt out. he degraded himself, mingling his royal self with those skipping fools.
you think it's that easy? if doing good deeds were as easy as knowing how to do them, then everyone would be better off. small chapels would be big churches, and poor men's cottages would be princes' palaces. it takes a good priest to practice what he preaches. for me, it's easier to lecture twenty people on how to be good than to be the one person out of twenty who actually does good things. the brain can tell the heart what to do, but what does it matter? cold rules don't matter when you've got a hot temper. young people are like frisky young rabbits, and good advice is like a crippled old man trying to catch them. but thinking like this won't help me choose a husband. oh, the word "choose" is strange! i can't choose who i like, or refuse who i dislike. i'm a living daughter still controlled by the wishes of her dead father. isn't it a pain that i can't choose or refuse anyone, nerissa?
caesar, i have news about menecrates and menas, notorious pirates who prowl the sea in a variety of ships. they've made many raids upon italy, and the naval patrols go pale at even the thought of resisting them. the young, energetic men are joining pompey. these pirates can capture a ship as soon as it leaves the harbor, since the simple mention of the name "pompey" carries as much power as a fleet of troops in battle.
his reputation was ruined by their scornful attitudes. he lost face by laughing with those joking boys, and tolerating the rudeness of every smooth-faced, disdainful prankster. he spent his time in common, public places, surrendering himself to the pursuit of popularity. soon, they saw him every day and it was like overdosing on honey; they began to hate the taste of that sweetness. a little too much is as bad as far too much. seeing him became as common a sight as a cuckoo in june, heard but not paid attention to; seen, but by eyes so used to seeing that they took it for granted. they didn't look with a special gaze, as they do at the sun when it shines only rarely. instead, they grew bored, they looked away. they slept in front of him and watched him dully, the way a sullen man looks at his enemy. they were stuffed, gorged, and full with his presence. and that is just where you stand, harry. you have lost your princely status by associating with vile criminals: there's not an eye in the kingdom that isn't weary of looking at you. no eyes except mine, that is, which had wished to see more of you; and now they're acting against me, blinding themselves with foolish tears.
your father was an extremely moral man, and religious people get odd ideas on their deathbeds. your father's idea was to have a game with three boxes. the suitor who can figure out whether to pick the gold, silver, or lead box will solve your father's riddle, and that suitor's the man for you. no one will ever choose the right box who doesn't deserve your love. but tell me. do you like any of the princely suitors who've come?
antony, it's time to stop your wild hedonism. when you were defeated at the battle of modena, where you killed the consuls, hirtius and pansa, and then driven away, you had to face hunger and thirst. and even though you were brought up as a gentleman, you patiently tolerated more hardships than savages could withstand. you drank horses' urine and water from scum-covered puddles that even animals would refuse. though you were used to the finest foods, you didn't turn up your nose at the bitterest berries on the thorniest bushes. you even ate bark from trees, as deer do in winter. going over the alps, you ate strange meat that some men would rather die than consume. and you went through all this, the comparison between then and now shames you, in such a soldier-like way that you didn't seem to suffer at all.
from now on, my very gracious father, i will behave more like myself.
run through the list. as you name them i'll describe them for you, and from my descriptions you can guess how i feel toward them.
it's too bad.
at this moment, you seem just like richard did when i returned from france to lead the revolt. and just as i was then, percy seems now.
well, first there was the prince from naples.
let's hope his sense of shame will send him back to rome quickly. it's time that we brought our armies into the field. let's call a council of war immediately. pompey is making the most of our absence.
i swear on my scepter and my soul, he has more of a right to the throne than you, you shadowy copy of a king. for without a right to the throne, nor anything even resembling a right, he has filled the kingdom's battlefields with armies. he seeks to lead an army against the king, into the jaws of the lion. and even though he is no older than you are, he leads old statesmen and venerable bishops into bloody battles and violent wars. what lasting honor he won, by beating the renowned douglas! that man's great exploits, violent invasions, and glorious military reputation had won him praise throughout the christian world as the most outstanding soldier. and yet hotspur, this mars mars = roman god of war mars in baby clothes, this infant warrior, has defeated douglas three times, captured him once, then freed him and made him his ally. now they have become a huge threat to my throne. and what do you have to say about this? percy, northumberland, the archbishop of york, douglas, and mortimer have banded together, and now they are after me. but why am i telling you this? why should i tell you about my foes, harry, when you are my most beloved and most dangerous enemy? with your sycophantic fear, your vulgar inclinations, and your short temper, i wouldn't be surprised if you left me to fight under percy, following his heels like a dog and bowing to him when he frowns. just to prove what a degenerate you are.
ah, yes, that stallion. all he talks about is his horse. he thinks it's a great credit to his character that he can shoe a horse all by himself. i'm afraid his mother may have had an affair with a blacksmith.
tomorrow, caesar, i'll be able to tell you what land and sea forces i can raise for this war.
don't think that; that will not happen. god forgive whoever turned you against me like this! i'll redeem myself by beating percy. and at the end of some
then there's the count palatine.
i'll be getting my own figures together in the meantime. good-bye.
glorious victory, i'll come to you and proudly say that i am your son. i will wear a garment made of blood, and my face will be stained by a bloody mask which, when washed away, will clean me of my shame. this will be the day, whenever it happens, that this famous and honored child, this brave hotspur, this highly praised knight, will meet your disregarded harry in battle. i wish that every honor he's earned were multiplied, and that every one of my shames were doubled. for the time will come when i'll make this youth from the north exchange his glorious deeds for my embarrassments. percy is working for me, my lord. he's collecting glories on my behalf, and i'm going to hold him strictly accountable for them. he'll either have to surrender every last one of those glories to me, no matter how small, or i'll tear them right out of his heart. this i promise you, in the name of god. and if god allows me to do these things, then i beg you to heal the wound caused by my long years of bad behavior. if not, then my death will cancel all my debts. i would rather die a hundred-thousand deaths than break even the smallest part of this promise.
he does nothing but frown, as if he wants to say, "if you don't want me, i don't care." he doesn't even smile when he hears funny stories. if he's so sad and solemn when he's young, i can only imagine how much he'll cry as an old man. no, i'd rather be married to a skull with a bone in its mouth than to either of those men. god protect me from these two!
good-bye, my lord. if you receive any more news, please share it with me.
through this vow, a hundred-thousand rebels are killed. you will be given a position of command, and absolute trust in this undertaking.
what did you think about that french lord, monsieur le bon?
don't worry, that goes without saying.
what's wrong, blunt? you look like there's an emergency.
we might as well call him a man, since god created him. no, i know it's bad to make fun of people, but still! his horse is better than the neapolitan's and he frowns more than the count palatine. he was trying to outdo everyone so much that you couldn't tell who he was. he started dancing every time a bird sang, and he was so eager to show off his fencing that he'd fight with his own shadow. if i married him, i might as well as marry twenty husbands, because he's like twenty men all rolled into one! i'd understand it if he hated me, since even if he loved me desperately, i'd never be able to love him back.
charmian!
there is, which is what i've come to tell you. lord mortimer of scotland sent word that douglas and the english rebels met at shrewsbury, on the eleventh of this month. if everyone involved keeps their word, they will have an army as enormous and terrifying as any that ever caused trouble in this kingdom.
what about falconbridge, that young english baron?
madam?
we heard this news five days ago. the earl of westmoreland left today, along with my son lord john of lancaster. harry, you'll go next wednesday. on thursday, i will go myself. we'll meet at bridgenorth. harry, you will march through gloucestershire. given the amount of time we'll all need, we should come together with our full forces at bridgenorth twelve days from now. there's a lot to do, so let's go. our enemies will take advantage if we're slow.
i have no opinion about him. we don't talk because we don't understand each other. he doesn't speak latin, french, or italian, and you know how little english i speak. he's great-looking, but how can you talk to someone who doesn't speak your language? he was dressed so oddly too! i think he got his jacket in italy, his tights in france, his hat in germany, and his behavior everywhere.
ah, give me some mandragora narcotic syrup mandragora to drink.
bardolph, haven't i shrivelled since our last robbery? haven't i gotten thin? aren't i shrinking? my skin is hanging off me like a loose gown on an old lady; i'm puckered like a rotten apple. i'd better repent my sins, and fast, while there's still something left of me. i'll be in bad shape soon, and then i won't have the strength to repent. if i haven't forgotten what the inside of a church looks like, i'm a withered berry, a lame old nag. the inside of a church! the wrong crowd, the wrong crowd has ruined me.
what do you think of his neighbor, the scottish lord?
why, madam?
sir john, you complain so much, you're sure not to live much longer.
i think he's very forgiving, since he let the englishman slap him on the ear without hitting him back. rather than defend himself, he just threatened to pay the englishman back later. then the frenchman promised to help the scot pay the englishman back, and added a slap of his own.
so i can sleep away the time while my antony is gone.
you're absolutely right. come on then, sing me a dirty song. make me laugh. i lived my life as properly as a gentleman should. well, properly enough, anyway. i didn't swear much. i didn't gamble, more than seven days a week. i went to a whorehouse no more than once, every fifteen minutes. i paid my debts, three or four times. i lived well and within reasonable boundaries. and now, i live poorly and out of moderation.
how did you like the young german, the duke of saxony's nephew?
you think about him too much.
you're so fat, sir john, that you have no choice but to live out of moderation: moderation could not fit you.
he's pretty awful in the morning when he's sobering up, and even worse in the afternoon when he's drunk. at his best he's a little less than a man, and at his worst he's little more than an animal. if we got married and he tragically met his demise, i'm sure i could find a way to go on without him.
that's treason!
you fix your face and i'll fix my life. you're like the flagship of our fleet, with a light on its bow, except that your light is in your nose.
if he offers to play the game and chooses the right box, but then you reject him, you'll be disobeying your father's last wishes.
i hope not, madam.
why, sir john, my face isn't hurting you.
i know. so please put a nice big glass of white wine on the wrong box. i know he'll get tempted and choose that one. i'll do anything rather than marry a drunk, nerissa.
eunuch! mardian!
no, you're right. i actually get some good from your face: it's like a skull, or a death token. i can't look at your face without thinking of the flames of hell, and dives from the bible, who burned eternally. if there were anything pious about you, i could swear oaths on your face. i could say, "now, by this fire will-o-the-wisp = a natural phenomenon in which lights seem to appear over marshy ground fire , which is god's angel ..." but you're a complete sinner, and if it weren't for the light in your face, you'd be the son of darkness. when you ran up gadshill at night to find my horse, i could have sworn you were a will-o-the-wisp or a fireball. you're an endless torchlight parade, a permanent bonfire. walking with you from tavern to tavern at night has saved me a thousand marks marks = unit of currency marks in candles and flashlights. but the money i've spent on wine for you would have been enough to buy the most expensive candles in europe. i've kept that nose of yours burning for thirty-two years, god bless me.
you don't have to worry about any of these lords, my lady. they've all told me what they want, which is to go back home and give up on you, unless there was some other way to win you than your father's pick-the-box test.
what can i do for your highness?
dammit! i wish my face were in your belly a common expression of irritation belly .
i'll die an old maid unless i can be won according to the rules set by my father's will. i'm glad these suitors are sensible enough to stay away. the only thing i like about them is that they're not there. i wish them all safe trips home.
i don't want to hear you sing. i'm not interested in anything a eunuch can do. it's a good thing for you that, being castrated, you can better concentrate on my needs. do you have desires?
god have mercy! then i'd surely have heartburn.
do you remember a venetian scholar and soldier who accompanied the marquess of montferrat here once when your father was still alive?
yes, dear madam.
hello there, madame clucking chicken! have you figured out yet who picked my pocket?
yes, yes, that was bassanio. i think that was his name.
indeed?
now sir john, what do you think, sir john? do you think i have thieves in my establishment? i've searched, i've asked questions; so has my husband. we've asked every man, boy and servant here. no one's ever lost so much as a fraction of a hair in this tavern before.
yes, madam, that's the one. he deserves a beautiful wife more than all the other men i've ever seen.
well, not in deed, madam, since i can't do anything unchaste. but i do have intense passions, and i do think about what venus did with mars venus, goddess of love, and mars, god of war, were legendary lovers. what venus did with mars .
you lie! bardolph got a shave here, and he lost a lot of hair. and i swear my pocket was picked. to hell with you, you're a woman. to hell with you.
i remember him well, and my memory tells me that he deserves your praise.
oh, charmian, where do you think he is now? is he standing or sitting? or is he walking? or is he on his horse? oh, how fortunate that horse is to have antony on him. do well, horse. do you know whom it is you carry? a man who carries responsibility for a third of the world on his shoulders. he's speaking now, or perhaps he's whispering, "where's my serpent of the nile?" for that's his pet name for me. i'm killing myself with this provocative speculation . . . are you thinking about me? even though i've been darkened by the sun and wrinkled with age? caesar, with your broad forehead, when you were alive, i was the perfect young consort for a king. and powerful pompey used to stare at me as if he were frozen in time. referring to two previous lovers, julius caesar and gneius pompey (son of pompey the great and elder brother of sextus pompeius). i was the perfect young consort for a king. and powerful pompey used to stare at me as if he were frozen in time.
who, me? no, i say. by god, i've never been called such a thing in my own tavern before.
hello, do you have any news?
queen of egypt, greetings!
oh come on, i know all about you.
the four suitors are looking for you so they can say goodbye, madam. and there's a messenger representing a fifth one, the prince of morocco, who says the prince will be here tonight.
you are nothing like mark antony! but since you come from him, you're saturated with his healing spirit. how does it go with my magnificent mark antony?
no, sir john; you don't know me, sir john. i know you, sir john. you owe me money, sir john, and now you're making a fuss so that you can cheat me out of it. i have bought you a dozen shirts to wear.
if i could say hello to the fifth one as happily as i'll say goodbye to the first four, i'd be very happy he's coming. if he's as good as a saint but is black like a devil, i'd rather he hear my confession than marry me. let's go, nerissa., (to the servant) go ahead. as soon as we shut the door on one suitor, another one starts knocking.
the last thing he did before sending me off, dear queen, was to kiss, the last of many such kisses, this indian pearl for you.
junk, cheap junk. i gave them away to bakers' wives, to sift flour with.
three thousand ducats, hmmm.
his speech is stored in my heart.
i swear, as an honest woman, that they were made of expensive fabric, eight shillings an ell ell = measurement of inches ell . besides, you owe me money for food and drink, plus twenty-four pounds i lent you.
yes, for three months.
my ear must pull it out.
(points at bardolph) he had some of it. let him pay.
for three months, hmmm.
"good friend," he said, "say that the faithful roman sends an oyster's treasure to the great queen of egypt, and that he plans to enhance this meager gift by adding new kingdoms to her empire. tell her that the entire east shall call her queen." then he nodded and solemnly mounted an armored warhorse, which neighed so loudly it effectively silenced anything i might have said in reply.
him? he's poor, he has nothing.
as i said before, antonio will guarantee the loan. if i default, he'll pay you.
was he sad or happy?
what? poor? look at his face. what do you call rich? they could make coins from his nose, mint his cheeks. i won't pay a denier denier = a french copper coin, worth very little denier . you think i'm a rube? what, i can't relax at a tavern without getting my pocket picked? i lost my grandfather's sealing ring, worth forty marks.
antonio will guarantee it, hmmm.
he was like that time of year halfway between the extremes of hot and cold: he was neither sad nor happy.
jesus! i've heard the prince tell him countless times that ring was only made out of copper.
can you help me? what's your answer?
oh, what an even disposition he has! observe, observe good charmian! that's exactly how he is! just notice. he wasn't sad, because he knows that his disposition affects others. he wasn't merry, because to be merry would indicate that he had forgotten his love in egypt. he was somewhere in the middle, between them . . . oh, heavenly mixture! whether you are sad or merry, the intensity of either suits you like no one else . . . did you meet my messengers on your way here?
what? the prince is a bastard, a sneak. dammit, if he were here and said something like that, i'd beat him like a dog.
three thousand ducats for three months, and antonio will guarantee it.
yes, madam, twenty different messengers. why did you send so many?
hey there, lad! is that what's happening? are we all going to march?
your answer?
whoever is born on a day i forget to send a message to antony will die a beggar. bring ink and paper, charmian. welcome, my good alexas. charmian, did i ever love caesar as much as this?
yes, side by side, like prisoners to the gallows.
antonio's a good man.
oh, that splendid caesar!
my lord, please, listen to me.
have you heard anything to the contrary?
may you choke on any other sentiments like that! say, "that splendid antony."
what is it, mistress quickly? how's your husband? i think highly of him; he's an honest man.
what? no, no, no, no. what i meant in saying he's a good man is that he has enough money to guarantee the loan. but his investments are uncertain right now. he has one ship bound for tripoli, another heading for the indies. what's more, people at the rialto the rialto is the business district of venice, where the merchants meet. rialto tell me he has a third ship in mexico, and a fourth in england, as well as other business ventures throughout the world.
the courageous caesar!
my lord, please listen to me.
but ships are just fragile boards, and sailors are just men. there are rats and thieves and pirates, not to mention storms, winds, and rocks. anything could happen. but in spite of all this, the man is still wealthy enough. three thousand ducats, i think i can let him guarantee your loan.
by isis, i'll give you bloody teeth if you ever compare caesar with antony, my best man among men.
forget about her, and listen to me.
i assure you he can.
pardon me, but i'm just repeating what you yourself have said.
what is it, jack?
i will be sure he can, before i make the loan. and i'll think of a way to be sure. can i speak with antonio?
that was when i was young and inexperienced and didn't know what passion was. (to everyone) but come. (to charmian ) go get me ink and paper. he shall have different messages every day if i have to depopulate egypt to send them.
the other night i fell asleep here behind the arras and i had my pocket picked. this bar's like a whorehouse: they pick your pockets.
if you like, you can dine with us.
if the great gods are just, they will help the most honest men.
what did you lose, jack?
oh yes, to smell pork any meat from pigs (like pork or bacon) is forbidden by jewish dietary law. pork ? i don't think so!. your prophet jesus sent the devil into a herd of pigs. i'm not going to eat that. i'll buy with you, sell with you, talk with you, walk with you, and so on, but i won't eat with you, drink with you, or pray with you. any news on the rialto? who's that?
you should know, noble pompey, that although the gods may delay action, that doesn't mean they will necessarily refuse their help.
would you believe it, hal? three or four i.o.u.'s worth forty pounds each, and my grandfather's sealing ring.
this is signor antonio.
but while we pray and wait for that help, the cause we petition for may be lost.
junk, not worth more than eight pennies.
(to himself) he looks just like a guy who's robbed me but now comes to beg me for a favor! i hate him because he's a christian. but more than that, i hate him because he stupidly lends money without interest, which lowers the interest rates here in venice. if i can just get the upper hand of him once, i'll satisfy my old grudge against him. he hates jews. even at the rialto he's always complaining about me and my negotiating and my hard-earned profits, which he calls "interest."
sometimes we don't know what's best for us and ask for things that may harm us. in that case, the wise gods deny our prayers for our own good.
that's what i said, my lord. and i said i'd heard you say so, and then he said awful things about you, like the foul-mouthed man that he is. he said he'd beat you.
it would an insult to jews everywhere to forgive that man!
i'll do well. the people are on my side, and i'm in charge of the sea. my forces are growing, and everything i know tells me it's all coming together. mark antony is at dinner in egypt and won't be going outside to make war. caesar loses supporters wherever he raises money. lepidus flatters both of them, as they flatter him, but he doesn't love them, and they don't love him.
what? he did?
shylock, are you listening?
caesar and lepidus are organizing their military operation. they have a massive army.
if he didn't, i'm not faithful, trustworthy or womanly.
i'm thinking about how much cash i have on hand. if i remember correctly, i can't raise the entire three thousand ducats immediately. but so what? tubal, a wealthy jew i know, will supply me with the cash. but wait a minute! how many months do you want? (to antonio) oh, hello, how are you, signor? we were just talking about you.
where did you hear this? it's not true.
you're about as faithful as a whore, as trustworthy as a fox on the run, and, as for womanhood, a man in a dress is the minister's wife compared to you. get out of here, you thing, get out.
shylock, although i never lend or borrow with interest, i'm willing to break that habit to help a friend in need. (to bassanio) does he know how much you need?
from silvius, sir.
thing? what thing?
oh yes, three thousand ducats.
he's dreaming. i know they're in rome together, hoping for antony to return. lecherous cleopatra, may all the charms of love soften those withered lips! join your witchcraft with your beauty, and let antony's lust combine with both. keep this libertine occupied with endless debauchery. keep his brain drunk and his appetite unsatisfied, so that sleeping and eating make him drowsy and forgetful of his duties, like the lethe mythical river of the underworld; to drink from it brought forgetfulness lethe does.
what thing? a thing to say "thank god" for.
for three months.
what's the news, varrius?
i am not a thing to say "thank god" for, i want you to know; i am an honest man's wife. and ignoring the fact that you are a knight, you are a brute for calling me that.
yes, i forgot, three months. (to bassanio) you told me that. (to antonio) now then, about your guarantee. let me see, but listen, antonio, i thought you said you don't lend or borrow with interest.
this news is absolutely true: mark antony is expected to arrive in rome at any hour now. in the time since he left egypt, he could have traveled an even longer distance.
well, if you ignore the fact that you're a woman, then i suppose that would make you an animal.
that's right. that's not how i do business.
i would have listened to less important news with greater enthusiasm. menas, i had no idea this amorous glutton would have put on his helmet for such an insignificant war. his military ability is double that of the other two. we must form a better opinion of ourselves if our uprising can pull the insatiable antony's attention away from that egyptian widow.
what animal, you brute?
when jacob took care of his uncle laban's sheep, jacob was the heir to his grandfather abraham's birthright, because his mother cleverly arranged for her husband isaac to make jacob his heir, 
i don't expect caesar and antony will have a very friendly reunion. antony's dead wife raised an army against him, as did his brother, though i don't think antony instigated it.
what animal? why, an otter.
what's your point? did he charge interest?
menas, i don't understand how minor quarrels can be superseded by greater ones. if it weren't for the fact that we oppose all three of them together, they'd be fighting each other. they certainly have enough provocation. but it's possible the fear of us may mend their petty differences, though how that will work out, we cannot say. it will be as the gods see fit. in any case, our survival depends on putting together the strongest force possible. let's go, menas.
an otter, sir john? why an otter?
no, he didn't charge interest shylock uses a story of jacob from genesis : , to defend his practice of charging interest. charge interest , not in your sense of the word. but listen to what jacob did. when he and laban agreed that all the spotted lambs would be jacob's pay, it was the end of autumn, when the sheep were starting to mate. because newborns look like whatever their mother sees during mating, he stuck some spotted branches into the ground right in front of the sheep, who saw them while they mated. the mothers later gave birth to spotted lambs, all of which went to jacob. that was his way of expanding his business, and it worked. my point is that profit is a blessing, as long as you don't steal to get it.
good enobarbus, you would be doing a very good thing if you advised your captain to speak calmly and quietly.
because she's not quite a fish and not quite a mammal. a man wouldn't know where to put her.
that business venture you're referring to happened because god made it happen like that. jacob didn't have any control over what happened. are you saying this story proves that charging interest makes sense? that your interest payments are like jacob's sheep?
i will advise him to speak as he usually does. if caesar makes him mad, let antony stand tall and speak as loudly as mars, the god of war. by jupiter, if i were antony, i wouldn't shave my beard today. i'd leave it long and dare caesar to insult me by pulling on it, just so i could fight him.
you're awful for saying so: you or any man would know where to put me, you brute, you!
i can hardly tell the difference; i make my money multiply as fast as those sheep. but listen to me, signor, 
this is not the time for dwelling on personal grievances.
you're right, hostess, and he has really insulted you.
watch out, bassanio. the devil can quote scripture for his own use. an evil soul using a holy story is like a criminal who smiles at you. he looks like a good apple but he's rotten at the core. oh, liars can look so honest!
it's always appropriate to deal with matters as they arise.
he insulted you, too, my lord. just the other day, he said you owed him a thousand pounds.
three thousand ducats. that's a nice even sum. three months from twelve months of the year. let me see. the interest rate will be, 
but major issues must come before minor ones.
sirrah, do i owe you a thousand pounds?
well, shylock? are you going to loan us the money?
not if the minor ones come up first.
a thousand pounds, hal? a million. your love is worth a million, and you owe me your love.
signor antonio, you've often insulted my money and my business practices in the rialto. i have always just shrugged and put up with it because jews are good at suffering. you called me a heathen, a dirty dog, and you spit on my jewish clothes. and all because i use my own money to make a profit. and now it looks like you need my help. all right then. you come to me saying, "shylock, we need money." you say that!, even though you spat on my beard and kicked me like you'd kick a stray mutt out your front door. and now you're asking for money. what can i tell you? shouldn't i say, "does a dog have money? is it possible for a mutt to lend three thousand ducats?" or should i bend down low, and in a humble and submissive voice say:
you speak out of passion, but i beg you not to stir things up. here comes the noble antony.
no, sir. he called you a bastard and said he'd beat you.
"sir, last wednesday you spit on me. you insulted me on this day, and another time you called me a dog. and out of gratitude for these favors, i'll be happy to lend you the money?"
and there comes caesar.
did i, bardolph?
i'll probably call you those names again and spit on you, and reject you again too. if you're going to lend us this money, don't lend it to us as if we were your friends. when did friends charge interest? instead, lend it to me as your enemy. if your enemy goes bankrupt, it's easier for you to take your penalty from him.
(to ventidius ) if we can come to an agreement here, we'll move on to parthia. listen, ventidius.
indeed, sir john, you said so.
look at you getting all riled up! i want to be friends with you, and forget all the times you've embarrassed and humiliated me. i want to give you what you need, and not charge a penny of interest, but you won't listen to me! i'm making a kind offer, zero percent financing.
(to maecenas ) i don't know, maecenas. ask agrippa.
that's right, if he said my ring was junk and made of copper.
that really would be kind.
(to caesar and antony ) good friends, the cause that joined us was noble. don't let some petty quarrel tear us apart. let's discuss this calmly. when we argue our differences with raised voices, we do more harm than good. so i plead with you to use reasonable words as you discuss these unreasonable deeds, and don't lose your tempers.
and i do say that it's made of copper. so will you dare keep your word and beat me?
i'll show you how kind i am. come with me to a notary and we'll make it official. and let's add a little clause just for a joke. if you don't repay me on the day we agree on, in the place we name, for the sum of money fixed in our contract, your penalty will be a pound of your pretty flesh, to be cut off and taken out of whatever part of your body i like.
you're right. if we were in front of our armies, about to fight, i would do this.
hal, know this: if you were only a man, i would dare. but since you're also a prince, i'm scared of you, as much as i'm scared by the roar of a lion's cub.
it's a deal. i'll agree to those terms and even say that jews are nice.
welcome to rome.
why the cub and not the lion?
no, you can't sign a contract like that for me! i'd rather go without the money.
thank you.
only the king is as frightening as the lion. you think i'm as scared of you as i am of your father? if i am, i pray to god for my belt the breaking of a belt was considered bad luck. belt to break.
don't worry about it, man, i won't have to pay any penalty. in two months, a month before this loan is due, i expect to earn more than three times that much from my investments.
have a seat.
oh, but if it did, your guts would fall down to your knees! sirrah, there's no room in your chest for trustworthiness, truthfulness, or honesty. it's all filled up with guts and stomach. accuse an honest woman of picking your pocket? you son of a whore; you rude, bloated cheat. i'll be damned if there was anything in your pocket besides tavern bills, notes about whorehouses, and a penny's worth of candy for energy. if you had anything else in your pockets, then i'm a liar; yet you stand by your lies. you won't even try to hide how bad you are. aren't you ashamed of yourself?
oh father abraham, what kind of people are these christians? their own meanness teaches them to suspect other people!, please tell me this. if he fails to repay me by the deadline, what would i get out of such a penalty? a pound of human flesh taken isn't even as valuable as a pound of mutton or beef. i'm just offering this as a favor to a friend. if he agrees, great. if not, goodbye. and i hope you won't think badly of me.
after you.
don't you know, hal? adam fell from grace when the world was innocent. what should poor jack falstaff do, now that the world is wicked? you see i have more flesh than other men. it follows that i'm more fallible than other men., so you're confessing to picking my pocket?
yes, shylock, i'll sign the contract and agree to its terms.
no, after you.
it looks that way.
then meet me right away at the notary's. give him the instructions for our amusing little contract, and i'll go get the money for you right away. i need to check in at home first, because one of my careless servants is in charge right now. i'll see you soon.
i hear you've interpreted some of my actions as being improper, when they weren't improper at all, or if they were, their impropriety didn't concern you.
hostess, i forgive you. go get breakfast ready; love your husband; tend to your servants; cherish your guests. you'll find me a perfectly reasonable man. see? i'm calm, as always. now please, get going!
hurry up, my jewish friend.
i should be ridiculed if i were offended so easily, and laughed at even more for speaking of you disrespectfully, when i had no reason to speak of you at all.
now hal, what's the news at court? what ever happened about our robbery?
he's so kind you'd think the jew is turning christian.
caesar, what did my stay in egypt have to do with you?
i'm your guardian angel again, you fresh piece of meat. the money's been paid back.
i don't like it when a villain acts nice.
no more than my staying here in rome might mean to you in egypt. but if you conspired against my position while you were there, i might be interested in the reason for your stay in egypt.
i don't like that "paying back." it means twice the work!
come on, there's no reason to worry. my ships will come home a month before the money is due.
how do you mean, "conspired"?
my father and i are friends again, and i can do whatever i want.
don't hold my skin color against me. i was born and raised in the sun, which is why i'm dark-skinned. but i'm as red-blooded as any man. show me the best-looking person born in the freezing north, where the sun barely thaws the icicles. i'll win your love by cutting myself to prove to you i have redder blood than he does. i'm telling you, madam, my skin color has made brave men fear me and moroccan girls love me. i wouldn't change it except to make you think of me, my darling queen.
you can judge for yourself what i mean. your wife and brother led troops against me, claiming to be fighting in your name. they said they were acting for you.
then rob the treasury right away, and don't even delay long enough to wash your hands.
being good-looking isn't the only way to my heart, you know. i have other criteria for choosing a husband. not that it matters, because the box test takes away my free choice anyway. but if my father hadn't restricted me like this, forcing me to marry whoever wins his test, then you'd have had as good a chance to marry me as any of the suitors i've met so far, prince.
you're mistaken. my brother didn't use my name to justify his rebellion. i talked to some reliable participants in that battle. on the contrary, his fight was with both of us. he rejected my authority as much as yours. since you and i share a common cause, wouldn't his actions against you be hostile to me as well? i've already sent the proof in my letters. if you want to pick a fight, you'll have to find a more substantial excuse.
do it, my lord.
thank you for saying that. show me the caskets and let me try my luck. i swear by my sword, which killed the shah of persia and a persian prince and defeated the sultan suleiman three times, that i would face the meanest-looking warriors on earth. i would act braver than the bravest man on earth. i would grab bear cubs from a ferocious mother bear, or tease a hungry lion, all of this in order to win your love, lady. but this is bad! if the hero hercules and his servant lychas rolled the dice, which would win? not the greater hero. just the one who happened to be luckier that time. and just as hercules could be beaten by his servant, blind luck could make me lose this test and make someone worse than me win. if that happened, i'd die of sadness.
you defend yourself by blaming my judgment, but you're just making up feeble excuses.
i have gotten you an infantry company to command, jack.
you have to take your chances. either don't choose at all, or swear beforehand that if you choose incorrectly you'll never talk about marriage to any woman again. think about it carefully.
not true, not true. you know i would never approve a war against my own cause. as for my wife, if only you had such a wife. it's easier to rule a third of the world than a wife like that.
i wish it were the horse brigade. where can i recruit a talented crook? oh, if i only had a gifted thief, about twenty-two years old! i'm terribly lacking in help. well, thank god for these rebels. the only people they bother are the good people. i like that. i honor and salute them.
fine, i swear i won't ever get married if i choose incorrectly. let me take my chances.
we should all have wives like that. then the women could go to war with the men.
bardolph!
let's go to the temple first. you can take your chances after dinner.
i had no control over her uprisings, caesar, which arose from her impatience, and were shrewdly undertaken, as well. i'm sorry she caused you so much trouble. but you can't blame me for her offenses.
my lord?
i'll try my luck then. i'll either be the luckiest or the unluckiest man alive.
i sent you a letter while you were carousing in alexandria. you put my letters in your pocket without reading them and then mocked my messenger out of the room.
deliver this letter to lord john of lancaster, my brother. give this one to westmoreland.
i'm sure i'll feel guilty if i run away from this jew, my master. the devil's on my shoulder, tempting me. he's saying, "gobbo," "launcelot gobbo," "good launcelot," or "good gobbo," or "good launcelot gobbo", "use your legs and run away." but my conscience says, "no, launcelot, calm down, don't run away." the devil's urging me to leave. "go away!" he says. "run away! be tough," says the devil, "and run!" but then my conscience, hanging around my heart, says very wisely to me, "my good friend launcelot, you're a good boy, the son of an honest man," really, that should be the son of an honest woman, since my father cheated on my mother. anyway, my conscience says, "stay put." "go," the devil says. "don't go," says my conscience. "conscience," i say, "you give good advice." "devil," i say, "you give good advice." if i listened to my conscience, i'd stay with the jew my master, who's a devil. but if i ran away from the jew, i'd be following the advice of the devil, who's the very devil himself. certainly the jew is the devil incarnate, and my conscience is giving me a hard time by telling me to stay with the jew. the devil's advice is nicer. i'll run, devil. tell me to run, and i'll run.
sir, he burst into the room without invitation, just after i had come from an important banquet with three kings. i was not myself, as a result of the wine. the next day i explained all this to him, which was as good as begging his pardon. let's not fight over this fellow. if we must argue, let us remove him from our arguments.
peto, get to your horse, get to your horse! you and i have to be thirty miles from here by lunchtime.
excuse me, young man, how do i get to the jew's residence?
you've broken the terms of our sworn agreement. you will never be able to say the same about me.
jack, meet me at temple hall temple hall is one of the inns of court, the london schools of law. temple hall at two o'clock tomorrow. you'll get the list of your troops there, plus some money and an order for their equipment. the country is on fire, and percy's riding high. either they or we must die.
(to himself) good heavens, it's my father. he doesn't recognize me because he's half-blind, or more than half-blind, somewhere between half-blind and totally blind. i'll play a little game with him.
easy, caesar.
well spoken! what a splendid world! bring my breakfast, hostess! i wish that i could lead my troops from here!
young man, excuse me, how do i get to the jew's?
no, lepidus, let him say what's on his mind. now he slanders my honor, which is sacred to me. go on, caesar. what part of the agreement did i break?
well said, you excellent scotsman. if people these days didn't confuse the truth with flattery, i would praise you highly. no other soldier so newly tested in battle would have gained such a widespread reputation. god knows, i don't flatter: i hate people who give out praise too easily. but you have a place in my heart that no other man has. make me prove it; try me.
turn right at the next turn, but at the following turn, turn left. oh, and then at the very next turn, don't turn left or right, but turn down and around to the jew's house.
you agreed to send me troops and weapons when i needed them. you refused me both.
you are the most honorable man alive, and if any man challenges that, no matter how powerful, i'll defy him.
good heavens, those are difficult directions. can you tell me if a man named launcelot, who lives with him, is still there?
i overlooked your request, but i did not deny it. your request came at a time when the poisonous effects of reveling caused me to be unaware of my own actions. i will apologize as much as is appropriate, but my apology will not diminish my great stature, or if i am denied that honor, i will withhold my military might. the truth is that to get me out of egypt, fulvia provoked riots here. and though i am only indirectly the cause of all this trouble, i ask your pardon to the extent that my honor permits me to lower myself in such a situation.
you do that. well done.
are you talking about young master launcelot? (speaking so no one else can hear) watch out, i'm going to pull a good prank here., is that who you're talking about?
spoken like a gentleman.
what letters have you got there? (to douglas ) all i can do is thank you.
he's not a "master," sir, he's just a poor man's son. his father, if i do say so myself, is an honest but very poor man, and, thank god, likely to live a long time.
if it's okay with you, you should not press your grievances any further, but realize that the current situation should be enough to reconcile you.
these letters come from your father.
well, his father can be whatever he wants to be. we're talking about young master launcelot.
well put, maecenas.
letters from him? why isn't he here in person?
please don't call him that, sir. he's just launcelot.
or you can pretend to settle your differences until this matter with pompey is finished. you can argue as much as you like when there's nothing else to do.
he can't come, my lord; he's terribly sick.
but excuse me, ergo, old man, ergo, i'm asking you if you're talking about young master launcelot.
you are only a soldier. be quiet.
damn! how can he take the leisure of being sick at such a frantic time? who's in charge of his army? who's leading them here?
yes, i'm talking about launcelot, sir.
oh, i'd forgotten that no one's supposed to speak the truth.
his letters will tell you his plans, my lord, not i.
ergo "ergo" means "therefore" in latin. launcelot is using the word to prove he's an educated gentleman but seems to have no idea what it means. ergo , master launcelot. but please don't talk about master launcelot, old man. the young gentleman, submitting to the fates, the three sisters who control destiny, and other branches of learning like that, is deceased. or, to put it in plain language, he's gone to heaven.
it's not appropriate for a soldier to be part of a discussion among noblemen. don't speak any further.
pardon me, but is he bedridden?
oh, no. god forbid! the boy was going to support me in my old age!
as you please. i'll pretend to be a conscious stone, and think without speaking.
he had been, sir, for four days before i left. and on the day i left, his doctors were extremely concerned.
what am i, a cane? how could i support anyone? don't you recognize me, father?
i agree with what he says, though i don't care for the way he says it. it's not possible for us to be friends anymore. we're too different, in both our dispositions and actions. but if there were something that could join us together again, i would go to the ends of the world to find it.
i wish he'd waited till things were settled before he went and got sick. we've never needed him more than now.
heaven help me, i don't know you, sir. but please tell me, is my boy, god rest his soul, alive or dead?
may i speak, caesar.
sick now? faint now? his disease is infecting our entire project. it's spread all the way to here, right to our camp. he writes that some internal illness, and that his allies couldn't be gathered so quickly by one of his deputies. besides, he didn't think it was appropriate to delegate such a dangerous and important task to someone other than himself. but he also says that we should be bold and press on with our small contingent. for, as he writes, there's no turning back now, since the king surely knows our plans. what do you think?
you really don't recognize me, father?
what is it, agrippa?
your father's sickness is a serious injury to us.
sir, i'm half-blind. i don't know you.
you have a beautiful half-sister, octavia. great mark antony is a widower now.
it's a perilous wound, like losing a limb. and yet, truly, it's not that bad; the loss of my father seems worse than it is. after all, is it a good idea to bet all our resources on one throw of the dice? or to gamble such a rich stake on a single hazardous event? no, because that would mean we had reached the end of our hope, and the very limit of our luck.
even if you had your eyes, you still might not recognize me. it takes a wise father to know his own child. well, old man, i'll tell you news of your son. give me your blessing. the truth will come to light, and murder can't be hidden long, a man's son may hide, but truth will always come out.
you'd better not make that suggestion, agrippa. if cleopatra heard you, you would be well punished for your audacity.
that's right. we have a chance at a rich inheritance; we can take a risk now, based on the promise of success to come. that gives us comfort, something to fall back on.
please stand up! i'm sure you aren't launcelot, my boy.
it's true i'm not married, caesar. let me hear what agrippa has to say.
it gives us a refuge, a home we can always run to, in case the devil or misfortune ruins these early plans.
come on, quit fooling around. give me your blessing. i'm launcelot, who was your boy, is your son, and will be your child.
if antony were to take octavia as his wife, you two would be bound in eternal friendship. as brothers, your hearts would be tied together in an unbreakable knot. she is beautiful enough for the best of men. her virtue and grace are unparalleled. with this marriage, all the petty jealousies that now seem huge, and all the great fears that are dangerous in themselves, would disappear. people would become used to speaking the truth rather than gossip. since she would love both of you, you two would be joined in that love. excuse my bluntness. this is not a spur-of-the-moment suggestion. i have been considering this for some time, in my duties to both of you.
i still wish your father were here. our endeavor here won't withstand any division. people who don't realize your father is sick will assume that he knows some kind of secret, or that he is loyal to the king, or that he doesn't approve of how we're handling things. and just imagine how that kind of mistrust could frighten our more timid supporters, and lead them to doubt us. you know very well that the challenger must always avoid careful examination. we must seal every crack, every loophole, which skeptics might look through to see weaknesses. your father's absence draws the curtains back and reveals frightful things to ignorant people, who had never had a reason to fear before.
i can't believe you're my son.
what do you say, caesar?
you're taking this too far. i'd rather think about his absence this way: it makes us look even better. it makes our great undertaking seem even more daring than it would if northumberland were here. people will think that if we can raise an army against the king without my father, that once he joins we'll turn the whole kingdom upside down. everything is fine, we're all in one piece.
i don't know what to say to that, but the fact is i'm launcelot, the jew's servant, and margery, your wife, is my mother.
i'd rather hear your reaction to this first.
we're as well off as we could have hoped. in scotland, we don't even know the meaning of the word fear.
yes, you're right, her name is margery. if you're launcelot, then you're my own flesh and blood. (feels the back of launcelot's head) my lord, what a bushy beard you have! you've got more hair on your chin than dobbin my horse has in his tail.
if i said to agrippa, "i agree. make it happen," does agrippa have the power to make it so?
welcome, kinsman vernon, from the bottom of my heart.
then dobbin's tail must be growing backward. i'm sure he had more hair on his tail than i have on my face when i last saw him.
he has both my power and my influence over octavia.
i pray to god that what i have to say is worth welcoming, my lord. the earl of westmoreland, with seven thousand men, is marching this way. prince john is with him.
lord, how you've changed! how are you and your master getting along? i've brought him a present. how are you?
i wouldn't dream of opposing such an obviously promising idea. let's shake on it. if you go through with this plan, from now on we'll be brothers, and our love for one another will guide our actions.
nothing to be worried about. what else?
i'm all right. but i've decided to run away, and i can't wait to get going. my master's a total jew. you're giving him a present? give him a noose to hang himself. he's starving me to death. you can see my ribs so well you can count them. i'm glad you've come, father. give me your present to give to master bassanio. he gives his servants beautiful new uniforms.
here's my hand.
i've also learned that the king himself is coming this way, or at least plans to very soon, with a huge and powerful force.
if i can't get a job with him, i'll run away to the ends of the earth., oh look, this is lucky, here comes master bassanio now., let's go talk to him, father. if i work for the jew launcelot uses the word "jew" as a term of abuse here. jew any longer, you can just call me a jew.
i give you a sister whom i love more than a brother ever loved any sister. she will be the bond that joins our kingdoms and our hearts. we'll never fight again.
we'll welcome him too. where's his son, that sporting, foolhardy prince of wales, and his comrades, who don't care about anything?
(to an attendant) all right, go ahead. but do everything quickly. supper must be ready at five at the latest. make sure these letters get delivered, get the uniforms made, and tell gratiano to come visit me soon.
i'm happy to say "amen" to that!
they're all in uniform, all armed. they look like feathered ostriches; like eagles beating their wings after a bath; like statues painted gold. they're as lively as the springtime; as gorgeous as the midsummer sun; as giddy as young goats; as wild as young bulls. i saw young harry with his helmet on, and armor on his thighs. armed with powerful weapons, he rose off the ground like the winged god mercury, and leaped so effortlessly into his saddle, it was as if an angel had dropped out of the sky to ride a fiery pegasus pegasus = a winged horse, from greek mythology pegasus , and bewitch the world with his incredible horsemanship.
go talk to him, father.
i didn't think i would ever fight pompey. he's shown me unusual deference lately, and i must repay his favors or risk a reputation for ingratitude. that done, i can turn against him.
stop, stop! this praise of him makes me sicker than the sun on an early spring day. let them come, like sacrifices in all their finery; we'll offer them, hot and bleeding, to the fire-eyed goddess of smoky war. the war-god mars will sit on his altar, up to his ears in blood. i am on fire, knowing that this rich prize is so near, and yet still not ours. come, bring me my horse, who will carry me like a lightning bolt to face the prince of wales. then this harry will meet that harry, my horse against his horse; we'll meet and never separate, till one of us falls down as a corpse. oh, i wish that glendower were here!
(to bassanio) god bless you, sir!
there isn't much time. either we go after pompey or he'll come after us.
i have more news: as i passed through the town of worcester, i heard that glendower won't be able to collect his army for two more weeks.
thank you. what do you want with me?
where is he now?
that's the worst news i've heard so far.
this is my son, sir. he's a poor boy, 
near mt. misena hilly port town south of rome mt. misena .
yes, truly, that news makes me cold.
not a poor boy, but the rich jew's servant, who wants, as my father will explain, 
how large is his land army?
how many men in the king's army?
he wants very much, sir, as one might say, to work for, 
large and increasing. but his navy rules the sea.
thirty thousand.
to put it briefly, i work for the jew, and i want, as my father will tell you, 
that's what i hear. i wish we'd had this conversation sooner. let's get down to business, and yet, before we get ready for war, let's take care of that business we just discussed.
let it be forty. even with both my father and glendower absent, our armies may still be enough to win. come on, let's gather our troops right now. it's almost doomsday; if we die, we die cheerfully.
he and his master aren't exactly friends, 
with pleasure. i'll introduce you to my sister. follow me.
don't talk about dying. i won't even worry about dying for the next six months.
to be brief, the truth is that the jew has done me wrong, and that forces me to, as my father, an old man, will inform you, 
come with us, lepidus.
bardolph, go ahead of us to coventry, and fill me a bottle of wine. our army will keep marching, and we'll make it to sutton coldfield tonight.
i have a present i'd like to give you, sir. and i want to request that, 
noble antony, even illness couldn't keep me away.
will you give me some money, captain?
to make a long story short, the request is about me, as this good old man will tell you. even though i'm his son and i'm the one saying it, this old man is a poor man, 
(to enobarbus ) welcome back from egypt, sir.
spend your own.
one of you do the talking. what do you want?
you've become caesar's right hand man, maecenas! it's good to see you too, agrippa.
if i buy you this bottle, that makes me an angel an angel = several shillings; bardolph claims he has spent an angel on falstaff's wine. an angel .
to work for you, sir.
good enobarbus!
well, if this bottle earns you an angel, then keep it for your troubles. if you earn twenty angels, then keep them all; i'm good for it. tell my lieutenant peto to meet me at the city limit.
that's what we're trying to say, sir.
we can be happy that things have been resolved so agreeably. and i see you survived your time in egypt.
i will, captain. farewell.
i know who you are. you can have what you want. i spoke with your master shylock today, and he recommended you to me. if you want to leave a rich jew to work for a poor gentleman, you're welcome to.
yes, sir, it was tough. we confused the daytime by sleeping through it, and made the night merry with our drinking.
if i'm not ashamed of my soldiers, then i'm a pickled fish. i've taken terrible advantage of my position. i've pressed a hundred and fifty soldiers into service, and for that, the treasury has paid me over three hundred pounds. i recruited only well-to-do property owners and rich farmer's sons. i looked for men who were engaged to be married, who were already halfway through their preparations. i found a whole supply of pampered cowards who would rather listen to the devil than a military march; who feared the sound of gunfire
do you know the old proverb "the grace of god is enough," sir? it could be divided between you and my boss shylock, you have "the grace of god," and he has "enough."
we heard that once you were served eight wild boars roasted whole for breakfast, for only twelve people! is that true?
more than a wounded bird or a maimed duck might. i recruited only the soft-hearted, who each had as much courage as could fit on a pin head and bribed me to avoid fighting. so now, my battalion is made up of flag bearers, corporals, lieutenants, and crooks as ragged as lazarus in the bible, jesus raises lazarus from the dead. lazarus in those paintings where the dogs are licking the sores on his body. i have men who've never been soldiers: servants dismissed for their dishonesty; youngest sons with no hope of an inheritance; runaway apprentice bartenders; unemployed stable boys. when the world is calm and peaceful, these men are blisters on society. they're ten times more ragged than an old, tattered flag, and they're the kind of men i have to replace the ones who bribed me. you'd think i had a hundred and fifty men who'd just come from pig farming, who eat scraps and garbage. one madman saw us on the march and told me that it looked as if i'd unloaded all the gallows and drafted all the dead bodies. no one's ever seen such a group of scarecrows. i'm not going to march through coventry with them tonight, that's for sure. they march with their legs wide apart, as though they had chains on their ankles. which makes sense, since i drafted most of them out of jails. there's only a shirt and a half in the whole group, and the half-shirt is really just two napkins sewn together and thrown over the shoulders like a cape. and the whole shirt, to tell the truth, was stolen from a tavern owner in st. alban's, or maybe that drunken innkeeper in daventry. but that doesn't matter. they'll be able to steal plenty of clothing from the hedges, where the washers hang the laundry out to dry.
nicely put., go with your son, old man., say goodbye to your old master and find your way to my house. (to attendants) give him a uniform that's a little nicer than the others. make sure it gets done.
that was nothing. there were many even more memorable feasts.
what's up, swollen jack! a "jack" was also a quilted jacket. jack! what's up, quilt?
father, go ahead. i can't get a job, can i? i can't talk well, no. (reading his own palm) if any man in italy has a palm good enough to swear on a bible with, it's me. i've got very good luck! here's my life line. it shows a few wives, fifteen wives is nothing. eleven widows and nine maids is a humble beginning for one man. it seems i'll almost drown three times, and my life will be in danger when i'm caught in bed with another man's wife! but these little lines are the escape routes i can take to get out of that one. if luck's a lady, she's good at this business. father, let's go. i'll leave the jew behind in the blink of an eye.
she's a remarkable lady, if the rumors are to be believed.
hello there, hal, you crazy boy! what in the devil's name are you doing in warwickshire? and lord westmoreland, i beg your pardon. i thought you were already at shrewsbury.
bassanio please, leonardo, think about this (he hands him a piece of paper). these things have been bought and are ready. hurry back here. i'm having dinner tonight with someone i greatly respect. go now.
from the first time antony saw her, sailing on her barge on the cydnus river river in southern turkey. cydnus river , he was hers.
you're right, sir john; it's about time i got there, and you, too. but my army's already there. the king is waiting for us, so we must march all night.
i'll do my best.
she made quite an appearance there, or else my informant invented a very flattering description of her.
don't worry about me. i'm as focused as a cat looking for cream to steal.
(to leonardo) where's your master?
i'll tell you. her barge looked like a golden throne upon the waves, burning bright with the sun's reflections. the rear deck was covered with hammered gold. the sails were dyed purple, and they were perfumed so heavily that they made the air seem dizzy with love. the oars were made of silver, and the oarsmen rowed in time to flute music. as the oars beat the water, the waves seemed to speed up as if excited by lust. cleopatra's appearance was indescribable. as she reclined under a canopy woven from gold thread, she was more beautiful than any artist's idealized portrait of the goddess venus. pretty, cupid-like boys stood on either side of her, smiling and cooling her with multicolored fans, which seemed to fan the flames in her cheeks even as they cooled them, undoing what they did.
steal cream is right, you've stolen so much that it's turned you into butter. but tell me, jack, whose soldiers are those?
he's walking over there, sir.
how excellent for antony!
mine, hal, mine.
signor bassanio!
her ladies-in-waiting, like nereides sea nymphs nereides , or mermaids, tended to cleopatra as she watched them, and their graceful movements added to the beauty of the scene. it seemed as if a mermaid were steering. the silken sails and ropes swelled in the wind, expertly handled by the ladies' soft hands. people on the wharves could smell exotic perfume wafting from the barge as it passed them. all the people came out to see her, and antony, waiting for her in the marketplace, was left alone. even the air itself would have gone to look at cleopatra, if that wouldn't have caused an unnatural vacuum in the atmosphere.
i never saw such pitiful-looking losers.
gratiano!
extraordinary egyptian!
now, now: they're good enough to die. cannon fodder, cannon fodder, they'll fill a mass grave as well as better men would. they're just men, just men.
i have a favor to ask.
when she landed at the port, antony sent an invitation for her to come to supper. she replied by saying that it would be better for him to be her guest instead. our courteous antony, who has never said "no" to any woman, after spending plenty of time being groomed by the barber, goes to the feast. for that simple meal, he paid with his heart, even though it was only his eyes that were satisfied.
maybe so, sir john, but i think they look terribly poor and bare; they look like beggars.
anything.
royal seductress! she lured julius caesar into her bed, he made love to her, and she bore his child their son, caesarion his child .
well, i don't know where they got their poverty, but their bareness, or their bare-bonedness, well, they didn't get that from me.
don't say no. let me go with you to belmont.
i saw her once hop forty feet down the street. when she stopped she was so out of breath that she was panting. her beauty made even that weakness seem perfect, and even in her breathlessness she seemed to pour out breath.
that's for sure. unless you think several inches of fat over your ribs makes you "bare-boned." but hurry up, sirrah: percy is already at the battlefield.
well, if you have to go, you have to go. but listen to me, gratiano. sometimes you get a bit too wild, and you let your voice get a bit loud and rude. these things look good on you, of course, and to people like you and me there's nothing wrong with it. but in places where people don't know you, your behavior might seem too wild. please, try to act a little more serious, or the people in belmont will get the wrong impression about me, and your wildness will make me blow my chance with portia.
now antony has to leave her completely.
what, has the king already made camp?
listen, signor bassanio, there's nothing to worry about. i'll be solemn-looking, i'll talk with respect, and i'll only swear once in a while. i'll carry prayer books in my pocket and look sweet, even more. while grace is being said, i'll be modest and say "amen", i'll watch my manners as if i'm trying to please my grandma. if i don't do all this, never trust me again.
he'll never leave her. age won't wither her, and her charms are so varied that she never grows boring. with other women, the more familiar you grow with them the less appealing they become. cleopatra, on the other hand, makes you desire her the more you see her. even her worst faults are charming, and holy priests bless her even when she acts the slut.
he has, sir john: i'm afraid we may be too late.
well, we'll see how you act.
if beauty, wisdom, and modesty can settle antony's restless heart, octavia will be the best thing that has ever happened to him.
well, a hungry guest arrives early for a feast, but a poor soldier arrives late to a battle.
okay, but tonight doesn't count. you can't judge me based on what i do tonight.
let's go. good enobarbus, consider yourself my guest as long as you're here.
we'll fight him tonight.
no, it'd be a shame for you to act serious tonight. i'd rather see you having fun, because we have friends coming who want to have fun. anyway, i have to say goodbye to you now. i've got some business to take care of.
i humbly thank you.
we can't do that.
i have to join lorenzo and the others, but we'll visit you at supper time.
(to octavia ) there will be times when my duties and responsibilities take me away from you.
then you're giving him the advantage.
i'm sorry you're leaving my father like this. it's hell in our house, and you helped cheer it up, like a funny devil. but goodbye. here's a ducat for you. you'll soon be meeting lorenzo at supper; he'll be a guest of your new master. give him this letter. (gives launcelot a letter) do it secretly. goodbye. i don't want my father to see me talking to you.
and i will spend our time apart on my knees, praying for you.
not in the least.
goodbye. my tears show you my feelings, my beautiful pagan, my sweet jew! i'm sure some christian will resort to trickery to get you. but goodbye. it's not manly to cry. goodbye.
(to caesar ) good night, sir. my octavia, don't believe everything you hear about me. i haven't always lived a conventional life, but the future will be by the book. good night, dear lady. (to caesar ) good night, sir.
why do you say that? doesn't he have backup coming?
goodbye, launcelot.
good night.
so do we.
oh god, what a heinous sinner i am, being ashamed to be my father's child! but i need to remember i'm related to him by blood, not behavior. oh lorenzo, if you keep your promise to me, i'll end this agony by becoming a christian and marrying you.
now, sirrah term of address for a person of lower status sirrah , i hear you wish you were back in egypt.
his is guaranteed. ours isn't.
no, we'll sneak away at supper time, disguise ourselves with masks at my house, and come back in an hour.
i wish i had never left egypt and that you had never come to egypt.
nephew, i'm telling you. don't start the fighting tonight.
but we haven't made any preparations.
tell me why, if you can.
(to hotspur ) don't, my lord.
we haven't even talked about who'll be our torchbearers.
it's a feeling, but nothing i can put into words. but you had better get back to egypt again.
you're giving poor advice, based on fear and cowardice.
the masquerade party might turn out terribly if we don't manage things carefully. i think it's better to call it off.
tell me who shall have the better luck, caesar or me?
don't slander me, douglas. i swear on my life, and i'll prove it with my life, that if i'm roused to fight through thoughtful, careful consideration, i'm just as unafraid as you, my lord, or any scotsman alive. in tomorrow's battle, we'll see which one of us is afraid.
it's only four o'clock now. we have two hours to get ready.
caesar. so you'd better not stay with him, antony. your guardian angel is noble, courageous, significant, and unmatched when caesar's not around. but when you are with him, your angel is weakened and easily frightened. that's why there must be space between you.
fine. or tonight.
launcelot, what's going on?
don't speak of this again.
that's enough.
(he gives lorenzo the letter) if you don't mind opening this letter, you can find out for yourself.
to none but you, only to you. you will surely lose any game you play with caesar. with his natural luck, he will beat you even against the odds. your light dulls when he is near. i repeat: your angel is afraid to inspire you when you're around him, but when he goes away it becomes brilliant again.
tonight, i say.
i recognize the handwriting. it's beautiful handwriting. and the beautiful hand that wrote this letter is whiter than the paper it's written on.
leave now. tell ventidius i want to speak with him.
come on, we can't do that. i wonder how, being the great leaders you are, you cannot see the problems we're facing. my cousin has yet to arrive with his horses, and your uncle worcester's troops only arrived today. their spirit and their bravery is asleep; their courage is dulled and tamed by the hard journey. they don't have even a quarter of their usual strength.
i bet it's a love letter!
(to himself) i'll send him to parthia. whether he's truly gifted or just lucky, what the fortuneteller said is true. even the dice obey caesar. when we compete in sports, my skill is defeated by his luck. if we pick numbers in a lottery, he wins. his roosters always beat mine at the cockfights. his quails beat mine, even against the odds, when mine have the advantage. i'll return to egypt. though i've made this marriage to keep peace with caesar, my pleasure remains in the east, with cleopatra.
the enemy's horses are tired from the journey as well. the majority of ours are well-rested.
(to lorenzo) may i be excused, sir?
come here, ventidius. you must go to parthia. your authorization is ready. come with me and i'll get it for you.
but the king has more men then we do. for god's sake, nephew, wait until everyone arrives.
where are you going?
don't spend any more time here. go tell your generals to hurry their preparations.
i'm here with a generous offer from the king, if you'll listen to me and treat me with respect.
to invite my former boss, the jew, to dine tonight with my new master, the christian.
sir, we'll follow as soon as mark antony kisses octavia good-bye.
welcome, sir walter blunt. i wish to god you were on our side. many of us think very highly of you, though we begrudge you your honor and reputation, since you fight on the enemy's side.
(he gives launcelot money) hold on, take this. tell jessica i won't fail her. tell her in private., go, gentlemen, get ready for the masquerade tonight. i have someone who can be my torchbearer.
good-bye then, until the time i see you dressed in your battle gear, which will suit you both very well.
and i hope to god i always will, so long as you overstep the bounds of allegiance and duty by standing against the anointed king. but let me get to the point. the king sent me to learn your complaints, and to find out why you are stirring up warfare in a time of peace, and spreading violent dissent throughout his loyal country. if the king has somehow overlooked one of your deserving acts, which, he admits, there are many, he asks you to name your complaints. he'll meet your demands, with interest, as quickly as possible, and grant an absolute pardon to you and everyone who has followed your mistaken lead.
all right, i'll go get things ready.
according to my reckoning, we'll get to mt. misena before you, lepidus.
that's kind of the king. we know all too well about the promises the king makes, and the ways he keeps his word. my father, my uncle, and i put that crown on his head. and when he had barely twenty-six men supporting him, when no one cared about him, when he was wretched and low, a poor, forsaken criminal trying to sneak home, my father welcomed him. when he swore an oath to god, weeping and speaking passionately, that he had come back to england only to reclaim his father's title and make peace with king richard, my father took pity on him, swore to help him and did so. when the country's most important men saw that northumberland was on his side, they came to see henry, and bowed down to him. they met him in towns, cities, villages; they waited for him on bridges, stood in the streets, lay gifts before him, swore their loyalty, pledged the support of their sons, followed him like servants. soon enough, he began to understand his power. he overstepped the promise he'd made to my father at ravenspurgh, when his blood was still humble. and then, suddenly, he took it upon himself to reform certain laws and strict decrees that weighed too heavily on the kingdom. he made angry speeches about the abuses we were suffering, and seemed to weep over the country's problems. and with this face, this mask of righteousness, he won everyone's hearts. then he went even further, and cut off the heads of all of richard's deputies, who stayed behind to run the country while richard was waging war in ireland.
me too.
you're taking a shorter route. my plans take me a roundabout way. you'll get there two days before me.
i didn't come here to listen to this.
meet me and gratiano at his house in about an hour.
good luck, sir.
then i'll get to the point. a little while later, he overthrew king richard. soon after that, he killed him. and right after that, he raised taxes on everyone. to make matters worse, he allowed his kinsman mortimer, who by rights ought to be the king, to be imprisoned in wales, and remain there without ransom. he tried to use my victories to disgrace me, and tried to trap me with spies. he dismissed my uncle from his royal council, threw my father out of the royal court, broke promise after promise, and committed crime after crime. in conclusion, he forced us to raise this army for our own safety, and to question his claim on the crown, which we believe is too flimsy to stand.
it's good we're doing this.
farewell.
should i bring this answer to the king?
wasn't that letter from jessica?
play me some music. music feeds the melancholy moods of us lovers.
no, sir walter. we'll stand down for a while. go to the king. my uncle will bring him our demands early in the morning, provided that you arrange for a guarantee that he'll be allowed to return safely. and so, farewell.
i have to tell you everything. she's told me how i can get her out of her father's house. she's also told me what gold and jewels she owns, and she's described the page's a page is a young male servant. page's uniform she's keeping to wear as a disguise. if her father ever goes to heaven, it'll be because his daughter's so good. she'll never be punished with bad luck, unless it's because her father is an unbelieving jew. come with me. (gives gratiano the letter) you can look this letter over as you go. beautiful jessica will be my torchbearer.
musicians, come in!
i wish you would accept the king's offer of kindness and love.
well, you'll see it with your own eyes. you'll see the difference between working for shylock and working for bassanio., (calling for his daughter) jessica!, you won't eat like a pig like you used to do at my place., jessica!, and sleep, and snore, and wear your clothes out., jessica, i'm calling you!
never mind. let's play billiards. play with me, charmian.
perhaps we will.
jessica!
my arm is sore. you'll have a better game with mardian.
i pray to god you do.
who asked you to call her? i'm not asking you to call her.
playing with a eunuch is the same as playing with a woman. will you play with me, sir?
hurry, sir michael, bring this sealed letter as fast as you can to the lord marshal. bring this one to scroop, and all the rest to whom they are addressed. if you knew how important they were, you would hurry.
you always loved to tell me i couldn't do anything without being told.
i'll do my best, madam.
my good lord, i can guess what they say.
did you call me? do you need something?
when a person tries in good faith, even if he fails he cannot be blamed. i don't want to play now. give me my fishing rod. we'll go to the river. with my music playing in the background, i'll lure fish. my hook will go through their slimy jaws and as i pull them up i'll imagine each one is antony. i'll say, "aha! i caught you!"
i'm sure you can. tomorrow, sir michael, ten thousand men will try their luck. i'm told that at shrewsbury, the king, with a huge and quickly assembled army, will fight harry percy. i'm afraid, michael, that without northumberland, whose army was the largest of all, and without owen glendower, who was also being counted on but is absent because his horoscope told him to stay away, i'm afraid that percy's army will be too weak to fight the king right now.
i've been invited to supper, jessica. here are my keys., but why should i go? i wasn't invited because they like me. they're just flattering me. but i'll go out of spite, to feed off the wasteful christian., jessica, my girl, watch the house. i don't feel like going. things aren't going my way right now. i know because i dreamed of money bags last night.
it was funny when you and antony bet on who could catch the first fish. you had a diver put a salted fish on his hook. he was so excited as he hurried to pull it in!
don't worry, sir. douglas and mortimer are there.
please go, sir. my new master is expecting your approach.
that time? oh, there were so many fun times. i would play some trick on him and laugh until he lost his patience. then, that night, i would laugh with him while we made love until he was patient again. then by nine in the morning i would have him so drunk i could dress him in my clothes while i wore the sword he used at the famous battle of philippi.
no, mortimer isn't there.
and i'm expecting his reproach.
oh! news from italy! cram your good news into my ears. it's been so long since i've heard from him.
but mordake is there, and vernon, and harry percy, and worcester and a slew of brave warriors and excellent men.
and they've been plotting things together. i'm not saying you'll get a masquerade party, but if you do, i predicted it. i knew there would be a masquerade when i got that bad omen of a bloody nose last easter monday, at six in the morning, four years after i got the same kind of bloody nose on ash wednesday, in the afternoon.
madam, madam, 
that's correct. but the king has pulled together the best men in the country: the prince of wales, lord john of lancaster, the noble westmoreland, warlike blunt, and many other acquaintances and valuable men of good reputation, with great skill in battle.
what, there's going to be a masquerade? listen to me, jessica, lock my doors up, and when you hear the drum and the nasty squealing of the flute, don't climb up to the windows. don't stick your head out into the public street to stare at the christian fools with painted faces. block up my house's ears, i mean the windows. don't let the noise of shallow fools enter my serious house. i swear, i'm in no mood to go out to dinner tonight, but i'll go anyway., launcelot, go tell them i'll come.
antony's dead! if you say that, you bastard, you'll kill your queen. if you say he's healthy and free, i'll give you money and you may kiss my hand. kings have trembled to kiss this hand.
no doubt they will face great opposition.
i'll go ahead of you, sir. (to jessica) mistress, be on the lookout when you're staring out the window. a christian's coming who'll be worth a jewess's glance.
let me say first, madam, that he is well.
i hope so, but still i'm afraid. now hurry, sir michael, to prevent an absolute disaster. for if percy doesn't prevail, the king will come after us before he disbands his army. he's heard that we're part of the rebellion, so we'd be wise to prepare against him. now hurry. i have to go write to more friends. farewell, sir michael.
what did that gentile fool say to you, hmmm?
well then, here's more money for you. but you know, sirrah, we customarily say that the dead are well. if that's what you mean, i'll melt this gold and pour it down your throat that speaks these hateful words.
how bloody the sun looks as it peers over that massive hill. the day looks pale, it must be sick to see the sun in such a mood.
he said "goodbye, madam," and nothing else.
good madam, let me speak.
the southern wind is playing its trumpet, to announce to the world what the sun means. and judging by the whistling leaves, it's going to be a stormy, windy day.
the fool's nice enough, but he's such a huge eater, and slow as a snail when he works. he sleeps all day like a cat. bees that don't work can't stay in my hive, so i'm letting him go, handing him off so he can waste money for his new boss, the man who borrowed money from me. anyway, jessica, go inside. i might come back soon. do as i told you. shut the doors after you. as the saying goes, lock things up, and you'll get to keep them.
all right, i will. but you don't look as if you bring good news. if antony is free and healthy, you shouldn't wear such a sour face while bringing such good news. if he's not well, you should arrive like a fury the furies were mythological figures who punished those who broke either natural or moral laws fury with snakes for hair, not in the shape of a normal man.
then let it take the losers' side. to winners, nothing seems unpleasant.
goodbye. if luck's with me, i'll lose a father, and you'll lose a daughter.
do you want to hear my news?
hello there, my lord of worcester! it isn't right that you and i are meeting under these circumstances. you have betrayed my trust. you forced me to put aside my comfortable peacetime clothing and instead have made me crush my old body into hard, military armor. that isn't right, sir, that isn't right. what do you have to say about it? will you untie this ill-tempered knot of hateful war? will you return to my loyalty? when you circled me, your king, in your obedient orbit, you shone beautifully and naturally. now you blaze like a comet: a fearful omen, and a signal that evil will be released into the future.
this is the roof under which lorenzo said to meet him.
i have half a mind to hit you before you speak again. but if antony is alive, healthy, friendly with caesar, and not caesar's prisoner, i'll shower you with gold and pearls.
listen, my lord. for me, i would love nothing more than to spend my old age in peace and quiet. i protest: i did not seek out this day of aggression.
he's late.
madam, he's well.
you did not seek it? then how did it come here?
yes, and that's surprising, because lovers are usually early.
that's well spoken.
rebellion was standing in front of him, and he bumped into it.
yes, for new lovers time passes ten times faster than for couples who've been married forever.
and he's friendly with caesar.
quiet, you chatterer, quiet!
that's always true. who gets up from a meal with the same appetite he had when he sat down? can any horse retrace his footsteps with the same energy he had when he walked them the first time? we chase everything in life more excitedly than we actually enjoy it when we get it. it's like when a ship sails out of the harbor with all its flags waving, gently pushed by the wind. when that ship returns, her timber is all weather-beaten and her sails are ragged. that same wind makes the ship thin and poor.
you are an honest man.
(to the king) your highness chose to turn your back on me and my family. i must remind you, sir, that we were your first and dearest friends. for you, i quit my position under richard, and ran day and night to meet you on the road and kiss your hand. at that time, you were far less powerful than i was. but my brother, his son, and i brought you home and ignored the danger. at doncaster you swore an oath to us that you were not going to challenge the king; all you wanted was your late father's estate, the dukedom of lancaster, and in this we promised to help you. but soon, good luck began to pour on you like rain, and a flood of greatness fell upon you. you had a swarm of advantages: you had our assistance; and the king had been away so long; and the country was suffering under violence; and you seemed to have been so grievously wronged; and difficult winds were keeping
here comes lorenzo. we'll talk about this later.
caesar and he are better friends than ever.
richard so long in those unlucky irish wars, people thought he was dead. you seized the opportunity, and used the general feeling to your advantage. you forgot the oath you swore to us at doncaster. we nourished you, but you used us, like the cuckoo bird uses the sparrow: you settled in our nest, ate our food, and as you grew, you crowded us out. we loved you, but we couldn't even come near you, for fear that you'd swallow us up. for our own safety, we were forced to run away and secretly raise this army. and now we stand with it, armed with powers that you yourself have caused to stand against you. you treated us poorly, you looked at us with anger, and you broke the faith and trust you swore to us when you were younger.
my dear friends, thanks for your patience. i had business that made me late. when you have to steal your own wives some day, i'll wait for you just as long. come over here. my future father-in-law, the jew, lives here., hey! who's in there?
i'm going to make you a rich man.
you've said all this already. you've announced it in marketplaces, given sermons on it in churches. you've tried to make rebellion look pleasant in the eyes of all the fickle turncoats and poor malcontents, who laugh and clap eagerly at the news that a revolution is coming. but rebellion always trades in these kinds of thin excuses, and never lacks angry beggars, desperate for mayhem and chaos.
who are you? tell me so i can be sure, though i swear i recognize your voice.
but yet, madam, 
both our armies are full of men who will make the ultimate sacrifice in this battle, once it starts. tell your nephew that the prince of wales joins the whole world
i'm lorenzo, your love.
i don't like the sound of "but yet." it reverses all the good that came before it. damn those words, "but yet!" "but yet" is like a jailer about to bring out some horrible criminal. please, my friend, give me all the news, both good and bad, at the same time. you say he's friendly with caesar, healthy, and free.
in praising henry percy. except for his current endeavor, i don't think there's a man alive who is braver, more heroic, more daring, or more bold. as for me, i'm ashamed to admit that i've shirked my responsibilities. i hear that he agrees with me on that point. and yet, and i say this in front of my father, in order to avoid casualties on both sides, i want to challenge him in hand-to-hand combat. and i'm content to admit that, based on his good name and reputation, he's the favorite to win.
lorenzo, that's for sure, and i'm also sure you're my love, who else do i love so much? and now who but you knows whether i'm yours?
i didn't say free, madam. no, i didn't say that. he's bound to octavia.
prince of wales, i'd support that idea, except that there are countless reasons why i shouldn't. no, worcester, no. i love my subjects, even those who have mistakenly followed your nephew's lead. if they accept our pardon, then he, you, and they will all be my friends again, and i'll be theirs. tell your nephew this, and bring back his answer. but if he doesn't surrender, he will be rebuked and harshly punished. so, be gone. i don't want to hear anymore from you now. i offer a fair deal; i advise you to accept it.
as god is my witness, you know you're mine.
for what favor?
he won't accept. i'll bet my life on it. douglas and hotspur are convinced that they could take on the whole world together.
here, catch this box. it'll be worth your while. i'm glad it's nighttime and you can't see me. i'm ashamed of my disguise. but love is blind, and lovers can't see the silly things they do around each other. if they could, cupid himself would be embarassed to see me dressed up as a boy.
for the favor of sleeping in her bed.
then everyone get to their battalions. as soon as they respond, we'll attack. may god be with us. our cause is just!
come down here. you have to be my torchbearer for the masquerade.
i'm sick, charmian.
hal, if you see me fall in battle, stand over me, like this. it would be an act of friendship.
what, i have to hold a candle up so people can see what i'm doing? the truth is, i'm behaving like a loose woman. the torchbearer is supposed to bring light and love, but i should be hidden away in the dark.
he's married to octavia, madam.
only a giant could do you that friendship. say your prayers, and farewell.
you're hidden away, sweetheart, dressed up like a boy. come on quickly. time flies at night, and we're late for bassanio's feast.
may you die of the worst disease!
i wish it were bedtime, hal, and everything were okay.
i'll lock up the doors, grab some more ducats, and be with you right away.
good madam, be patient.
but you owe god a death.
my god, she can't be a jew, she's too nice!
what did you say to me?
it's not due yet. i'd hate to pay him before the due date. why should i be so eager to pay him before he even asks for it? well, it doesn't matter: honor spurs me on. yeah, but what if honor spurs me off once i'm on, and picks me out to die? what happens then? can honor set a broken leg? no. or an arm? no. can it make a wound stop hurting? no. honor can't perform surgery, then? no. what is honor? a word. what is in that word, "honor?" what is that "honor?" air. quite a bargain! who has it? a guy who died last wednesday. does he feel it? no. does he hear it? no. it can't be detected, then? right, not by the dead, anyway. but won't it live with the living? no. why? slander won't allow it. that's why i don't want any part of it. honor is nothing more than a gravestone, and that concludes my catechism catechism = a series of questions and answers that tests students' understanding of christian principles catechism .
god, i'm crazy about her. she's wise, if i'm judging her right. she's beautiful, if my eyes can see. and she's loyal, as she has proven. and as long as she's herself, wise, beautiful, and faithful, she'll always have a place in my heart.
get out, you horrible bastard, or i'll gouge out your eyes. i'll scalp you.
oh no, sir richard, my nephew cannot be told about the generous and kind offer the king made.
ah, you're here?, come on, gentlemen, let's go! our masquerade mates are waiting for us.
i'll have you whipped with wire and soaked in brine like a pickle, making your pain linger.
but he should be told.
who's there?
gracious madam, i only brought the news. i didn't make the match.
it will be the end of all of us! there is absolutely no way that the king will keep his word and trust us again. he will always be wary of us. he'll find other reasons to punish us for this rebellion. for the rest of our lives he and his loyalists will look on us with suspicion. treason is like a fox: you can tame it, care for it, and put it in a cage, but it will always have the wild instincts it inherited from its ancestors. no matter how we look, sad or happy, people will interpret our looks in the worst possible light. we'll be like oxen in a stall: the better they're fed, the closer they are to being slaughtered. my nephew's disloyalty might be forgiven: his young age and hot temper will excuse it. plus, his nickname gives him permission: hotspur the harebrain, always flaring up. all his offenses will be blamed on me and his father. after all, we encouraged him, and since we taught him to be angry at the king, we'll pay for it. so cousin, don't by any means let harry know what the king offered.
signor antonio?
if you say it isn't true, i'll give you a province and make you rich. the blows i gave you already will make up for your upsetting me. and on top of that i'll give you whatever you ask for.
tell him what you want, and i'll back you up.
gratiano, where is everybody? it's nine o'clock! our friends are all waiting for you. there's no masquerade tonight. the wind is blowing right, so bassanio's going onboard immediately. i've sent twenty people to look for you.
he's married, madam.
here comes your nephew.
i'm glad. i want to head out tonight.
rogue, you've lived too long!
my uncle's back. free westmoreland, his hostage. uncle, what's happening?
(to servant) go open the curtains and show the different boxes to the prince.
no way, then, i'll run. what's the matter with you, madam? i haven't done anything to you.
the king will beckon you to battle shortly.
a curtain is drawn revealing showing three caskets: one gold, one silver, and one lead.
good madam, restrain yourself. the man hasn't done anything wrong.
have westmoreland deliver your message of defiance.
(to morocco) now make your choice.
even innocents cannot always escape disaster. may egypt drown in the nile and all good creatures turn into poisonous snakes. call that servant back. even though i'm mad, i won't bite him. call him!
douglas, go tell him to do that.
the first one, the gold one, has an inscription that says, "he who chooses me will get what many men want." the second one, the silver one, says, "he who chooses me will get what he deserves." and this third one is made of dull lead. it has a blunt warning that says, "he who chooses me must give and risk all he has." how will i know if i chose the right one?
he's afraid to come in.
indeed, i will, and gladly.
one of them contains my picture. if you choose that one, i'm yours, along with the picture.
i won't hurt him. my hands are tainted if they hit an inferior, especially since i myself am the cause of my own distress.
the king doesn't appear willing to forgive us.
i wish some god could help me choose! let me see. i'll look over the inscriptions again. what does the lead box say? "he who chooses me must give and risk all he has." must give everything, for what? for lead? risk everything for lead? this box is too threatening. men who risk everything hope to make profits. a golden mind doesn't bend down to choose something worthless. so i won't give or risk anything for lead. what does the silver one say?
come here, sir. it may be honest, but it's never wise to bring bad news. you can give good news in many ways, but let bad news interpret itself as you tell it.
did you ask him to? god forbid!
"he who chooses me will get as much as he deserves." as much as he deserves, wait a minute there, morocco, and consider your own value with a level head. if your reputation is trustworthy, you deserve a lot, though maybe not enough to include this lady. but fearing i don't deserve her is a way of underestimating myself. as much as i deserve, i deserve portia! by birth i deserve her. in terms of wealth, talents, and upbringing, and especially love, i deserve her. what if i went no further and chose this one? but let's see once more what the gold one says: "he who chooses me will get what many men want." that's portia! the whole world wants her. they come from the four corners of the earth to kiss this shrine and see this living, breathing saint. princes travel across deserts and the vast wilderness of arabia to come see the beautiful portia. the wide ocean doesn't prevent them from coming to see her, they travel across it as if it were a little stream. one of these three boxes contains her lovely picture. could the lead one contain it? no, it'd be a sin to think such a low thought. lead's too crass to hold her. is she enclosed in silver, which is ten times less valuable than gold? oh, what a sinful thought! nobody ever set a gem like her in a worse setting than gold. they have a coin in england stamped with the figure of an angel, but that's just engraved on the surface.
i've only done my duty.
i politely told him what our issues were. i accused him of breaking his promise to us, and here's how he answered: he lied about the fact that he lied. he called us rebels, traitors, and said he'd punish us with his mighty army.
here an angel's lying in a golden bed., give me the key. i will choose this one and try my chances.
is he married? i can't hate you any more than i already do if you repeat that he is.
get your weapons, gentlemen, get your weapons! i sent king henry a brave and defiant message, and westmoreland, who was our hostage, will deliver it. this will surely bring the battle on immediately.
(she hands him a key) there, take it, prince. and if my picture's in there, then i'm yours.
he's married, madam.
the prince of wales stepped forward, nephew, and challenged you to a one-on-one fight.
damn it! what's this? it's a skull with a scroll in its empty eye socket. i'll read it aloud. (he reads) "all that glitters is not gold, you've often heard that said. many men have sold their souls just to view my shiny surface. but gilded tombs contain worms. if you'd been as wise as you were bold, with an old man's mature judgment, you wouldn't have had to read this scroll. so goodbye, you lost your chance." lost my chance indeed! so goodbye hope, and hello despair. portia, goodbye to you. my heart's too sad for long goodbyes. losers always leave quickly.
may the gods destroy you! do you maintain the same story?
oh, i wish the whole battle were between us, and that the only people who would lose their breath today would be me and harry monmouth! monmouth is the town in wales where hal was born. monmouth! tell me, tell me, what was the tone of his challenge? did he show contempt for me?
good riddance!, close the curtains and leave., i hope everyone who looks like him will make the same choice.
do you want me to lie, madam?
no, i swear; i never heard a challenge issued more gracefully. it was like a brother asking a brother to a little friendly competition. he paid you all due respect, and he summed up your good qualities in the most princely language. he spoke of how deserving you are, as though he were your biographer. he claimed you were even above praise, for simple praise could never measure up to your true merits. and he gave a modest account of himself, as well, which made him seem like a true prince indeed. he berated himself for having behaved wildly, but he said this so gracefully that he sounded like a teacher giving a lesson and a student learning one at the same time. there he stopped, but let me say this: if he survives this battle, then england never had a sweeter hope, nor one so misunderstood in his recklessness.
i saw bassanio sail away, and gratiano went with him. i'm sure lorenzo isn't on their ship.
oh, i wish you had lied, even if it meant half my kingdom would be submerged and filled with snakes. go, get out! even if you were as handsome as narcissus mythical boy who was so beautiful that he drowned himself while trying to embrace his own reflection narcissus , your face would be ugly to me. is he really married?
i think you've been charmed by his foolishness. i've never heard of a prince who was so wild and loose. but however he wants to seem, before night falls i will embrace him with these soldier's arms, and he will tremble at my affection. get ready, get ready quickly! and friends, partners, soldiers, take a moment to think for yourselves about what you have to do. i'm not a good enough speaker to motivate you.
that wicked jew got the duke to listen to his complaints. the duke went with him to search bassanio's ship.
i beg your highness' pardon.
my lord, i have some letters for you.
he got there too late. the ship was already sailing. but once he got there, the duke learned that lorenzo and his lover jessica were together in a gondola. in any case, antonio assured the duke they weren't with bassanio on his ship.
is he really married?
i can't read them now. oh, gentlemen, life is short. but if you spend that brief time shamefully, you are wasting your time: even if life lasted only an hour, it would still be too long. if we live, it will be in triumph over kings. if we die, it will be a glorious death, since princes will die with us. as for our consciences, our battle is fair: it's right to bear arms when the cause is just.
i've never heard such confused emotions as what that jew dog was shouting in the streets. "my daughter, oh my ducats, oh my daughter! ran off with a christian! oh my christian ducats! justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter, a sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats, of double ducats, stolen from me by my daughter, and jewels, two stones, two rich and precious stones, stolen by my daughter! justice, find the girl! she has the stones on her, and the ducats."
please don't be offended that i don't want to offend you any more. it's not fair to punish me for something you make me do. he's married to octavia.
my lord, get ready. the king has launched his attack.
i know, all the boys in venice are following him, yelling, "his stones, his daughter, and his ducats!"
it's too bad that antony's fault should make you look like a jerk. you didn't have anything to do with it. go away. the merchandise you bring from rome is too expensive for me. let it stay in your inventory until it bankrupts you.
i thank him for cutting off my speech, since i have no talent for speaking. only one more thing: each man should do his best, and with that i will draw my sword. on this dangerous day, i intend to stain it with the best blood i can find. "hope is my comfort!" percy! let's go! sound all the imposing instruments of battle, and let's embrace one another to the tune of that music. for, by heaven, some of us will never be able to do that again.
i hope antonio repays his loan on time, or he'll suffer for this.
be patient, your highness.
what is your name, you, who are attacking me like this? what honor do you think you'll get by fighting me?
that's a good point. i spoke with a frenchman yesterday who said that a venetian ship loaded with treasure was wrecked in the english channel. i thought about antonio when he told me. i silently hoped it wasn't his ship.
when i have praised antony, i've disparaged caesar.
my name is douglas, and i'm haunting you in this battle because they tell me you are a king.
you should tell antonio what you hear, but don't do it suddenly, because it might upset him.
many times, madam.
they tell you the truth.
there's no nicer guy in the whole world. i saw bassanio and antonio say goodbye. bassanio told him he'd try to hurry back. antonio answered "don't rush. don't do a sloppy job for my sake, bassanio. stay until everything is finished. as for the jew's contract, don't let it be a factor in your plans. be happy and concentrate your thoughts on love and how to win your love." then his eyes started tearing up. he turned his face away. then he shook bassanio's hand affectionately, and they separated.
i'm being repaid for that now. help me out of here. i feel faint. oh, iras, charmian! it doesn't matter. good alexas, go ask that fellow to describe octavia. how old is she? what kind of disposition does she have? don't let him leave out the color of her hair. bring me his answers quickly.
today, lord stafford paid for resembling you so well, for instead of you, king harry, my sword killed him. now it will kill you, unless you surrender as my prisoner.
i think he only loves life because of bassanio. let's go find him and cheer him up.
let antony be purged from my life forever, but no, don't let him, charmian. even though half of him is like a gorgon the gorgons were mythical monsters whose gaze turned humans to stone gorgon , the other half is like mars. (to mardian ) ask alexas to also ask him how tall she is. feel sorry for me, charmian, but don't talk to me. help me get to my bedroom.
i was not born to surrender, you arrogant scotsman. you're about to see a king take revenge for stafford's death.
yes, let's do that.
i have your hostages and you have mine. let's talk before we fight. in order to conduct negotiations in safety, warring sides exchanged important persons and held the hostages until negotiations were complete. i have your hostages and you have mine. let's talk before we fight.
oh, douglas! if you'd fought like this at holmedon, i would never have been able to beat you.
hurry, hurry, close the curtain quick. the prince of arragon has taken his oath, and he's coming to make his choice now.
it's proper that we speak first, which is why we sent our proposals ahead of us for your consideration. if you've had time to think over these points, let us know whether they will relieve your frustration. if yes, then a lot of brave young men can return to sicily who would otherwise die here.
it's over, we've won: here's the king, dead.
look, here are the boxes, prince. if you choose the one that contains my picture, we'll be married right away. but if you fail, you have to leave immediately. no pleas will be allowed.
i address the three of you, the sole rulers of this world and the main arbiters of the gods' will. i don't know why my father's death shouldn't be avenged, since he has a son and friends to do it. you avenged julius caesar's death at philippi, where his ghost haunted his killer, brutus. why did cassius conspire against caesar? and why did the honorable, well-intentioned brutus and the others, men devoted to the ideal of freedom, assassinate caesar? they didn't want one man to be king in rome. and that's why i've built my navy, which is so huge that the weight of the ships makes the sea foam with anger. i will punish rome for her ingratitude toward my noble father.
where?
i swore i'd do three things. first, i can never tell anyone what box i choose. second, if i choose the wrong box, i'll never propose marriage for the rest of my life. third, if i pick the wrong box, i'll leave immediately.
take your time.
here.
everyone who comes to gamble on winning me has to swear to these three rules.
pompey, you cannot frighten us with your navy. we'll meet you at sea. you know that on land our army is far greater than yours.
this, douglas? no. i know this man: he was a brave knight, by the name of blunt; he is disguised as the king.
okay, i'm ready. i hope luck will give me what my heart hopes for! gold, silver, and common lead. "he who chooses me must give and risk all he has." you'd have to be more attractive for me to give or risk anything for you. what does the golden box say? hmm, let me see:
yes, on land you do outnumber me. even more since you annexed my father's house and lands. but since, like the cuckoo cuckoo birds lay their eggs in other birds' nests. like the cuckoo , you don't build anything for yourself, live in those lands as long as you can.
(to blunt) wherever your soul is off to now, let it carry the name of fool! you paid too much for that borrowed title. why did you tell me you were a king?
"he who chooses me will get what many men want." what many men want, that "many" could mean that most people are fools and choose by whatever is flashy. they don't go beyond what their eyes see. they don't bother to find out what's on the inside. just like those birds called martins who build their nests on the outside of walls, people pay too much attention to what's on the outside. so i won't choose what many men desire, because i won't jump on the bandwagon and include myself with the whole crude population. so i guess it's you, you silver treasure house. tell me once more what you say. "he who chooses me will get what he deserves." that's nicely put, because who's going to cheat luck and get more than he deserves? no one should have an honor he doesn't deserve. oh, wouldn't it be great if property, rank, official positions, and other honors were earned only by merit, not by corruption? there wouldn't be too many important men then. how many people who are humble now would be great then? how many people who give orders now would have to take orders? how many noblemen would be weeded out and would become peasants? and how many common people would suddenly shine with nobility? well, let me get back to my choice. "he who chooses me will get what he deserves." i'll assume i deserve the very best., give me a key for this one. i'll unlock my fate here in a second.
to get back to the matter at hand, what do you think of our proposal?
the king has many men on the battlefield disguised in his uniform.
you thought about it too long, considering what you found there.
that's the point.
now, i swear on my sword, i'll kill all his uniforms! i'll murder every item of his clothing, one piece at a time, until i find the king himself.
what's this? a picture of an idiot holding a scroll up for me to read! i'll read it., it looks so unlike portia! this outcome isn't what i hoped for, or what i deserve. "the one who chooses me will get what he deserves"! didn't i deserve anything more than a fool's head? is this my prize? don't i deserve more than this?
don't let us talk you into anything, but consider carefully the value of our offers.
get going! our side looks like it will win today.
judging what you deserve is one thing. offending you is something very different, so i'll keep my mouth shut.
and consider the possible consequences of fighting against us, in the hopes of gaining a greater fortune.
i could always escape shot-free escape shot-free = leave without paying the bill escape shot-free in london, but i'm scared of getting shot out here. here, you take it on the head. wait a minute, who's this? sir walter blunt! there's honor for you, but no vanity! i'm as hot as molten lead, and as heavy, too; so god keep the lead out of me. i don't need any lead bullets in my belly, my own guts are heavy enough. my army of ragged bums has been massacred. not even three of my hundred-fifty troops are still alive, and the ones who are have run away, to panhandle in the streets. who's coming?
what does this say? (he reads) "this box was tested in the fire seven times. the person who never makes a wrong choice has wisdom that will stand the test. some people kiss shadows. they only feel the shadow of joy. there are fools out there with silver hair and silver coins. this choice was as foolish as they are. take whatever wife you want to bed with you, you'll have a fool's head forever. so go away. you're done here." the longer i stay, the more foolish i look. i came here with a fool's head on my shoulders and now i'm leaving with two., goodbye, sweet lady. i'll keep my oath and patiently suffer through my anger.
you have offered me the lands of sicily and sardinia. in return, i must clear the sea of pirates and send tributes of wheat to rome. if i agree to this, we may leave unharmed, with our shields undented.
what, are you standing here doing nothing? give me your sword. many good men are lying cold and dead on the ground, with the enemy's horses galloping over them. their deaths have not been revenged. come, give me your sword.
these men are like moths, drawn to these boxes as if they were flames. this is how the candle burned the moth. oh, these fools! when they choose, they only know how to lose.
that's our offer.
oh, hal, please, give me a moment to catch my breath. no one has ever fought as heroically as i did today. i've killed percy, i've made him safe.
you know what they say. destiny chooses when you'll die and who you'll marry.
you should know that when i came here i was prepared to accept your offer. but mark antony made me somewhat angry. (to antony ) though it would be nobler to for me not to speak of this good act myself, you should know that when caesar and your brother were fighting, your mother came to sicily for refuge. i welcomed her gladly.
you're right; he's safe, and now he's coming to kill you. now please, give me your sword.
come on, close the curtain, nerissa.
(to pompey ) i heard what you did for her, pompey, and want to give you the many thanks i owe you.
no, hal, i swear to god! if percy's alive, you're not taking my sword. but you can have my gun, if you want.
where's lady portia?
let me shake your hand.
give it to me. is it in its holster?
here. how can i help you, sir?
i didn't think i would see you here.
yup. it's hot, hot; it could sack "sack" is a pun, meaning both "ransack" and a kind of white wine. sack a city. ( prince henry opens the holster and finds a bottle of white wine)
madam, a young venetian man has arrived to tell us his master is about to arrive. this lord has sent gifts. besides his nice polite greetings, his gifts are expensive. i haven't seen such a promising candidate for your love. this servant has arrived before his master the way a sweet spring day hints about a lush summer. but there's never been an april day as promising as this.
the east is very seductive. i have you to thank for my trip here; i wouldn't have left egypt otherwise, and i have benefited from it.
is this a time to joke and fool around?
please don't tell me any more. i'm almost afraid you're going to tell me he's a relative of yours, because you're going so crazy praising him. come on, nerissa, i want to go see this man who's come so courteously.
(to pompey ) you've changed since the last time i saw you.
if percy's alive, i'll pierce him. if he runs into me, fine. if he doesn't run into me, but i run into him, let him slice me like a butcher. i don't want the kind of honor sir walter has: give me life. if i manage to save my life, fine. if not, i'll have honor that i never looked for, and that'll be that.
i hope it's bassanio coming to win portia!
well, i cannot tell how my difficult life has weathered my face, but i will never let those difficulties subdue my courage.
please, harry, get out of here: you're bleeding too heavily. john of lancaster, go with him.
so, what's the news on the rialto?
it's good we had this meeting.
i won't leave, my lord, unless i am bleeding too.
well, there's a rumor that antonio had a ship carrying expensive cargo that shipwrecked in the english channel on the goodwin sands, a very dangerous sandbar. many ships have sunk there, according to rumors.
i hope it works out for the best, lepidus. so we are in agreement. please have the contract written up so we can all sign it.
i beg your highness, advance. your army will lose heart if it sees you falling back.
i hope this new rumor is a lie, like the gossiping widow's claim that she was sorry her third husband died! but it's true, i don't want to get all mushy and go on and on, but the good antonio, the honest antonio, oh, if i only had a title good enough to match his!, 
that's the next thing on the agenda.
i will. my lord of westmoreland, take him to his tent.
come on, get to the point.
we'll have celebration feasts for each other before we go our separate ways. let's draw lots to see who will host the first one.
(to prince henry) come, my lord. i'll lead you to your tent.
what are you saying? well, the point is, he's lost a ship.
i'll give the first one, pompey.
lead me, my lord? i don't need your help. god forbid that a shallow scratch could make the prince of wales retreat from a battlefield like this one, where great men are falling and being trampled upon, and rebels are triumphing in their massacres!
i hope that's all he loses.
no, antony. pick one of these lots. whether your banquet is first or last, your egyptian cooking will make it the best. i heard that julius caesar got fat from all the feasting there.
we've stopped for too long. come, westmoreland. we have work to do. for god's sake, come on!
let me say "amen" quickly, before the devil comes in and stops my prayer, because here comes the devil, disguised as a jew.
you've heard a lot.
by god, you have deceived me, lancaster. i didn't think you were that brave. before, i loved you as a brother; now, i respect you as my soulmate.
how's it going, shylock? what's the news among the merchants?
i mean well, sir.
he had percy cornered, and he carried himself more bravely than i would have expected of such a young warrior.
you knew, no one knew, no one knew as well as you did, about my daughter's plans to run away.
i'm sure you do.
oh, this boy lends us all courage!
that's true. i even knew the tailor who made the disguise she wore when she ran off.
i've heard a lot more. i heard that apollodorus carried, 
another king! the more of them we kill, the more of them spring up. i am douglas, and i bring death to everyone wearing that uniform. who are you, disguised as a king?
and shylock knew his daughter was ready to run away. it's natural for children to leave their parents.
(interrupting pompey ) that's enough of that. yes, it's true.
the king himself. and it pains me, douglas, that you ran into so many of my shadows, and not me. i have two sons on the field, looking for percy and for you. but, since you were lucky enough to come upon me, i'll fight you myself. defend yourself.
she'll be damned for it.
what did he carry, please?
i fear that you're another fake; and yet, you bear yourself like a king. whoever you are, you're mine, and i'll defeat you.
that's true, if the devil's judging her.
a certain queen to caesar, rolled up in a mattress according to plutarch, this is how cleopatra managed to secretly tryst with julius caesar. rolled up in a mattress .
look at me, you nasty scotsman, or you'll never look at anything again. i have the spirits of brave shirley, stafford, and blunt in me. it is the prince of wales who threatens you, and i never make promises i cannot keep.
my own flesh and blood turned against me! a rebel!
now i know who you are. how are you, soldier?
cheer up, father. how are you? sir nicholas gawsey called for reinforcements, and so has clifton. i'm going to clifton right now.
no! your flesh still rebels solanio pretends to think shylock means he can't control his own sexual urges. flesh still rebels at your age?
i'm well, and probably will be for a while, as i hear that four feasts are being prepared.
wait, and breathe for a moment. you have redeemed your bad reputation, and show that you care something for me, by rescuing me like this.
i mean my daughter is my flesh and blood.
let me shake your hand. i've never been your enemy. i've seen you fight and envied your skill.
oh god! anyone who ever said i wished for you to die did me a terrible wrong. if i wanted that, i would have let douglas continue his attack. that would have killed you faster than any dose of poison, and it would have saved me the trouble of treachery.
you two are totally different. your flesh is more different from hers than coal is from ivory. there's more difference between your bloods than between red wine and white. but tell us, did you hear anything about antonio's loss at sea?
sir, i wouldn't say i was your friend, but i've praised you when you deserved ten times more praise than i gave.
go to clifton; i'll go to sir nicholas gawsey.
that's another bad deal i've made!, a bankrupt, a spendthrift, who now has to hide his head on the rialto, a beggar who used to look so smug in front of the other merchants. let him think about his own debt. he liked to call me a loan shark; let him think about his debt to me. he used to lend money as a favor between christians; but now, let him think about his own debt.
enjoy your frankness; it suits you. i invite you all aboard my ship. after you, my lords?
if i'm not mistaken, you're harry monmouth.
but you won't take his flesh if he can't pay. what's that good for?
show us the way, sir.
you make it sound as if i'd deny it.
i'll use it for fish bait. you can't eat human flesh, but if it feeds nothing else, it'll feed my revenge. he's insulted me and cost me half a million ducats. he's laughed at my losses, made fun of my earnings, humiliated my race, thwarted my deals, turned my friends against me, riled up my enemies, and why? because i'm a jew. doesn't a jew have eyes? doesn't a jew have hands, bodily organs, a human shape, five senses, feelings, and passions? doesn't a jew eat the same food, get hurt with the same weapons, get sick with the same diseases, get healed by the same medicine, and warm up in summer and cool off in winter just like a christian? if you prick us with a pin, don't we bleed? if you tickle us, don't we laugh? if you poison us, don't we die? and if you treat us badly, won't we try to get revenge? if we're like you in everything else, we'll resemble you in that respect. if a jew offends a christian, what's the christian's kind and gentle reaction? revenge. if a christian offends a jew, what punishment will he come up with if he follows the christian example? of course, the same thing, revenge! i'll treat you as badly as you christians taught me to, and you'll be lucky if i don't outdo my teachers.
come with me.
my name is harry percy.
(to solanio and salarino) my master antonio is at his house and would like to speak to you both.
(to himself) your father would never have agreed to this treaty, pompey. (to enobarbus ) you and i have met, sir.
why then, i'm looking at a very brave rebel by that name. i am the prince of wales, and don't think, percy, that you can share in my glory any longer. there isn't enough room for two stars in the same orbit; england cannot handle a double reign, harry percy and the prince of wales ruling at once.
we've been looking for him everywhere.
i think it was at sea.
it won't have to, harry, for the time has come for one of us to die. i only wish that you had as great a reputation in warfare as i do.
here comes another jew. you couldn't find a third like these two unless the devil himself turned into a jew.
that it was, sir.
my reputation will be greater by the time we part. i'll take all the flowers of honor from your helmet, and turn them into a garland for myself.
hello, tubal. any news from genoa? did you find my daughter?
you've done well at sea.
i can't stand your arrogance any longer.
i went to many places where i heard news about her, but i couldn't find her.
and you've done well on land.
well said, hal! go for it, hal! this isn't child's play, i'll tell you that much!
oh, oh, oh! one of the stolen diamonds cost me two thousand ducats in frankfurt! i never felt the curse of the jews until now. i never felt it until now, two thousand ducats in that diamond, and other precious, precious jewels! i wish my daughter were dead at my feet wearing those jewels! i wish she were in her coffin here, with the ducats in her coffin! you couldn't find out anything about them? why? i don't even know how much i'm spending to find them. loss upon loss! the thief left with so much, and i'm spending so much to hunt down the thief, and still i'm not satisfied! i haven't gotten my revenge. the only luck i have is bad luck. nobody suffers but me. nobody's crying except me.
i'll flatter anyone who flatters me, though what i've accomplished on land cannot be denied.
oh, harry, you've taken away embowelled = disemboweled, in order to be embalmed taken away my youth. i can handle the loss of my fragile life, but not the loss of all the honors you have won from me: that loss wounds my thoughts more than your sword wounds my flesh. but thought depends on life, and life depends on time, and time, which watches over the whole world, must stop eventually. oh, i could make prophecies, but the cold hand of death is stopping my tongue. no, percy. you are dust, and food for, (he dies)
well, other men have bad luck too. antonio, as i heard in genoa, 
neither can my accomplishments at sea.
for worms, brave percy. farewell, brave soul. your ambition, aimed at evil, ends, look at how withered it has become. when this body contained a soul, an entire kingdom was too small to hold it. but now, two paces of wretched earth is plenty of room. the ground that you lie dead upon doesn't have a single living man upon it as brave as you. if you could hear me, i wouldn't praise you so lavishly. but let me cover your battered face with part of my uniform. i'll thank myself on your behalf for doing these rites of respect. adieu, and take my praise of you to heaven. let your disgraces sleep with you in the grave, and let them be kept off your tombstone!
what, what, what? bad luck, bad luck?
yes, for your own safety, you should deny one thing: you have been a great thief at sea.
what? my old friend? couldn't all this flesh hold onto a little life? poor jack, farewell. i would rather have lost a more valuable soldier. if i were in love with vanity, i'd really miss you. death hasn't taken anyone as fat today, though it has taken many better men in this vicious battle. i'll have you embowelled soon; till then, lie here in blood, by the great percy.
he's had a ship wrecked coming from tripolis.
as you were on land.
embowelled? if you cut me open today, i'll let you pickle me and eat me tomorrow. damn! i had to fake
thank god, thank god! is it true, is it true?
that's the one part of my service on land i do deny. but let's shake hands, menas.
being dead, or that raging rebel of a scotsman would have ended me. fake? no, i tell a lie: i'm not a faker. to die is to be a faker, because a dead body is an imitation of a living one. but to fake being dead, in order to stay alive, that's no kind of faking. that's the truest kind of living there is. bravery is mostly about precaution; i'm careful, and it saved my life. damn, i'm scared of this bombshell percy, even though he's dead. what if he's faking, too, and he gets up? i swear, he'd be the better faker. therefore, i'll make sure he's dead; in fact, i'll swear that i killed him. why couldn't he just get up, like i did? only a witness could stop me, and there are no witnesses here. therefore, sirrah, (stabs the body)you're coming with me, complete with a new wound in your thigh. (he throws hotspur's body over his shoulder)
i spoke with some of the sailors who survived the wreck.
if our eyes were policemen, they might capture two thieves at once while we're embracing.
john, my brother, you've bravely proven yourself in this, your first battle.
thank you, tubal. good news, good news! ha, ha, heard in genoa.
men's faces are truthful, whatever their hands do.
wait! who do we have here? didn't you say this fat man was dead?
i also heard that your daughter spent eighty ducats in genoa one night.
but no beautiful woman has an honest face.
i did. i saw him dead on the ground, bleeding and not breathing. are you alive? or is this some kind of dream, playing with our sight? talk to us. we won't trust our eyes without our ears. you aren't what you seem to be.
oh, you're sticking a dagger in me! i'll never see my gold again. eighty ducats in one shot! eighty ducats!
that's no lie. they steal hearts.
that's for sure. i'm not a double man. but if i'm not jack falstaff, then i'm a crook. here's percy. if the king will honor me for this, fine. if not, let him kill the next percy himself. i expect to me made an earl or a duke for this, i'll tell you that much.
i came to venice with a number of antonio's creditors who say he won't be able to avoid going bankrupt.
we came here to fight against you.
why, i killed percy myself and i saw you dead.
i'm very glad about that. i'll hound him. i'll torture him. i'm very glad.
for my part, i'm sorry this battle turned into a drinking match. today pompey laughs away his fortune.
you did? lord, lord, how people love to lie! i admit i had fallen and was out of breath, and so was he. but we both stood up at the same time and fought for a long hour. if i am to be believed, fine. if i'm not believed, then the guilt will lie with the people who are supposed to reward bravery. i swear on my life, i gave him this gash in the leg. damn, if he were alive and said i didn't, i'd shove my sword down his throat.
one creditor showed me a ring he got from your daughter in exchange for a monkey.
if that's true, he won't get it back by crying.
this is the strangest story i've ever heard.
damn her! you're torturing me, tubal. that was my turquoise ring! leah gave it to me before we were married. i wouldn't have given it away for a whole jungle of monkeys.
that's the truth, sir. we didn't expect mark antony to be here. is he married to cleopatra?
this is the strangest man, john. all right then, display your prize on your back. as far as i'm concerned, if lying will help you out, i'll decorate your lie as prettily as i can.
but antonio's certainly ruined.
caesar's sister is named octavia.
a trumpet is blowing retreat: we've won. come on, brother. let's get to high ground and see which of our friends are alive, and which are dead.
that's true, that's very true. tubal, go find me a police officer to arrest antonio. get him ready two weeks ahead of time., i'll take antonio's heart if he can't pay. with him out of venice, i can make whatever bargains i want when i lend money., go, tubal. meet me at the synagogue.
that's true, sir. she was previously caius marcellus' wife.
i'll follow them and claim my reward. may god reward whoever rewards me. if i grow into a great man, i'll grow thinner: i'll go on a diet, quit drinking, and live properly, like a great man should.
(to bassanio) please wait a day or two before making your choice. if you choose wrong, i'll lose your company. so wait a while. something tells me, not love, but something, that i don't want to lose you, and you know that if i hated you i wouldn't think that. but let me put it more clearly in case you don't understand, though i know girls aren't supposed to express their thoughts, i'm just saying i'd like you to stay here for a month or two before you undergo the test for me. i could tell you how to choose correctly, but then i'd be disregarding the oath i took. so i'll never tell. but you might lose me by making the wrong choice. if you do choose wrong, you'll make me wish for something very bad. i'd wish i had ignored my oath and told you everything. god, your eyes have bewitched me. they've divided me in two. one half of me is yours, and the other half, my own half, i'd call it, belongs to you too. if it's mine, then it's yours, and so i'm all yours. but in this awful day and age people don't even have the right to their own property! so though i'm yours, i'm not yours. if there's no chance for me to be yours, then it's just bad luck. i know i'm talking too much, but i do that just to make the time last longer, and to postpone your test.
but she is now mark antony's wife.
this is how rebellions always end, defeated. evil-spirited worcester! didn't i offer kindness, forgiveness and friendship to all of you? and you pretended that i did the opposite? your relatives and friends trusted you, yet you lied to them? three of our knights who were killed today, a noble earl, and many other men might have been alive right now if you had been a decent man and reported truthfully on the negotiations between our two armies.
let me choose now. i feel tortured by all this talking.
excuse me, sir?
i did what i had to do for the sake of my own well-being. i accept my fate patiently, since there's no way i can avoid it.
tortured, bassanio portia and bassanio are role-playing here, pretending to be torturer and victim. bassanio ? then confess to your crime. tell us about the treason you've mixed in with your love.
it's true.
put worcester to death, and vernon too: i'll wait a while before i decide what to do about the others.
the only treason i'm guilty of is worrying that i'm never going to get to enjoy you. treason has nothing at all to do with my love. they're as opposite as hot and cold.
then caesar and he will always be united.
what's happening on the battlefield?
hmmm, i'm not sure i believe what you're saying. men under torture will confess anything.
if i were to make a prediction regarding this union, i wouldn't say that.
when that brave scotsman, lord douglas, saw that things were turning against him, that percy had been killed, and that his men were fleeing in terror, he ran away too. he fell down a hill and was so badly injured that our men were able to capture him. he's being held prisoner at my tent. i ask your highness to let me decide what to do with him.
promise me you'll let me live, and i'll confess the truth.
i think the marriage was made more for political reasons than for love.
with all my heart.
all right then, confess and live.
i think so too. but you'll see that the very thing that joins them will be the thing that separates them. octavia has a pious, chaste, meek disposition.
brother, john of lancaster, i'm going to give you the honor of this generous act. go to douglas and set him free, with no ransom due. let him do whatever he wants. his brave fighting against us today should be valued, even though he was our enemy.
"confess and love" is more like it. oh, torture's fun when my torturer tells me what i have to say to go free! but let me try my luck on the boxes.
doesn't everyone want a wife like that?
thank you for giving me this honor. i'll take care of it immediately.
go ahead, then. i'm locked in one of them. if you really love me, you'll find me., nerissa and the rest of you, get away from him. play some music while he chooses. then if he loses, it'll be his swan song, music before the end. and since swans need water to swim in, i'll cry him a river when he loses. but on the other hand, he may win. what music should we play then? if he wins, the music should be like the majestic trumpets that blare when subjects bow to a newly crowned monarch. it's the sweet sounds at daybreak that the dreaming bridegroom hears on his wedding morning, calling him to the church.
not someone who doesn't share that disposition, meaning mark antony. he'll go back to his egyptian dish. then octavia's complaints will rouse caesar, and as i said before, the thing that brought them together will part them. antony will go where his passion is. he only married out of political necessity.
all that's left is for us to split up our armies. you, my son john, and you, westmoreland, head towards york as quickly as you can. confront northumberland and that churchman the archbishop, who, i gather, are raising armies against us. you and i, harry my son, will head for wales to fight glendower and mortimer. the rebellion in this land will break apart once it meets battles like the one we fought today. and since we have accomplished our business so well, let's not quit until everything has been won.
bassanio's walking to the boxes now. he looks as dignified as hercules did when he saved the princess hesione from the sea monster. but he loves me more than hercules loved the princess. i'll play hesione, and everyone else will be the bystanders watching with tear-streaked faces. we've all come out to see what will happen., go, hercules! if you survive, i'll live. i'm more anxious watching you fight than you are in the fight itself.
then that's the way it may turn out. come on, sir, will you come aboard? i want to drink your health.
(singing) tell me where do our desires start, in the heart or in the head? how are they created, how sustained?
i'll join you, sir. we did a lot of drinking in egypt.
stop trying to persuade me, proteus. young homebodies have dull minds. if you weren't so tied to the girl you love, i'd ask you to come with me to see the distant wonders of the world rather than waste your youth living aimlessly as a sluggard at home. but, since you're in love, love constantly and thrive in your love. i would do the same were i in love.
answer me, answer me.
let's go.
are you going now? goodbye, valentine, my dear friend! think of me when you happen to see some rare and noteworthy object in your travels. wish me happiness, too, when you have good fortune. and if you're ever in danger, trust that my prayers will protect you, for i will pray for you, valentine.
(singing) desires start in the eyes, sustained by gazing, and desires die very young. let's all mourn our dead desires. i'll begin, ding, dong, bell.
here's where they'll end up, on the floor. some of them are leaning already. it won't take much for them to fall over.
and you'll be praying for me on a book about love as opposed to the bible. valentine implies that proteus makes love his religion. a book about love , i suspect?
ding, dong, bell.
lepidus is red in the face.
i'll pray for you on a book i love.
you can't always judge a book by its cover. people are often tricked by false appearances. in court, someone can deliver a false plea but hide its wickedness with a pretty voice. in religion, don't serious men defend sins with scripture, covering up evil with a show of good. every sin in the world manages to make itself look good somehow. how many people are cowards at heart but wear beards like hercules or mars, the god of war? take another example: beauty. it can be bought by the ounce in makeup, which works miracles. women who wear it the most are respected the least. it's the same thing with hair. curly golden hair moves so nicely in the wind and makes a woman beautiful. but you can buy that kind of hair as a wig, and wigs are made from dead people's hair. decoration's nothing but a danger, meant to trick and trap the viewer. a lovely, cunning shore can distract a man from the perils of a stormy sea, just as a pretty scarf can hide a dangerous dark-skinned beauty. nowadays, everyone's fooled by appearances. so i'll have nothing to do with that gaudy gold box, it's like the gold that midas couldn't eat. and i'll have nothing to do with the pale silver either, the metal that common coins are made of. but this humble lead one, though it looks too threatening to promise me anything good, moves me more than i can say. so this is the one i choose. i hope i'm happy with my choice!
they made him drink the leftover wine usually given to the poor.
no doubt on some shallow story of "true" love, like the one about young leander crossing the hellespont in classical myth, leander swam across the hellespont each night to see his love, hero. but he drowned in a storm during his crossing one night. leander crossing the hellespont .
(to herself) all my other emotions are vanishing into thin air, as all my doubts and desperation and fears and jealousy are all flying away! oh, i need to calm down, make my love and my joy less intense. i'm feeling this too strongly. please make my love less, or i'm going to overindulge, making myself sick.
their various personalities grate on one another. lepidus cries, "no more arguing!" and then when they agree he resigns himself to drink.
that's a deep story of a deeper love, the love was so deep it covered his shoes.
(opening the lead box) what do we have here? a picture of beautiful portia! what artist captured her likeness so well? are these eyes moving? or do they just seem to move as my eyes move? her sweet breath forces her lips open, a lovely divider of lovely lips. and look at her hair, looking like a golden mesh to trap the hearts of men, like little flies in a cobweb. the painter was like a spider in creating it so delicately. but her eyes, how could he keep looking at them long enough to paint them? i would've expected that when he finished one of them, it would have enraptured him and kept him from painting the other. but i'm giving only faint praise of the picture, just as the picture, as good as it is, is only a faint imitation of the real woman herself. here's the scroll that sums up my fate: (he reads) "you who don't judge by looks alone, have better luck, and make the right choice. since this prize is yours, be happy with it, and don't look for a new one. if you're happy with what you've won and accept this prize as your blissful destiny, then turn to where your lady is, and claim her with a loving kiss."
which goes on to impede his judgment.
it's true. and your love is so deep it covers your boots, and yet you never swam across the hellespont.
a nice message. my lady, with your permission, this note authorizes me to give myself to you with a kiss. but i'm in a daze, like someone who's just won a contest and thinks that all the applause and cheering is for him, but isn't sure yet. and so, beautiful lady, i'm standing here just like that, wondering whether all this can be true until you tell me it is.
that's what happens when you partner with great men but lack their power. i'd rather carry a reed that obviously can't protect me than a sword i cannot lift.
covers my boots? don't make fun of me.
you see me standing here, lord bassanio. what you see is what you get. though i wouldn't wish to be better for my own sake, for your sake i wish i were twenty times more than myself, a thousand times more beautiful and ten thousand times richer, just so you might value me more, so my good qualities, beauty, possessions, and friends would be more than you could calculate. what you're getting is an innocent and inexperienced girl. i'm happy that at least i'm not too old to learn new things. i'm even happier that i'm not stupid, and i can learn. i'm happiest of all that i'm yours now, my lord, my king, and you can guide me as you wish. everything i am and everything i have now belongs to you. just a minute ago i was the owner of this beautiful mansion, master of these servants, and queen over myself. but as of right this second all these things are yours. with this ring i give them all to you.
to be so unimportant in the company of important men is like having a face without any eyes.
no, i won't, for it doesn't profit you any.
if you ever give away this ring or lose it, it means our love's doomed, and i'll have a right to be angry with you. (she gives bassanio the ring)
this is how they do it, sir: they measure the depth of the nile, according to certain marks made on the walls of the pyramid. they know by those measurements if there will be famine or plenty. the higher the nile flows, the better the harvest. as the river ebbs, the farmer scatters his seeds on the remaining silt. the harvest comes shortly after that.
what?
madam, you've left me speechless, but my feelings are responding to your words. i'm as confused as a crowd of people going wild after hearing their prince give a speech. but the day i take this ring off will be the day i die. if you see me without it, you can be confident i'm dead.
do you have unusual snakes there?
when you're in love, your love-sick groans only earn her scorn, your brokenhearted sighs just get you flirtatious glances, and twenty tedious, sleepless nights spent pining for your sweetheart only yield you a brief moment of happiness. if by chance you succeed, it may turn out to be an unlucky win. and if you don't, then you've only managed to waste your time. either way, you win foolishness by being clever, or your cleverness is killed by foolishness.
my lord and lady, it's now our turn, who have been watching as our dreams came true. now we can shout, "congratulations, congratulations, my lord and lady!"
yes, lepidus.
so, by your logic, i'm a fool.
my lord bassanio, and my dear lady, i wish you all the joy i can wish for. and when you get married, i hope i can be married at the same time.
the egyptian snake is born when the sun shines on the nile mud, just like the crocodile.
because of your logic, i fear you'll become a fool.
absolutely, if you can find a wife by then.
yes, lepidus.
it's love you have a problem with. but don't blame me, i'm not love.
i think i've found one already, thanks to you, my lord. i can fall in love just as quickly as you can, and i loved nerissa as soon as i laid eyes on her. you fell in love with portia, and i fell in love with nerissa, because i'm not in the habit of delaying any more than you are, my lord. your fate depended on those boxes, and it turns out that mine did too. i couldn't help but chase her. i started making love vows to her till my mouth was dry. then finally she said she loved me and would marry me if you two got married as well.
let's have a seat and some wine. a toast to lepidus!
love is your master, because he's got the better of you. and in my opinion, anyone who's been taken in by a fool shouldn't be considered very wise himself.
is that true, nerissa?
i don't feel so well, but i won't stop.
yet writers say that just as the destructive caterpillar dwells within the sweetest flower buds, love inhabits the cleverest minds.
yes, madam, it is, if it's all right with you.
not until you pass out. i'm afraid you'll keep going until then.
and writers also say that just as the caterpillar eats the greatest flower bud before it blooms, so too does love make young and fragile minds foolish. it destroys the young lover, who loses his youth while still in his prime, and takes away all his future hopes. but why am i wasting my time giving advice to you, a man who is devoted to foolish love? so, once again, farewell! my father expects to meet me at the harbor to see my ship off.
and do you mean what you're saying, gratiano?
no, i certainly won't stop. i've heard that the pyramids build by the ptolemies are splendid. without doubt i've heard that.
i'll go with you, valentine.
yes, my lord.
(aside to pompey ) pompey, could i have a word with you?
my dear proteus, no. we should say goodbye to each other now. write to me in milan, and tell me of your luck with love and whatever other news happens while i'm away. i'll likewise write to you.
then we'd be honored to have you join us in our wedding ceremony.
(aside to menas ) whisper it in my ear. what is it?
may you find happiness in milan!
(to nerissa) let's bet them a thousand ducats that we will have a son first.
(whispers in pompey 's ear) please, captain, leave the feast and let me speak with you privately.
and the same to you here at home! farewell!
you want to stake the money down now?
(aside to menas ) leave me alone awhile. where's the wine for lepidus?
he hunts for honor, while i hunt for love. he leaves his friends to bring them more honor, but i neglect myself, my friends, and everything else for love. oh, julia, you've transformed me. you've made me neglect my studies, waste my time, argue against all reasonable advice, and set myself against the world. you've made my brain weak from thinking about you so much, and my heart sick with melancholy.
hey, if i lay down my " stake gratiano puns on "stake" as both money that is bet and penis. stake ," i'll never be able to have a son. but who's this coming? lorenzo and his pagan girlfriend? what, and my old venetian friend salerio?
what does a crocodile look like?
god save you, sir proteus! have you seen my master?
welcome, lorenzo and salerio. i hope my position in this new house is firm enough to allow me the right to welcome my friends. (to portia) with your permission, portia, i welcome my good friends and countrymen.
sir, it's shaped like itself and is as wide as it has width. it is only as high as it is and moves with its own legs. it lives on what nourishes it, and when the four elements fire, air, earth, and water, thought to be the building blocks of all life the four elements leave it, its soul moves into another body.
he just left here a minute ago on his way to milan.
i do too, my lord. they're entirely welcome.
what color is it?
i'd wager twenty to one, then, that his ship has already left. i'm foolish for having lost him.
(to bassanio) thank you, sir. i didn't intend to come see you. but i ran into salerio on the way, and he begged me to come along with him until i couldn't say no.
its own color.
indeed, sheep often go astray when the shepherd has gone away.
that's true, and with good reason. this letter is for you from signor antonio. (he gives bassanio a letter)
it's a strange snake.
you're saying that my master is a shepherd, then, and i'm a sheep?
before i open this letter, please tell me how my good friend is doing.
it is that. and its tears are wet.
yes.
he's not sick, my lord, but he's very upset, and his problems are serious. his letter will tell you how he's doing.
(aside to antony ) will that description satisfy him?
well then, my horns are his horns, whether i'm awake or asleep.
(pointing at jessica) nerissa, welcome this stranger. , salerio, welcome. any news from venice? how's the great merchant antonio doing? i know he'll be happy to hear of our success. we're like the ancient hero jason, we went looking for the golden fleece and we won it!
(aside to caesar ) that last toast pompey gave him will take care of him, unless he's a raging glutton.
what a silly answer, very fitting for a sheep.
i wish you'd won the fleece salerio puns on "fleece" (the wool from a ram) and "fleets" (groups of ships). fleece he lost.
(aside to menas ) go to hell, sir. are you still here? go away! do what i tell you. where's the wine i ordered?
this means you think i'm still a sheep.
something bad in that letter is making bassanio turn pale. some good friend of his must have died, because nothing else in the world could change a man so much. what, does the news only get worse?, please, bassanio, i'm half of you, so let me bear half the burden this letter brings you.
(aside to pompey ) if any service i've done you deserves a favor, get up from your stool and speak with me.
yes, and your master a shepherd.
oh portia, these are some of the worst words that ever stained a piece of paper. my darling, when i gave my love to you, i told you that all the wealth i had ran within my veins, that i have noble blood, but no money. when i said that, i told you the truth. but my dear, when i said i was worth nothing, i was actually bragging, i should've said that i was worse than nothing. i've borrowed money from a dear friend who in turn borrowed money from his mortal enemy for my sake. here's a letter, my dear. the paper's like my friend's body, and every word in it is a bleeding wound on that body., but is it true, salerio? have all his business ventures failed? not even one success? he had ships to tripolis, mexico, england, lisbon, north africa, and india, and not one of these ships avoided the rocks?
(aside to menas ) i think you're crazy!
no, i can disprove that with an example.
not one, my lord. anyway, even if he had the money now, the jew probably wouldn't take it. i've never seen a creature with a human shape who was so eager to destroy a man. he's at the duke's morning and night, accusing the state of harming free trade if they deny him justice. twenty merchants, the duke himself, and the highest-ranking venetian nobles have all tried to persuade him to forget his contract, but nobody can do it. he's determined to get the penalty specified in his contract with antonio.
what is it?
it'll be a challenge, but i'll prove it with another example.
when i was still living with him i heard him swear to tubal and cush, his countrymen, that he'd rather have antonio's flesh than twenty times the sum antonio owed. and i know that unless the law intervenes, it'll be bad news for poor antonio.
i've always had great respect for your destiny.
the shepherd looks for the sheep, but the sheep doesn't look for the shepherd. i'm looking for my master, but my master isn't looking for me. therefore, i'm not a sheep.
is this your good friend who's in so much trouble?
you've served me faithfully. what else can i say? (to the others) be happy, lords!
the sheep follows the shepherd because it wants food, but the shepherd doesn't follow the sheep for food. you follow your master for your pay, but your master doesn't follow you for pay. therefore, you're a sheep.
yes, he's my best friend, the kindest man and most courteous to others. he's more honorable than anyone else in italy.
stay away from the quicksand of drink, lepidus: you're sinking.
another bad example like that and i'll say, "baa."
how much does he owe the jew?
(to pompey ) would you like to be king of the entire world?
but anyway, what happened? did you give my letter to julia?
three thousand ducats.
what are you saying?
yes, sir. i, a lost sheep, gave your letter to her, a prostitute the term "mutton" used in shakespeare's original was slang for "prostitute." prostitute . and she, the prostitute, gave me, a lost sheep, nothing for all my hard work.
what, that's all? pay him six thousand and cancel the debt. i'd pay twelve thousand before i'd let a friend like that suffer in the slightest because of you. first come with me to church to get married. then you can leave for venice to see your friend. you have to go, because you'll never sleep next to me peacefully without settling this. i'll give you enough gold to pay back your debt twenty times over. when it's paid, bring your friend back. until you get back, nerissa and i will live like virgins and widows. come on, let's go, because you're going to leave me the same day we get married. put on a happy face, and welcome your friends. since it's costing me a lot to marry you, i'll think of you as even more precious. but let me hear the letter from your friend.
would you like to be king of the entire world? now i've said it twice.
the world isn't big enough for all these darn sheep.
(he reads) "dear bassanio, my ships have all been wrecked. my creditors are getting mean. my money's almost run out. i couldn't pay my debt to the jew on the due date. since i'll certainly die when he takes his collateral out of my flesh, all debts are cleared between you and me if i can just see you again before i die. in any case, do what you want. if your affection for me doesn't convince you to come, don't let my letter do so."
how could that happen?
if it's too crowded for you, then you should stick her.
oh, my darling, make your arrangements and go!
just consider it. though i seem poor, i am the man who will give you the world.
no, now you've really gone astray. i ought to pound you.
since you're letting me leave, i'll hurry. but i won't sleep till i get back.
are you drunk?
no, sir, less than a pound will suffice for delivering your letter.
jailer, watch out for this one. don't try to convince me to feel sorry for him. this is the fool who lent out money without charging interest. jailer, keep an eye on him.
no, pompey, i haven't had anything to drink. you can be the most powerful man on earth if you dare use your power. both land and sea are yours if you will take them.
you misunderstood. i meant give you a pounding, pinhead.
listen to me, good shylock.
tell me how.
you've gone from a pound down to a pinhead? no, i want more than that, that's far too little payment for delivering a letter to your lover.
i'm going to get my bond shylock uses the word "bond" here to mean the goods antonio promised to give shylock if he defaulted on the loan, in other words, the pound of antonio's flesh. bond . don't try to say anything against my taking my bond. i've sworn an oath that i will have my bond. you called me a dog before you had any reason to. but since i'm a dog, beware my fangs. the duke will give me justice., i do wonder, jailer, how you can be so foolish as to let this prisoner out of his cell.
the three who share the known world are aboard your boat. let me cut the anchor cable. when we are away from land, cut their throats. everything that belongs to them is yours.
so what did she say?
please, listen to me.
oh, you should have done it without telling me! for me to do such a thing would be dishonorable. for you to do it would be good service. you should know that to me, profit isn't more important than honor, but the other way around. regret that your mouth betrayed your actions. if you had acted without my knowledge, i would have approved your action later. but now i must condemn it. give it up and go drink.
(nodding) ay.
i want my bond. i won't listen to you. i want my bond, so stop talking. i won't be taken for a fool who sighs and gives in to christian meddlers. don't follow me. i'm not talking with you. i want my bond.
(to himself) for this, i'll never be faithful to your declining fortunes again. a person who wants something but won't take it when it materializes won't get the opportunity again.
nod-ay? well, that's "naughty."
he's the most stubborn dog that ever lived among humans.
this toast is for lepidus!
you misunderstood, sir. i said she nodded, and you asked me if she nodded, and i said, "ay."
leave him alone. i won't follow him around with useless pleas anymore. he wants me dead. i know the real reason. i've often given money to people who were unable to pay back their loans to him. that's why he hates me.
(to a servant) help lepidus ashore . . . i'll accept it for him, pompey.
and all that put together is "naughty."
i'm sure the duke will never allow this contract to be enforced.
here's to you, menas.
now that you've taken the trouble to figure it out, take that for your trouble and consider it your answer.
the duke can't deny the law, because that would threaten the security of all foreign merchants in venice, and that's how the city makes its money. if the government disregards the law, it will be discredited. so go. i've lost so much weight worrying about my losses have that i'll hardly have a pound of flesh to spare for my bloody creditor tomorrow., well, jailer, let's go., i hope to god that bassanio comes to see me pay his debt. after that, i don't care what happens.
i accept with thanks, enobarbus.
no, no, you shall have it for delivering the letter.
madam, i hope you don't mind my saying that i admire your noble respect for friendship, which you show in letting your husband go off to help his friend like this. if you only knew the man you're helping out, and what a faithful gentleman he is and how much he loves your husband, i know you'd be even prouder of your kindness than you normally might be.
fill the cups until they run over.
well, i guess i must be willing to put up with you.
i've never regretted doing good, and i don't now. friends who spend a lot of time together and really care equally for each other must have many traits in common. since antonio's my husband's best friend, they must be very similar men. in that case, the money i've sent is a small price to pay to rescue someone who resembles my bassanio, who's like my own soul., anyway, let's change the subject, since i feel like i'm starting to flatter myself. i have a favor to ask of you. lorenzo, please take charge of the management of my house until my husband comes back.
there goes a strong fellow, menas.
why, sir, what do you mean, "put up with me"?
i've sworn to god that i'll live a life of prayer and contemplation until my husband returns. only nerissa will keep me company. there's a monastery two miles away where we can stay. please say you'll agree, because i really need you to do this.
why do you say that?
geez, sir, i mean getting nothing but the word "naughty" as payment for my delivery.
madam, with all my heart. i'll do anything you ask.
he carries a third of the world. can't you see that?
damn, you have a quick wit.
i've already spoken to my staff about this. they'll consider you and jessica masters of this house in place of lord bassanio and myself. so goodbye until we meet again.
then a third of the world is drunk. i wish it were all drunk. then everything would go more smoothly.
and yet i can't speed past your slowness in paying me.
i hope you can relax and enjoy yourself!
drink up. liven up the party.
come on, come on, tell me briefly. what did she say?
i hope you find peace and happiness, my lady.
all right, then.
open your wallet, and the money and her response will both be delivered.
thank you. i wish you the same. goodbye, jessica.
this hasn't reached the level of an egyptian feast yet.
(giving him money) well, sir, here's something for your trouble. what did she say?
now, balthazar, you've always been honest and faithful to me, and i trust you still are. (she gives balthazar a letter) take this letter to padua as fast as you can. make sure you put it into the hands of my cousin bellario, the doctor of laws.
it's getting there. clink your cups together in a toast! here's to caesar.
honestly, sir, i think you'll have a hard time winning her.
and as quickly as possible, take whatever letters and clothes he gives you to the public ferry that goes back and forth to venice. don't waste time talking now. just go. i'll meet you at the ferry.
i could do without another toast. it's unnatural. i keep washing my brain with alcohol, and it keeps getting fouler and more muddled.
why? did you get that from speaking with her?
i'll go as fast as i can, madam.
live in the moment.
sir, i couldn't get anything at all out of her, not even so much as a tip for delivering your letter. and since she was so stingy to me for having delivered your thoughts, i fear she'll prove just as stingy with you. don't give her any little gifts except stones, because she's as hard as steel.
come on, nerissa, i have many things to do that you don't even know about yet. we'll see our husbands before they even have a chance to miss us.
i'd prefer to seize the day. but i would rather abstain from everything for four days than drink so much in one.
what did she say? nothing?
will they see us?
(to antony ) ha! shall we dance egyptian bacchanals bawdy dances honoring bacchus, roman god of wine bacchanals , my noble emperor, and celebrate our wine?
no, not even so much as "take this for your trouble." i can attest to your generosity since you've given me a small tip. in return, you can deliver your own letters from now on. and so, sir, i'll say hello to my master for you.
they will, nerissa, but we'll be disguised as men. i'll bet you anything that i'll be handsomer than you when we're both dressed up. i'll wear my sword more gracefully, and speak like a teenage boy, and walk with a manly stride rather than my ladylike steps. i'll talk about fights like a bragging youth, and i'll tell cute lies about honorable ladies who fell in love with me and got sick and died when i rejected them. they just died, what could i do! then i'll start feeling sorry for them, wishing i hadn't killed them. i'll tell twenty lies like that, so men will think i graduated from school at least a year ago. i know a thousand immature tricks like that, and i'll use them all.
let's have one, good soldier.
go on, get out of here. you'll save your ship from sinking since you're destined to die on dry land refers to the saying "he that is born to be hanged shall never be drowned." you're destined to die on dry land .
why, are we turning to men?
come, let's join our hands until the overpowering wine makes us soft and forgetful.
i must send a letter with a better messenger. i'm afraid my julia wouldn't accept my letter because she received it from such a worthless postman.
what kind of question is that! if i had a dirty mind, i'd think you meant turning to men for sex. here, i'll tell you my whole plan in my carriage, which is waiting for us at the gate. so hurry up, because we have twenty miles to cover today.
everyone join hands. attack our ears with loud music, and i'll position you for the dance. then the boy will sing, and every man will sing the chorus at the top of his voice.
now that we're alone, tell me, lucetta, would you recommend that i fall in love?
yes, look, it's true that children are punished for the sins of their fathers. that's why i'm worried about you. i've always been straightforward with you, so now i'm telling you what i think. cheer up, because i think you're going to hell. there's only one hope for you, and even that's a kind of illegitimate hope.
(singing) come, you king of the vine, plump bacchus, with your pink eyes. our troubles are drowned in your vats. we'll crown ourselves with wreathes of grapes.
yes, madam, so you stumble into it on purpose.
what hope is that, may i ask?
(singing) give us cups until the world spins! give us cups until the world spins!
of all the attractive gentlemen that speak with me daily, which do you think would be best to love?
you can hope your father isn't your real father. maybe your mother fooled around, and you aren't the jew's daughter.
how can you top that? good night, pompey. (to antony ) dear brother-in-law, let's leave together. this frivolity isn't appropriate to the serious purpose that brought us here. noble lords, let's say good night. we've all gotten red in the face. even the strong enobarbus isn't immune to the effects of wine, and i'm tongue-tied myself. this wild party has almost turned us all into clowns. what more need i say? good night. good antony, shake my hand.
please tell me their names again, and i'll tell you my opinion about them as best i can.
that really is an illegitimate hope. then i'd be punished for the sins of my mother.
we'll have a rematch at your feast on shore.
what do you think of the attractive sir eglamour?
in that case i'm afraid you're damned by both your father and your mother. when you avoid one trap, you fall into another. you're in trouble either way.
yes, we will. let's shake on it.
as a knight, he's well spoken, elegant, and fine. but if i were you, i wouldn't fall in love with him.
my husband will save me. he's made me a christian.
oh, antony, even if you've taken my father's house, what is that to me? we're friends! come, this way to the rowboat.
what do you think of mercatio, who is rich?
he was wrong to do that. there were enough christians before, as many of them as could stand to live near each other. all these new christians will make the price of hogs go up. if we're all pork-eaters, we won't be able to get our hands on a slice of bacon, even if we've got the money for it.
be careful not to fall in.
i like his money a lot, but him only so-so.
i'll tell my husband what you've said, launcelot. here he comes.
menas, i'm not going back on shore.
what do you think of kind proteus?
you're going to make me jealous, launcelot, if you keep taking my wife into dark corners like this!
no, come to my cabin. we'll have the musicians play drums, trumpets, flutes. what do you say? we'll make neptune roman god of the sea neptune hear us bid a loud good night to these great men. play and be damned. play loud!
good lord, how foolish people are!
no, you don't need to worry about us, lorenzo. launcelot and i can't agree on anything. he says i won't get into heaven because i'm a jew's daughter, and he says you're irresponsible because by converting jews to christianity you're raising the price of pork.
hooray, i say. there's my hat!
what's that for? why this outburst at his name?
i can justify that better than you can justify sleeping with portia's african servant. the moor like the prince of morocco, the servant referred to is a "moor" or north african, in this case a black woman. launcelot puns on the words "moor" and "more." moor is pregnant with your child, launcelot.
hooray! come on, noble captain.
pardon me, dear madam, it's inexcusable that i, the unworthy servant that i am, should criticize such lovely gentlemen.
it's too bad there's more of the moor than there ought to be. well, even if she's a less than honest woman, she's still a lot more respectable than i thought at first.
now i've paid you back, parthia, and gotten revenge for marcus crassus' death. carry king orodes orodes was king of parthia and father of pacorus. he assassinated marcus crassus, a member of the first roman triumvirate. king orodes ' son at the front of our army, so all the parthians will know, orodes, pacorus pays for marcus crassus!
why don't you think well of proteus out of all the rest?
any fool can make puns! i think the best sign of intelligence will soon be silence, and talking will only be a good thing for parrots to do. go in and tell the servants to get ready for dinner.
noble ventidius, while your sword is still warm with the blood of slain parthians, why not finish the job? the parthians retreat. go after them. chase them down if you have to track them through media, mesopotamia media and mesopotamia were countries bordering parthia media, mesopotamia , or any other places they may go to hide. then our great general, antony, will commend you.
fine then, of all the good men, i think proteus is best.
that's already been done, sir. they're all ready to eat dinner.
oh, silius, silius, i've done enough. a subordinate may exceed his authority. you must understand, silius, that it's better to leave something undone than achieve too much fame in your superior's absence. caesar and antony have always achieved more by delegating authority to their officers than by leading their troops in person. sossius, an officer that held the same position in syria as i do here, achieved great distinction very quickly but lost antony's support as a result. a man who achieves more in war than his captain does becomes his captain's rival. ambition is a good quality in a soldier, but it proves detrimental rather than beneficial when used to surpass his superiors. i could do more to help antony, but to do so would insult him. and by insulting him, i would lose credit for the good i have done him already.
what's your reason?
good lord, what a clown you are! tell them to make the dinner.
a soldier is just a tool, like his sword, unless he has your qualities, ventidius. are you going to write antony about this?
i have no other reason than a woman's intuition: i think he's the best simply because i do.
that's also been done, sir. the word you're looking for is " cover by "cover," launcelot means "set the table." cover ."
i'll modestly tell him what i have done in his name, that's the magical wording these days. i'll write how, under his flag and with his well-paid troops, we have beaten the formerly unvanquished parthia.
and would you have me throw my love at him?
will you cover, then?
where's antony now?
yes, if you thought your love wouldn't be thrown away.
no, sir, i know my duty. launcelot launcelot now interprets "cover" to mean put on his hat, which he's not supposed to do in front of his superiors. launcelot
he plans to go to athens. we must arrive there before him, as quickly as our baggage train will allow us. (to the soldiers) get a move on!
but, of all the others, he has never proposed to me.
you keep finding ways to mock me! are you planning on showing me all your wit at once? please understand my simple message: go tell the servants to set the table and bring in the food, and we'll come in to dinner.
did the brothers-in-law leave?
yet, of all the others, i think he loves you the most.
about the table, sir, dinner will be served on it. as for the food, it will be served in covered dishes. as for your coming in to dinner, just do what you feel is right.
they finished their business with pompey, and pompey has left. now the three triumvirs are putting their official seals on the treaty. octavia weeps at the thought of leaving rome. caesar is in a sober mood. and menas reports that lepidus has been hungover since pompey's party.
the fact that he doesn't say much to me shows he doesn't love me much.
oh, he's good at bending words around! the fool has memorized a whole army full of fancy words. i know jesters in better positions, with the same talents he has. they also like to digress from the topic at hand by playing with language. anyway, how are you, jessica? and how do you like lord bassanio's wife?
that lepidus is an elegant man. a pun: lepidus means "elegant" in latin. that lepidus is an elegant man.
fire that's most enclosed burns most of all.
i like her more than i can say. bassanio should live an upstanding life because having a wife like portia is a blessing. it's as if he found heaven here on earth. and if he doesn't deserve this joy on earth, he'll never deserve it in heaven. imagine what would happen if two gods in heaven made a bet. if one of them used portia as his stake, the other god would have a hard time coming up with a human woman to match her value. the poor rude world doesn't have her equal.
he's a stylish man. and how he loves caesar!
those who don't show their love don't love at all.
as good a wife as she is, that's how good a husband i am to you.
yes, but how he adores mark antony!
oh, those who tell others of their love love the least of all.
i'll be the judge of that!
caesar? he's a god of a man. enobarbus and agrippa mock lepidus' excessive flattery. he's a god of a man.
i wish i knew how he felt.
i'll give you a chance to judge later. first let's go to dinner.
then what's antony? a god of a god?
(giving her a letter) read this paper, madam.
no, let me say some good things about you while i'm in the mood.
are you talking about caesar? he's without equal!
"to julia." tell me, who's it from?
no, please, save it for dinner conversation. that way, no matter what you say, i'll digest it with everything else.
oh, antony! oh, you phoenix mythical bird, symbol of immortality phoenix !
the letter will say.
in that case i'll serve you up like a dish of food.
if you want to praise caesar, just say his name, that's all the praise that's necessary.
tell me, who gave it to you?
is antonio here?
he certainly flattered them both with extravagant compliments.
sir valentine's servant, but i think it was sent from proteus. he would have given it to you himself, but i ran into him first and took it in your name. please forgive me.
yes, sir, i'm here.
he loves caesar best, but he also loves antony. oh! no one can describe or fathom lepidus' love for antony! hearts cannot think it, tongues cannot speak it, meas-urements cannot calculate it, scribes cannot write it, bards cannot sing it, and poets cannot make verses about it. but when it comes to caesar, lepidus' love approaches the awestruck wonder of a worshipper.
well, you're a fine go-between! do you dare receive love letters, and to whisper and conspire against me because of my lack of experience? trust me, it's an important job, and you're just the kind of person for it. there, take the letter. see that it's returned, or else don't let me see you again. (giving the letter back)
i feel sorry for you. you've come to face a ruthless enemy, an inhuman wretch incapable of pity, without any feelings of mercy.
he loves them both.
a request for your love deserves more in return than your hatred.
they tell me you've done everything you can to talk him out of what he's doing. but since he remains stubborn, and there's no legal way to protect me from his malice, i'll just have to take what he'll give me. i'm ready to suffer peacefully whatever he does to me in his cruelty and anger.
they are his dung, and he their beetle.
will you get going?
one of you go call the jew into court here.
so, there's the signal to ride. good-bye, noble agrippa.
just think about it.
he's standing ready outside the door. here he comes, my lord.
good luck, worthy soldier, and good-bye.
then again, i wish i had read the letter. it would be embarrassing to call her back again and do the very thing i chided her for. how foolish she is, since she knows i'm a single girl but still wouldn't make me read it! out of modesty girls say "no" when they wish the giver would construe it as "yes." how difficult this foolish thing called love is, like a cranky baby that will scratch its nurse and then immediately after show affection. how rudely i scolded lucetta, when really i wanted her here. i've taught myself to appear angry even when my heart smiles with joy! my punishment is to call lucetta back and ask forgiveness for my mistake. hey, lucetta!
make room so he can stand in front of me. shylock, everyone thinks, and i agree, that you're just pretending to be cruel. they think that at the last second you're going to show mercy and pity, which will be more surprising than the bizarre cruelty that you seem to be showing now. and even though you're here to collect the penalty, a pound of this poor merchant's flesh, they think you'll not only let it go, but out of humanity and love you'll forgive some portion of the principal he owes you too. in doing so you'll be taking pity on him for his many recent losses, which have been large enough to send even the greatest merchant out of business, and make even the most hard-hearted turk or tartar feel sorry for him. what do you say? we all expect a nice answer from you, jew.
you can't go any further with us, sir.
what would you like, my lady?
i've told you what i intend to do, and i've sworn by the holy sabbath to seek the penalty that is due according to our contract. if you refuse to allow me to do so, your city's charter and its freedom are endangered. you're going to ask me why i'd rather have a pound of decaying flesh than three thousand ducats. i won't answer that. let's just say it's because i feel like it. is that enough of an answer? what if i had a rat in my house, and i felt like paying ten thousand ducats to have it exterminated? do you have your answer yet?
you take an important part of myself with you. treat it well . . . . sister, be the kind of wife i hope you will be, and that this great contract rests upon your being . . . gracious antony, don't let my sister, this epitome of virtue that connects us, become the reason we separate. if you and i don't value her equally, it would be better for us to work out our differences without her.
is it almost dinnertime?
some men don't like roast pig, others go crazy if they see a cat, and others can't help urinating when they hear bagpipes. there's no sense trying to explain people's likes and dislikes. so, to answer your question. just as there's no clear reason why one man doesn't want a roast pig, or why another man can't stand a harmless and useful cat, or another can't tolerate bagpipes, so i can't give a reason, and i won't give a reason (other than the simple hate and loathing i feel for antonio) why i'm pursuing this unprofitable case against him. does that answer your question?
don't insult me with your distrust.
i wish it were, so that you could chew on your food instead of your servant.
that's no answer, you heartless man. it doesn't excuse your cruel behavior.
i mean what i say.
what is that that you picked up so carefully?
i don't have to give you answers that you like.
you won't find any cause for anxiety, even if you look for one. so, may the gods protect you and change the hearts of the romans so that they turn and give you their support. we'll leave you here.
nothing.
does everyone kill what they don't love?
good-bye, my dearest sister, good-bye. i hope you have good weather to set your mind at ease. farewell.
why did you bend over, then?
does anyone hate something and not want to kill it?
my noble brother!
to pick up the paper that i dropped.
disliking something isn't the same thing as hating it.
her eyes are like april: full of showers. but they'll flower into love. (to octavia ) be cheerful.
and that paper is nothing?
what, would you let a snake bite you twice?
(to caesar ) take care of my former husband's property, and, 
nothing that concerns me.
(to bassanio) please don't bother arguing with the jew. you might as well go stand on the beach and ask the ocean to get smaller. you might as well ask a wolf why he killed the lamb and made its mother cry.
what is it, octavia?
then let it lie on the ground for the people it does concern.
you might as well tell the pine trees on the mountain to stop waving their treetops when the storms blow through them. you might as well do the impossible rather than try to soften his jewish heart. it's the hardest thing imaginable. therefore i'm begging you, don't make any more offers, don't look for other ways to stop him. just let me receive my punishment, and let the jew take his penalty.
i'll tell you privately.
madam, it will not lie about what it concerns unless a liar reads it.
(to shylock) instead of your three thousand ducats, here are six thousand.
she won't say what she's feeling, and she can't understand her feelings. she's balanced uneasily, like a feather on the swell of a great wave, she won't move, even though her situation is about to change.
some lover of yours has written a poem to you.
if you offered me six times that, i wouldn't accept it. i would choose to take my penalty.
(aside to agrippa ) do you think caesar will cry?
i'll sing it, madam, to a tune. give me the note to sing it in. your ladyship can choose it.
how can you ever hope for mercy for yourself, when you don't give any now?
(aside to enobarbus ) he does look like it.
i place as little value as possible in such trifles. you should sing it to the tune of "light o' love."
why should i be afraid of your judgment when i haven't done anything wrong? many of you own slaves, which, like your donkeys and dogs and mules, you use to perform awful jobs just because you bought them. should i say to you, "set them free! let them marry your children! why are you making them work so hard? let their beds be as soft as yours, and let them eat the same food as you"? no, you'd answer, "the slaves are ours." and that's just how i'm answering you. the pound of flesh that i want from him was very expensive. it's mine and i'm going to get it. if you refuse me, the laws of venice have no validity. i await justice. so answer me. will i get it?
(aside to agrippa ) if he were a horse, watery eyes would lower his value. men aren't supposed to cry, either.
the poem is too heavy for so light a tune.
i have the authority to dismiss this court, unless bellario comes today. he's a legal expert i sent for to act as judge and help settle this matter.
(aside to enobarbus ) why, enobarbus, when antony saw that julius caesar was dead, he cried terribly. and he wept when he found that brutus had been killed at philippi.
too heavy! i guess the note is serious, then?
my lord, a messenger is waiting outside with letters from bellario. he's just come from padua.
(aside to agrippa ) he certainly did have rheumy eyes that year. whenever he had to kill, he cried, it's true!, until i cried too.
yes, and it would be melodious, too, if you'd sing it.
bring us the letters. call the messenger in.
(returning with octavia ) don't worry, sweet octavia, i'll always write to you, and i'll think about you all the time.
and why won't you sing it?
cheer up, antonio! keep up your courage, man! i'll give the jew my flesh, blood, bones, and everything before you lose one drop of blood for me.
come here, sir. i'll wrestle with you out of love. see, now i have you.
i cannot reach such high notes.
i'm like the one sick sheep in the flock, the one who deserves to die. the weakest fruit drops to the ground first, so let me drop. bassanio, the best thing you can do is to keep living and write an epitaph for my gravestone.
and thus i let you go and give you to the gods.
let's see your poem. what is it, you hussy?
have you come from bellario's office in padua?
good-bye. be happy.
keep your mood in check and get over your anger. i don't like this new tune you're singing.
yes, my lord. bellario sends his greetings. (she gives the duke a letter)
(to antony ) may every star light your path.
you don't?
(to shylock) why are you sharpening your knife so eagerly?
farewell, farewell.
no, madame, it's too sharp.
to cut my penalty from that bankrupt man over there.
farewell.
you, hussy, are too sassy.
you're sharpening that knife not on your sole but on your soul, you cruel jew. no metal, not even the executioner's axe, could ever be half as sharp as your hatred. can't any prayers reach your heart?
where is that messenger?
no, now you're too flat. you're ruining the harmony with a melody that's too harsh. your song only needs a tenor in other words, julia needs a man. tenor .
no, none that you're smart enough to make.
he's afraid to come in.
the tenor is ruined with your unruly bass.
oh, you're going to hell, you disgusting dog. killing you would be justice. you almost make me forget that i'm a christian. you make me want to agree with the philosopher pythagoras that animal souls are reincarnated in human bodies. your vicious dog soul used to belong to a wolf that was killed for slaughtering humans. when he died, his cruel soul passed out of his body and went into yours while you were lying in your unholy mother's womb. that's why your desires are wolfish, bloody, and ravenous.
oh, come on., come here, sir.
indeed, i sing for proteus.
unless your taunts can undo the signature on my contract, you're just wearing out your lungs by speaking so loud. be quiet, boy, or you'll lose your mind. i stand here with the law on my side.
gracious queen, even herod of judea wouldn't dare look at you unless you were in a good mood.
this letter won't trouble me from now on. here's a fuss over a love letter!
this letter from bellario introduces us to a young and well-educated legal expert. where is he?
i'll have herod's head chopped off! but now that antony's gone, who will do it for me? (to messenger ) come closer.
go, get out of here, and leave the papers where they are. i know you'd try to pick them up just to anger me.
he's waiting nearby to find out if you'll invite him in.
most formidable queen!
she pretends not to care, but she would be happy to be so angered by another love letter.
with all my heart., three or four of you go welcome him., in the meantime, i'll read bellario's letter out loud. (he reads) "i've received your letter but i'm very sick at the moment. as it happened, when your messenger came, a young lawyer from rome was visiting me. his name is balthazar. i told him about the case of the jew and antonio the merchant, and we consulted many books together. he knows my legal opinions about this matter, and he has his own expert opinions as well. i'm sending him in my place to answer your request for someone to act as judge in this matter. please don't underestimate him because he's so young. i never knew such a young man with such a mature head. i leave him to you. when you put him to the test, you'll see how wonderful he really is. you hear what the wise and educated bellario writes."
did you see octavia?
no, i wish i were so angry with this one!
and this is the legal professor, i take it., let me shake your hand. did old bellario send you here?
yes, revered queen.
stupid hands, to tear up such lovely words! destructive fingers, to feed on such sweet words and then rip up the letter they came from! i'll apologize by kissing each piece of paper. here, this one says "kind julia." it should say "unkind julia"! out of revenge for my own ingratitude i'll throw the paper on the floor and hatefully trample my name in disdain.
yes, my lord.
where?
and here's one that says "love-wounded proteus." poor wounded name! my breast will serve as your bed until your wounds are completely healed. i cleanse them with a healing kiss. but "proteus" was written down two or three times. be still, good wind, and don't blow these pieces of paper away until i've found each word in the letter, except for the piece with my own name on it, may some whirlwind take that piece, hurl it onto a frightening cliff, and from there throw it into the raging sea! look, his name is written twice in this line: "poor forlorn proteus, passionate proteus, to the sweet julia." i'll tear that last part off. then again, maybe i won't, since he tied it so prettily to his own sorrowful names. i'll fold them up, one on top of another. now the names may kiss, hug, battle, or do what they will.
welcome. please have a seat. are you familiar with the case currently before the court?
in rome, madam. i saw her face as she walked with her brother and mark antony.
madame, dinner is ready, and your father waits for you.
yes, thoroughly. which one is the merchant? and which one is the jew?
is she as tall as i am?
well, let's go then.
antonio and shylock, both of you come forward.
she is not, madam.
what, should these papers just lie on the ground revealing everything?
is your name shylock?
did you hear her speak? is her voice pitched high or low?
if you respect them, then it would be best to pick them up.
shylock is my name.
madam, i heard her speak. she has a low-pitched voice.
no, you yelled at me for dropping them in the first place. but we shouldn't leave them here or they'll catch a cold.
your case is most unusual, though the venetian law can't stop you from proceeding., (to antonio) he has a claim on you, correct?
that's not in her favor. he can't like her very long.
i see you have a strong desire for them.
yes, so he says.
like her? oh, isis, that's impossible.
yes, madame, you can interpret my behavior as you like. but i see things, too, even though you think my eyes are closed.
do you acknowledge the contract?
you're right, charmian. she's both dull-spoken and dwarfishly little., did she carry herself with majesty? compare her to any memory you might have of royalty.
come on, come on. will you please hurry up?
yes, i do.
she creeps along. moving or standing still, her bearing is about the same. she has a body, not a life. she's more like a statue than a living, breathing human being.
tell me, panthino, what were you and my brother talking so seriously about in the walkway back there?
then the jew must show you mercy.
is this true?
we were talking about his nephew, your son, proteus.
why do i have to do that? tell me.
if not, then i have no powers of observation.
why? what about him?
no one shows mercy because he has to. it just happens, the way gentle rain drops on the ground. mercy is a double blessing. it blesses the one who gives it and the one who receives it. it's strongest in the strongest people. it looks better in a king than his own crown looks on him. the king's scepter represents his earthly power, the symbol of majesty, the focus of royal authority. but mercy is higher than the scepter. it's enthroned in the hearts of kings, a quality of god himself. kingly power seems most like god's power when the king mixes mercy with justice. so although justice is your plea, jew, consider this.
there aren't three people in all of egypt who could do better.
he wondered why your lordship would let him spend his youth here at home. other men with lesser reputations send their sons to seek opportunities abroad, or to find their fortunes fighting in the wars, or to discover far away islands, or to study in the universities. he said that proteus was capable of doing any or all of these things, and he asked me to urge you not to let him spend any more time at home. it would be a shame for him in old age not to have traveled in his youth.
justice won't save our souls. we pray for mercy, and this same prayer teaches us to show mercy to others as well. i've told you this to make you give up this case. if you pursue it, this strict court of venice will need to carry out the sentence against the merchant there.
he's very observant. i can tell. she doesn't have anything going for her so far. this messenger is wise.
you don't need to urge me on this matter. i've thought about it a lot this month. i've considered how much time he's wasting, and how he cannot be a complete man without having some real-world trials and tests. experience comes from hard work and is perfected over the course of time. tell me, though, where would it be best to send him?
i take all responsibility for my decisions. i want the law, the penalty, and the fulfillment of my contract.
very wise.
i think your lordship knows that his friend, the young valentine, has gone off to visit the emperor in his royal court in milan.
can't he pay back the money?
(to messenger ) how old do you think she is?
i'm fully aware.
yes. i'm offering to pay it back right this moment, even twice the sum. if that's not enough, i'll sign a contract to pay ten times that much, and i'll give you my hands, my head, and my heart as security. if that's not enough, then you're just evil and malicious., (to the duke) i beg you, just this once, use your authority to bend the law. do a great right by doing a little wrong. don't let this devil have his way.
she was a widow previously, madam.
it would be good, i think, if your lordship sent him there. there he can take part in jousts and tournaments, listen to learned discussions, speak with noblemen, and witness everything befitting his youth and nobleness of birth.
that can't happen. there's no power in venice that can change an established decree. the change will be recorded as a precedent, and many bad legal decisions will result. that can't happen.
a widow? do you hear that, charmian?
i like what you say. you've advised me well. and so you may see how much i like it, i'll announce it publicly. i'll send him off to the emperor's court immediately.
a daniel in the bible, as a young man, daniel shows great wisdom while acting as judge in the case of susanna, who was falsely accused. daniel has come to judgment, yes, a daniel!, oh, wise young judge, i honor you!
and i think she's at least thirty.
if it pleases you, don alphonso and some other noblemen are setting off tomorrow to visit the emperor and to offer their services to help him in whatever he needs.
please, let me review the contract.
do you remember her face? was it long or round?
sounds like a good group. proteus will go with them. proteus enters, reading a letter.
(he hands portia a paper) here it is, judge, here it is.
round enough to be unattractive.
just in time! i'll talk to him now.
shylock, they're offering you three times the money you lent.
usually that means a person is foolish. what color is her hair?
(to himself) sweet love, sweet poetry, sweet life! here is a letter in her handwriting, which does the bidding of her heart. here is her pledge of love, which vows she will be faithful. oh, i wish our fathers would approve of our love and consent to let us marry, sealing our happiness forever. oh, heavenly julia!
but i made an oath, an oath, an oath in heaven. should i perjure my soul by disobeying it? no, not for all of venice.
brown, madam, and she wouldn't want her forehead to be any lower.
what's that you say? what's that letter you're reading there?
the money wasn't paid back! and so the jew may lawfully claim a pound of flesh nearest the merchant's heart, to be cut off by him., but please have mercy. take three times your money. tell me to tear up this contract.
here's gold for you. you mustn't hold my earlier outburst against me. i'll hire you again to go back to rome. i find that you're very good at this kind of work. go, prepare to travel. my letters are ready to go.
your lordship, it's just a short note of greeting from valentine, delivered to me by a friend of his.
i'll tear it up when it's paid. you seem like a good judge. you know the law. your explanation has made sense. i urge you to deliver your verdict. i swear that nothing anyone can say will change my mind. i'm sticking to the contract.
he's an admirable man.
give me the letter. let me see what news it brings.
i beg the court to deliver the verdict.
he certainly is. i'm very sorry i was so hard on him. why, from what he says, octavia isn't worth getting upset over.
there is no news, my lord. he just writes how happy he is and that the emperor likes him and honors him each day. he wishes i were with him to share his good luck.
well, then, here it is: you must prepare yourself for his knife.
not a bit, madam.
and how do you feel about his wish?
oh, good judge! oh, you excellent young man!
this man's been around royalty. he should recognize it when he sees it.
like one who is used to following your orders and not able to honor valentine's wishes.
the law fully authorizes the penalty, which you have to pay according to the contract.
been around royalty! isis forbid it were otherwise, since he's been in your service so long.
my wish is similar to valentine's. now don't think that i decided this rashly, because i get what i want, and that's final. i've decided that you should spend some time with valentine in the emperor's court. i'll provide you with the same money for room and board that he receives from his family. be ready to go tomorrow. don't try to get out of it now, because i've made up my mind.
very true. oh wise judge! you're so much older than you look!
i want to ask him one more thing, charmian. but it's not important. bring him to my writing room. everything may still be all right.
my lord, i can't get ready that quickly. please, think about this a day or two longer.
(to antonio) so bare your chest.
i assure you it is, madam.
look, whatever you want will be sent to you after you leave. you're not going to stay here any longer. you must go tomorrow. come on, panthino, you will help get everything ready so he can leave as soon as possible.
yes, his chest! that's what the contract says, doesn't it, judge? "nearest his heart.", those are the very words.
no, no, octavia, it's not only that. that would be excusable, that and a thousand other offenses like it. but caesar has gone and waged a new war against pompey. he made his will and read it in a public assembly. roman politicians could gain popularity among the common people by writing a will that included bequests in their favor, such as sums of money, parkland, or orchards dedicated to their use. he made his will and read it in a public assembly. he hardly refers to me at all, though official decisions are supposed to be made jointly. when he can't avoid mentioning my services to the state, he minimizes them as much as possible. when situations arise when it would be natural to emphasize my due credit, he either ignores them or only pays me lip service.
i dove into the sea to avoid being burned by the fire, and now i'm drowning instead. i was afraid to show julia's letter to my father because i didn't want him to disapprove of my love, but taking advantage of my lie he raised more obstacles against it. oh, our new love is like the uncertain days of april, which will be sunny one moment, and suddenly a cloud takes the sunshine away!
yes. is there a scale here to weigh the flesh?
oh, dear husband, don't believe everything you hear, or if you must believe it, don't let it all make you angry. no lady could be more miserable than i if you two disagree. i'll be left in the middle, praying for both sides. the good gods will laugh at me when on the one hand i pray for my husband and on the other for my brother. "let my husband win!" "let my brother win!" one prayer cancels out the other. there's no middle ground between these two extremes.
sir proteus, your father calls for you. he's in a hurry, so i beg you, go quickly.
i have it ready.
gentle octavia, support the one that supports you. if i'm defeated, i lose my reputation. if i lose my reputation, i lose myself. it would be better for you to have no husband than a husband who lacks honor. however, as you requested, you may go and try to negotiate with your brother. in the meantime, i'll raise an army that will surpass his. go as soon as possible, so your prayers may be answered the sooner.
this is how it is: my heart agrees to it but wants to say no a thousand times.
pay a surgeon to stand by and bind his wounds, shylock, so he doesn't bleed to death.
thank you, my lord. may the god of power make me, the weakest of the weak, your mediator. a war between you two would split the very world, and the bodies of your slaughtered soldiers would have to fill the chasm between.
sir, here is your glove.
is that called for in the contract?
when you find out who started this disagreement, turn your anger upon them. our faults can't be so alike that you would judge us similarly. order supplies for your trip and choose your traveling companions. spend as much as you like.
that isn't mine. i'm already wearing my gloves.
not explicitly, but so what? it wouldn't hurt you to be charitable.
how goes it, friend eros?
well, then, this may be your glove, because it's all by itself.
i can't find it. it's not in the contract.
some startling news has just arrived, sir.
ha! let me see it. yes, give it to me. it's mine. sweet accessory that sylvia's divine hand wears. ah sylvia, sylvia!
(to antonio) you, merchant, do you have anything to say?
what news, man?
(calling) madame sylvia! madama sylvia!
not much. i'm ready and waiting., give me your hand, bassanio. goodbye.
caesar and lepidus declared war against pompey.
what are you doing, pal sirrah, the word used in shakespeare's original language, is used to address a social inferior. pal ?
don't be sad that this happened because of you, because lady luck's been nicer to me than usual. usually she makes the unhappy man live on after he loses his wealth, to spend his old age in poverty. but in my case she's letting me avoid that misery. send your honorable wife my greetings, and tell her how i died and how i loved you. speak well of me after i'm dead, and when the tale's done, ask her to judge whether bassanio had a friend. be sad only at the fact that you'll lose your friend, your friend doesn't regret that he paid your debt. if the jew cuts deep enough, i'll pay it instantly with all my heart.
that's old news. who's winning?
she's too far away to hear me, sir.
antonio, i married a woman as dear to me as life itself. but life itself, my wife, and the whole world aren't more valuable to me than your life is. i'd give it all up, yes, i'd sacrifice them all to this devil here, to save you.
caesar used lepidus in the war, but as soon as it was over, lepidus was expelled from the triumvirate. he wasn't allowed any of the glory of the victory, and he was accused of treasonous correspondence with pompey. on the basis of caesar's accusation alone, lepidus was imprisoned. so the weak third of the triumvirate is imprisoned until death frees him.
but, sir, who asked you to call out for her?
your wife wouldn't like it if she were here to hear you make that offer.
so now the world will only be devoured by two sets of jaws, caesar's and antony's. and even if you throw everything you possess to the two of them, they'll battle each other to the death to have it all. where's antony?
you did, sir, or else i misunderstood you.
i have a wife i love. i wish she were in heaven so she could appeal to some power to make this dog jew change his mind.
he's walking in the garden, like this (imitating anger). and he kicks the leaves on the path, exclaiming, "lepidus, you fool!" then he threatens to kill the officer who murdered pompey. pompey was killed by one of antony's officers, titius, during his campaign for antony's territories. some historians believe that titius acted on antony's specific order. then he threatens to kill the officer who murdered pompey.
well, you're always too presumptuous.
it's nice you're offering to sacrifice her behind her back. that wish of yours could start quite an argument back at home.
antony's grand navy is prepared.
even though last time i was scolded for being too slow.
that's what you get for marrying christian husbands. i have a daughter. i wish she'd married any one of barabbas's in the bible, barabbas is a thief who is set free at the same time that jesus is condemned to death. barabbas's descendants instead of a christian!, we're wasting time. please, deliver the sentence.
to sail to italy and caesar. another thing, domitius: antony wants to see you now. i should have waited to tell you my news.
enough, sir. tell me, do you know madame sylvia?
a pound of this merchant's flesh is yours. the court awards it and the law authorizes it.
it won't be that important. but never mind. take me to antony.
the madame sylvia you love, your worship?
what a righteous judge!
come with me, sir.
why, how do you know that i am in love?
and you have to cut this flesh from his chest. the law allows it, and the court awards it.
in alexandria he condemned rome, and that's not all. this is what happened: he and cleopatra sat on chairs of gold on a silver-covered stage in the marketplace. caesarion, whom they call my father's son, julius caesar was octavius caesar's adopted father (biologically, he was his uncle). caesarion, whom they call my father's son, and all their illegitimate children sat at their feet. antony confirmed her possession of egypt and made her absolute queen of lower syria, cyprus, and lydia.
because of all the right signs, of course: first, like sir proteus, you have started to fold your arms like you're unhappy about something. you go around singing love songs like a redbreasted robin. you walk alone, like one who has the plague. you sigh like a schoolboy who has lost his textbook. you weep, like a young girl who has just buried her grandmother. you don't eat, like one who's on a diet. you can't sleep, like one who fears being robbed. you whine, like a beggar on hallowmas hallowmas, or all saint's day, took place on november , and it was customary on that day to give charity to beggars. like a beggar on hallowmas it used to be that when you laughed, you crowed like a rooster. when you walked, you walked like a lion. when you didn't eat, it was because you'd just finished lunch. when you looked sad, it was because you were out of money. and now a mistress has changed you. when i look at you, i can hardly recognize you as my master.
what a wise judge! come on, get ready.
he did this in public?
can you see all these things in me?
but wait a moment. there's something else. this contract doesn't give you any blood at all. the words expressly specify "a pound of flesh." so take your penalty of a pound of flesh, but if you shed one drop of christian blood when you cut it, the state of venice will confiscate your land and property under venetian law.
in the public arena, where they perform sporting events. he proclaimed his sons to be kings of kings. he gave media, parthia, and armenia to alexander. he gave syria, cilicia, and phoenicia to ptolemy. cleopatra was dressed like the goddess isis. they say she often attended her public functions like that.
they are all outside of you, in your outward appearance.
oh, what an upright judge!, pay attention, jew., oh, what a smart judge!
let's send this news to rome.
outside of me? they cannot be outside of me.
is that the law?
the roman people are fed up with his arrogance already. they'll abandon him completely when they hear this.
outside of you? no, i'm sure, because if you weren't so obvious no one would see them. but your appearance is so marked by these foolish traits that they must be inside you, and they shine through you as if you were water in a jar. everyone that sees you is like a physician who knows why you're sick.
you can see for yourself. you asked for justice, so rest assured you'll get more justice than you bargained for.
the people have heard it already, and they've been told of his accusations.
but tell me, do you know my lady sylvia?
oh, what a wise judge!, pay attention, jew. a wise judge!
who does he accuse?
the woman you stare at while she sits at the dinner table?
in that case i'll take their offer. pay me three times the amount of the loan and let the christian go.
he accuses me of withholding his share of sextus pompeius' possessions, which we seized in sicily. then he says i didn't return some ships he loaned me. finally, he criticizes the deposing of lepidus, and then goes on to accuse me of keeping all of lepidus' property for myself.
have you noticed me doing that? yes, that's the woman i mean.
here is the money.
sir, these accusations should be answered.
well, sir, i don't know her at all.
wait! the jew will have justice. wait, don't rush! he's not getting anything except the penalty.
it has been done already, and the messenger is on his way. i answered that lepidus had become too brutal and abused his position. for this he deserved to be deposed. as for what i seized in the wars, i granted that antony should have a share. but i also demanded my share of his acquisitions in armenia and the other conquered kingdoms.
do you know her only by my staring at her and not otherwise?
oh, jew, what an upright judge this is! what a wise judge!
he'll never agree to that.
isn't she ugly, sir?
so get ready to cut off the flesh. don't shed any blood, or cut less or more than exactly a pound of flesh. if you take more or less than exactly a pound, even if it's just the tiniest fraction of an ounce, if the scale changes by even so much as a hair, you die, and all your property will be confiscated.
then we won't agree to his demands.
she's not as beautiful, boy, as she is gracious.
a second daniel!, a daniel, jew! i've got you now, pagan.
greetings, caesar, my lord! greetings, dearest caesar!
sir, i know that very well.
why is the jew waiting? take your penalty.
oh, to think you've been rejected!
what do you know?
give me my money and let me go.
you've never thought of me like that, and you have no reason to.
the she isn't as pretty as she is looked on favorably by you.
i have it ready for you. here it is.
then why did you travel so quietly? you didn't arrive like caesar's sister. antony's wife should have an army to escort her, with neighing horses to announce her arrival long before she appears. the trees along the road should have been filled with eager spectators. crowds should have been faint with excitement waiting to see you. the dust from your attending troops should have risen to heaven. but you've arrived like a common maid bringing goods to a roman market. you've kept me from displaying my love, and when love is not shown, it's often not felt. i would have met you by sea and again by land. at each stage of your trip there would have been a more spectacular greeting.
i mean that her beauty is exquisite but her graciousness is infinite.
no, he refused it publicly, in open court. he will have only justice and his penalty.
my good lord, i wasn't forced to travel like this. it was my choice. mark antony heard that you were preparing to wage war on him. when he gave me this news, i begged him to let me visit you.
that's because the first one is done with makeup and the other can't be counted.
a daniel, i keep saying it! a second daniel!, thank you, jew, for teaching me that word.
which he quickly allowed, given that you're an obstacle to his lust.
what do you mean, done with makeup? and why can't you count the other?
i won't even get the original three thousand ducats back?
don't say that, my lord.
i mean, sir, she's so painted with makeup to look beautiful that no man values her beauty.
you can't have anything but the penalty, to be taken at your peril, jew.
i've kept track of him, and reports of his affairs arrive on every ship. where do you think he is now?
so what do you think of me, then? i think she's very beautiful.
well, then, i hope he chokes on it! i'm not staying here to argue anymore.
he's in athens, my lord.
you haven't seen her since she was deformed.
wait a minute, jew. the law has another hold on you. the laws of venice state that if a foreign resident directly or indirectly attempts to kill any citizen, the person he tried to kill will receive one half of the foreigner's goods. the other half goes to the state. whether the offending person lives or dies is up to the duke, there's no one else to appeal to. in your predicament you've earned that punishment, because you've clearly contrived indirectly, and directly too, to take the life of the defendant. so get down on your knees and beg mercy from the duke.
no, he's not. you've been deceived. cleopatra summoned him. he's given his empire to a whore, and now they're gathering kings to wage a war. he's recruited bocchus, the king of libya; archelaus of cappadocia; philadelphos, king of paphlagonia; the thracian king, adallas; king manchus of arabia; the king of pont; herod, of judea; mithridates, king of comagen; polemon and amyntas, the kings of mede and lycaonia, and many more.
how long has she been deformed?
beg to be allowed to hang yourself! but if you've handed over all your wealth to the state, you don't even have enough money left to buy a rope. so you'll be hanged at the state's expense.
oh, i'm heartbroken. i'm divided between two friends who are determined to kill each other.
ever since you fell in love with her.
i want you to see the difference between us, so i pardon you even before you ask for a pardon. half of your wealth goes to antonio. the other half goes to the state. however, if you show a proper humility, i may reduce this penalty to a fine.
you're welcome here. i didn't write about breaking the alliance with antony until i saw you were being misled and realized how dangerous it would be to keep postponing preparations. cheer yourself. don't be troubled by the present situation, the obligations of which must ruin your happiness. don't worry about things that have already been decided by fate. welcome home to rome. nothing is more precious to me than you. you have been unbelievably abused, and now the gods make us the dispensers of justice. be comforted. you will always be welcome to me.
i have loved her ever since i first saw her, and i still think she's beautiful.
yes, the state's half can be reduced, but not antonio's.
welcome, lady.
if you love her then you cannot see her.
no, go ahead and take my life. don't pardon that. you take my house away when you take the money i need for upkeep. you take my life when you take away my means of making a living.
welcome, dear madam. every heart in rome loves and pities you. only the adulterous and abominable antony abandons you, giving his power to a whore who turns that power against us.
why not?
what mercy can you show him, antonio?
(to caesar ) is that true, sir?
because love is blind. oh, if you had my eyes, or if you could see as clearly as you did when you scolded sir proteus for not wearing a garter garters were used to keep stockings from falling, and going without garters was popularly considered a sign of lovesickness. not wearing a garter !
a hangman's rope free of charge. nothing else, for god's sake!
it's undeniable. you are welcome here, sister. i beg you to continue to be patient. my dearest sister!
what would i see then?
if the duke and his court agree to set aside the fine for one half of his property, i'm happy, as long as he lets me have the other half in trust, to give it to the gentleman who recently stole his daughter. i only ask two more things. first, shylock must immediately become a christian. second, he must make a will here in this court that leaves all his property to his son-in-law lorenzo and his daughter when he dies.
i'll be straight with you. do not doubt it.
your own current foolishness and her enormous deformity. proteus, because he was in love, forgot to put on a garter to keep his stockings up, and you, also being in love, can't see well enough to even put on your stockings.
he must do this, or i'll recant the pardon i just delivered.
but why, why, why?
then maybe, boy, you're in love, because this morning you couldn't see well enough to polish my shoes.
are you satisfied, jew? what do you say?
you opposed my taking part in the war. you said it wasn't proper.
true, sir. i was in love with my bed. i thank you, you hit me because i was so in love, which has made me bold enough to scold you for your love.
i'm satisfied.
well, is it? is it?
in conclusion, i'm in love with her.
(to nerissa) clerk, draw up a document to make his gift official.
isn't this war against me? why shouldn't i be there in person?
i wish you weren't standing erect. maybe then your love would go away.
please let me go. i'm not well. send the deed after me and i'll sign it.
well, i could answer that if we went to war on male and female horses alike, the male horses would be totally distracted and useless. the mares would be ridden by their riders and the male horses.
last night she asked me to write some lines of poetry to the one she loves.
go, but sign the deed.
what do you mean?
and did you?
(to shylock) when you're baptized a christian, you'll have two godfathers. if i'd been the judge, you would've had ten more, twelve jurors to sentence you to death rather than baptism.
antony will necessarily be distracted by your presence. you will affect his heart and his head. you'll take up time he can't afford to lose. he's already criticized for frivolous behavior. in rome they say that your eunuch photinus and your maids run the war.
i did.
(to portia) sir, please come home with me to dinner.
let rome fall! may the tongues of our critics rot! i have responsibilities in this war, and as the absolute ruler of my kingdom i will carry out my duties as if i were a man. don't argue against it. i won't stay behind.
they're badly written, aren't they?
i'm very sorry, sir, but i have to go to padua tonight. i should really leave right away.
no, i've had my say. here comes the emperor.
no, boy, i wrote them as well as i could. be quiet now, here she comes.
i'm sorry you don't have time., antonio, give this gentleman a reward. in my opinion, you owe him a lot.
isn't it strange, canidius, that he could cross the ionian sea so quickly from tarentum and brundusium and take toryne?, have you heard about this, sweet?
(aside) oh, what a puppet show! such a wonderful puppet she makes. now he'll give his commentary on the show.
(to portia) sir, thanks to you my friend and i have been freed from paying some awful penalties today. instead of giving the jew the three thousand ducats he's owed, we give it to you in gratitude for your kind efforts.
no one admires speed more than the lazy.
madame and mistress, i wish you a thousand good mornings.
and even then we're still indebted to you. we owe you love and service forever.
that's a good reprimand, suitable for reminding even the best of men to guard against negligence. canidius, we'll fight him at sea.
(aside) and god give you a good evening! what manners!
being satisfied with a job well done is payment enough. in saving you i consider myself well paid. my thoughts were never on money. i hope you'll recognize me when we meet again. i wish you well. now, i've got to go.
of course we'll fight him by sea. what else?
sir valentine and servant, to you i wish two thousand good mornings.
sir, i really feel the need to give you something. take some memento from us as a token of our gratitude, not as a fee. please do two favors for me. first, don't refuse me, and second, excuse me for insisting.
why do you want to do that, my lord?
(aside) he should outdo her in compliments, but she outdoes him.
since you keep insisting, i'll do as you say. (to antonio) give me your gloves. i'll wear them for your sake. (to bassanio) and as a souvenir of your appreciation, i'll take this ring from you. don't pull your hand back. i won't take anything more than this, and you can't refuse me this.
because he's daring us to do it.
as you asked, i have written your letter to that secret, anonymous friend of yours. though i didn't want to do it, i wrote it out of duty to your ladyship.
this ring, sir, oh no, it's nothing. i'd be ashamed to give you this.
so you've dared him to single combat.
i thank you, gentle servant. it's very smartly written.
i don't want anything but that. now that i think about it, i really want it.
yes, and you dared caesar to fight the battle at pharsalia, where he fought against pompey. but caesar ignores offers that don't give him an advantage, and so should you.
now trust me, madame, it wasn't easy to write this, because i had to be somewhat vague since i didn't know to whom it would go.
there's more to this ring than its cash value. i'll give you the most expensive ring in venice, and i'll make a public announcement to help me find it. but as for this ring, please excuse me.
your ships are not well crewed. your sailors are mule drivers, harvesters, men who were drafted quickly and have little training. caesar's fleet is manned by mariners who already have experience battling pompey. his ships are maneuverable. yours are slow and awkward. refusing to fight him at sea won't disgrace you. you've prepared for a land war.
perhaps you think it was too much trouble?
i see you like to make big offers, sir. first you taught me how to beg, and now i think you're teaching me how a beggar should be answered.
i will fight by sea. by sea.
no, madame. if it helps you, i will write a thousand times as many lines if you like. and yet . . .
good sir, this ring was given to me by my wife. when she put it on my finger, she made me swear never to sell it, give it away, or lose it.
most worthy sir, if you do that you throw away all the advantages you have on land. you will have to divide your army, which mostly consists of battle-hardened foot soldiers. you will be unable to use your legendary battle knowledge. you'll be abandoning proven methods that promise victory, and instead you'll put yourself at the mercy of haphazard chance.
a fine pause! i can guess what you're going to say next. and yet i will not say it. and yet i don't care. and yet you can take this back. and yet thanks anyway, meaning i won't bother you again.
many men use that excuse to avoid giving gifts. if your wife's not a madwoman, and you tell her how much i deserve this ring, she won't stay angry at you forever if you give it to me. well, anyway, goodbye.
i'll fight at sea.
(aside) and yet you will, and yet say another "yet."
bassanio, let him have the ring. consider how much he deserves it, and weigh that, along with my friendship, against your wife's order.
i have sixty ships. caesar doesn't have any that are better.
what do you mean, your ladyship? don't you like it?
(he gives gratiano the ring) go, gratiano, run and catch up with him. give him the ring, and take him to antonio's house if you can. go quickly.
we'll burn our surplus ships and fully man the rest. we'll sail from actium and beat caesar as he approaches. even if we fail at that, we can still fight him on land.
yes, yes. the lines are very nicely written, but since you wrote them so unwillingly, take them back. no, take them.
come on, you and i will go soon. early in the morning we'll both rush to belmont. come on, antonio.
what's your business?
madame, they are for you.
find out where the jew's house is. give him this deed and have him sign it. we'll leave tonight and be home a day before our husbands get back. lorenzo will be happy with what we've done.
the news is true, my lord. caesar has been seen. he has captured toryne.
yes, yes. you wrote them, sir, at my request, but i don't want them. they are for you. i wish they had been more movingly written.
(he gives portia bassanio's ring) sir, you're lucky i caught up with you. bassanio thought about it some more and sent this ring to you. he would like to invite you to dinner.
can caesar be there in person? no, that's impossible. it's strange enough that his army should be there. canidius, take our nineteen legions military division consisting of , armored infantrymen legions and twelve thousand horse soldiers. you must hold them on land. we'll go to our ship. come away, cleopatra.
if it pleases you, i'll write another for your ladyship.
i can't have dinner with him. please tell him i accept his ring with thanks. and could you please take my servant to old shylock's house?
what's the news, brave soldier?
and when it's written, read it over for my sake. and if it pleases you, fine. and if it doesn't, well, that's also fine.
i'll do that.
oh, don't fight by sea, noble emperor! don't trust rotten planks. don't you trust my sword and these wounds? let the egyptians and phoenicians go swimming. we are used to winning by standing on the earth and fighting toe to toe.
if it pleases me, madame, what then?
(to portia) sir, may i speak with you? (speaking so that only portiacan hear) i'll see if i can get my husband's ring, which i made him swear to keep forever.
well, well, let's go.
why, if it pleases you, then take it as payment for your hard work. and so good morning and goodbye to you, servant.
(to nerissa) i bet you'll be able to. they'll swear they gave the rings to men. but we'll deny it and outswear them too., 
by hercules, i think i'm right.
(aside) oh, that joke is as hard to see as a nose on a man's face or a weathercock on a steeple! my master pleads with her, and she has taught him, her student, to become her teacher. what an excellent trick! has anyone ever heard anything better than my master, the scribe, writing the letter to himself?
go, hurry. you know where i'll be waiting.
soldier, you are. but antony's decisions aren't coming from his extensive experience. our leader is being led. we are following a woman.
what's that, sir? what are you reasoning to yourself over there?
(to gratiano) sir, will you show me to shylock's house now?
on land you keep the legions and cavalry together, don't you?
no, i was rhyming. it's you who's been doing the reasoning.
the moon's bright tonight. i think that on a night like this, when the wind blew the trees so gently that they didn't make a sound, troilus troilus was the son of king priam of troy. his lover, cressida, was sent to the greek camp, where she betrayed him. troilus climbed up onto the walls of troy and sighed for cressida in the greek camp.
marcus octavius, marcus justeius, publicola, and caelius will go by sea, but we'll keep the bulk on land. caesar's speed defies belief.
reasoning what?
on a night like this, thisbe thisbe had agreed to meet her lover pyramus, but was frightened away by a lion. pyramus killed himself because he thought the lion had eaten her, and thisbe killed herself when she found pyramus dead. thisbe saw the lion's shadow and ran away in fear.
while he was still in rome, he deployed his forces in so many different disguises that all our spies were fooled.
to be a spokesman for madame sylvia.
on a night like this, dido dido, the queen of carthage, was abandoned by her lover aeneas. dido stood holding a willow branch on the seashore, begging her lover to come back to her in carthage.
who's his lieutenant, do you know?
to whom?
on a night like this, medea medea used her magic to help her lover, jason's father. later, jason betrayed her, and she murdered their children in revenge. medea gathered magic herbs to rejuvenate old aeson.
a man named taurus, they say.
to yourself. why, she's wooing you indirectly with this trick.
on a night like this, jessica ran away from the wealthy jew and stole his money. she ran away from venice all the way to belmont with her spendthrift lover.
i know the man well.
what trick?
on a night like this, young lorenzo swore he loved her very much, stealing her heart with vows of love, but not one vow was true.
the emperor is calling for canidius.
by a letter, i should say.
on a night like this, pretty jessica, in a bad mood, said outrageously wrong things about her lover, and he forgave her.
the present time is like a woman in labor, each minute giving birth to some piece of news.
but, she hasn't written to me.
i'd get the better of you in this storytelling game, but somebody's coming. i hear his footsteps.
taurus!
why would she need to when she's made you write to yourself? why, don't you get the joke?
who are you, coming so fast in this quiet night?
my lord?
no, believe me.
a friend.
don't attack by land. keep the army together. don't provoke them to battle until we have finished at sea. don't exceed your orders as written here.
no believing you, indeed, sir. did you think she was being serious?
a friend? what friend? what's your name, please, friend?
our fate depends on this chance.
she gave me nothing except an angry word.
my name's stephano, and i've come to tell you my mistress will arrive here at belmont before sunrise. she's still at the monastery, kneeling and praying for a happy marriage.
assemble our squadrons on the other side of the hill, in sight of caesar's navy. from there we'll be able to see how many ships he has and plan accordingly.
why, she's given you a letter.
who's coming with her?
we're ruined, ruined, ruined! i can't watch any more. the egyptian flagship, the antoniad, followed by all sixty egyptian ships, has turned and fled. it destroyed my eyes to look upon it.
that's the letter i wrote to her friend.
no one except her maid and a holy hermit. has my master returned yet?
gods and goddesses, the whole congregation of them!
and she's delivered that letter, and that's the end of it.
no, he hasn't, and we haven't heard from him., but let's go in, jessica. we'll get ready to welcome the mistress of the house back home.
what's wrong with you?
i wish it were that good.
hey, hey! hey! yoo-hoo!
we have lost a major portion of the world through utter foolishness. we have kissed away entire kingdoms and provinces.
i promise you, it is that good. because you've often written to her, and she, whether out of modesty or because she didn't have the time, or out of fear that the messenger carrying the letter would discover her feelings, couldn't reply. so she taught the man she loves to write to himself. i say all this very carefully, because i read it in her as if it were printed on a page. why do you look so pensive, sir? it's lunchtime.
who's shouting?
how goes the battle?
i've already eaten.
hey! have you seen master lorenzo! master lorenzo, hey! hey!
our side shows all the signs of certain defeat, which appear like the symptomatic sores of the plague. right in the middle of the fight, just when the battle could have gone either way, actually we had a slight advantage, that immoral egyptian nag, may she die of leprosy!, suddenly became frightened, and turned her ships around and fled.
yes, but listen, sir: even though the chameleon love chameleons were thought to feed on air since they can go long periods without eating. here it also refers to love's fickleness, since chameleons can change their color. the chameleon love can feed off the air, i need real food for nourishment, and i'm eager to have meat. oh, don't be like your mistress, have a heart!
stop hollering, man! i'm here.
i saw that. the sight made me so sick i couldn't watch any more.
be patient, gentle julia.
hey! where, where?
once she had turned around, the noble antony, ruined by love, hoisted his own sails and followed her like a lovesick duck. he left the battle at the most crucial point. i never saw such a shameful act. he betrayed his own experience, manhood, and honor.
i have to be, since there is no way to fix the situation.
here.
terrible. terrible.
i will return as soon as i can.
tell him a messenger has arrived from my master with good news. my master will be here in the morning.
the battle on the sea is almost lost. if our general had been his old self, we would have won. oh, with his sordid desertion, he sets the example for our own.
if you're not unfaithful you'll return sooner. keep this to remember me by, for my sake. she gives him a ring.
my dear, let's go inside and wait for them to arrive. but i guess it doesn't matter. why should we go in?, stephano, tell the household staff that your mistress is about to arrive, and bring some musicians outside here.
are you considering desertion, as well? then everything must really be finished.
well, then, we'll exchange rings. here, you take this.
how beautiful the moonlight's shining on this bank! let's sit here and let the music fill our ears. stillness and nighttime are perfect for beautiful music. sit down, jessica. look at the stars, see how the floor of heaven is inlaid with small disks of bright gold. stars and planets move in such perfect harmony that some believe you can hear music in their movement. if you believe this, even the smallest star sings like an angel in its motion. souls have that same kind of harmony. but because we're here on earth in our earthly bodies, we can't hear it.
they fled toward peloponnesus.
and we will seal the bargain with a holy kiss.
wake up the moon goddess with a hymn! get her attention and draw her home with music.
it's easy to get there. i'll go there and ascertain their next move.
here is my hand to show my fidelity. and if an hour in the day passes when i don't sigh when thinking of you, julia, then may some disaster torment me in the next hour to punish my love's forgetfulness! my father is waiting for me. don't say anything. the tide is right for me to set out, no, not your tide of tears. those tears will keep me here longer than i should stay. farewell, julia!
i'm never in the mood to laugh when i hear sweet music.
i'll yield my legions and cavalry to caesar. in this, i follow the examples of the six kings who have already surrendered.
what, she's gone without saying a word? yes, that's how it should be with true love. it cannot speak, because truth is best expressed through action, not words.
that's because your soul is paying attention to the music. take a wild herd of animals, or young untrained colts, leaping around like crazy, roaring and neighing loudly, which they have to do because it's in their blood, but if they happen to hear a trumpet, or any kind of music, they all stand still. sweet music makes their wild eyes peaceful. that's why the poet ovid wrote that the great musician orpheus could make
i'll still follow antony, even though the odds are against him and good sense tells me i should go the other way.
sir proteus, everyone is waiting for you.
trees, stones, and rivers come to him by playing music. there's nothing in the world that can resist music. the man who can't be moved by the harmonious melodies is fit only for treason, violence, and pillage. his soul is as dull as night and dark as the underworld. nobody like that should be trusted. pay attention to the music.
listen. the earth tells me to stop walking upon it, as it's ashamed to carry me. friends, come here. i'm completely lost. i have a ship full of treasure. take that. divide it. escape and make peace with caesar.
go on. i'm coming, i'm coming. too bad! this parting has left us poor lovers without words.
that light we see is coming from my hall. look how far that little candle sends its light! that's the way a good deed shines in a naughty world.
flee? not us.
no, it'll be this time tomorrow before i've stopped crying. all the members of the lance family have this fault. i've received my portion of the family trait, just like the prodigious son lance, who frequently confuses words, means to refer to the bible story of the "prodigal son." prodigious son , and now i'm going with sir proteus to the imperial court in milan. i think crab, my dog, has the sourest personality of any dog alive. even with my mother weeping, my father wailing, my sister crying, our maid howling, and our cat wringing her hands, this cruel-hearted mutt didn't shed a single tear. even a jew would have wept to see us saying goodbye to each other. why, my grandmother, who doesn't have use of her eyes, you see, cried herself blind when i said goodbye. no, i'll demonstrate what happened. this shoe represents my father. no, this left shoe is my father. no, no, this left shoe is my mother. no, that can't be right either. yes it is, it is, it has the sole that isn't as good. this shoe, with the hole in it, is my mother, and this one is my father. take that! that's right now. now, sir, this wooden stick is my sister, because, you see, it is as white as a lily and as thin as a twig. this hat is nan, our maid. i am the dog. no wait, the dog is himself, and i am the dog, oh, i mean, the dog is me, and i am myself. okay, okay, that's it. now i go to my father and say, "father, give me your blessing." now the shoe can't say a word because it's crying so hard. now i'll kiss my father. well, he keeps crying. now i come to my mother. oh, i wish this shoe could speak full of emotion now! well, i kiss her. and that's the way it happened. here's how she breathed from crying so much. now i come to my sister. listen to the moans she makes because she's so sad. all the while the dog doesn't shed a single tear or speak a word. see how i flatten the dust with my tears?
while the moon was shining we didn't even notice the candle.
i have already fled from my true self. i've told cowards to turn their backs on me and run. friends, go. i've decided on a plan that doesn't require your assistance. leave. my treasure's in the harbor; take it. oh, i followed something i'm ashamed to look at now! even my hair revolts. the white hairs blame the brown hairs for being irresponsible, and the brown ones blame the white ones for being spineless and foolish. friends, go. i'll give you letters of introduction to some friends of mine who will help you. please, don't be sad, and don't tell me how reluctant you are. take your cues from my own despair. abandon the person that has abandoned himself. go to the harbor immediately! i'll give you the title to that ship and its treasure. just give me a moment, please, only a moment. i've relinquished my authority, so please, i'll see you all before long.
lance, go on, go on, board the ship! your master is already aboard, and you're supposed to hurry after him in a rowboat. what's the matter? why are you crying, man? get on, you ass! you'll lose the tide if you delay any longer.
well, brighter lights always dim the smaller ones. a governor shines as brightly as a king until a king is near by, and the governor suddenly looks like a nobody. music, listen!
no, gentle madam, go. comfort him.
it doesn't matter if this tied-up dog is lost, because it's the unkindest tied-up thing any man ever tied up.
it's your music, madam, from your house.
yes, do, dearest queen.
what's the unkindest tide?
now i see that you can't call anything good except in right context. i think that music sounds much better at night than it does during the day.
of course you must comfort him! what else?
why, the dog that's tied up right here, crab, my dog.
the night's silence makes it sound better.
let me sit down. oh, juno queen of the roman gods juno !
no, no, man, i mean you'll lose the ocean tide. and if you lose the ocean tide, then you'll lose the whole trip, and if you lose the whole trip, then you'll lose your master, and if you lose your master, then you'll lose your job, and if you lose your job...
the crow sings as well as the lark when no one's listening. if the nightingale sang during the day, when every goose is honking, nobody would think it sang any better than a wren. how many things in life seem good to us because of when they happen! quiet now! look how the moon seems to be sleeping with its lover and can't be awoken!
(seeing cleopatra ) no, no, no, no, no.
why are you covering my mouth?
if i'm not mistaken, that's portia's voice.
do you see her, sir?
because i was afraid you'd lose your tongue.
he recognizes me like a blind man recognizes a cuckoo, by its bad voice.
oh, damn, damn, damn!
where would i lose my tongue?
dear lady, welcome home.
madam!
in your tale.
we've been praying for our husbands' welfare. we hope they're better off because of our prayers. have they come back?
madam, oh, good empress!
up your tail!
no, ma'am, they haven't. but a messenger came ahead to tell us they were on their way.
sir . . . sir . . .
lose the tide, and the voyage, and my master, and my job, and the tied-up dog! why, man, if the river where the ship is moored dried up, i'd be able to fill it with my tears. and if the wind weren't blowing, i could blow the boat forward with my sighs.
go inside, nerissa. tell my servants not to mention that we were gone. you must not, either, lorenzo, or you, jessica.
(to himself) yes, my lord, that's true. at philippi, caesar kept his sword in its sheath, like a dancer, while i commanded the armies that conquered cassius and brutus. caesar fought only through lieutenants. he had no experience with the brave contests of war. but now . . . never mind.
come on, come on, man. i was sent here to get you.
your husband's near. i hear his trumpet. we're not tattle-tales, madam, don't worry.
ah, give us some privacy.
sir, you can call me whatever you like.
i think this night is just like sick daylight. it only looks a little paler. it looks like a day when the sun is hidden.
the queen is here, my lord.
well, are you going to go?
(to portia) if you walked outside at night, it would be daylight here at the same time as on the other side of the world.
go to him, madam, speak to him. he's not himself because he feels so ashamed.
yes, i'll go.
i'll give light "light" could mean having loose morals. light to men, but i'll never be light or unchaste. an unfaithful wife makes a husband worry, and i'll never let bassanio worry if i can help it. i hope god figures it all out! welcome home, my husband.
well, then, help me.
servant!
thank you, darling. i'd like to introduce you to my friend. this is antonio, my dearest friend. we are closely tied.
most noble sir, stand up. the queen is coming. she's weak and will die unless you comfort her.
mistress?
you should be tied to him, since he tied himself up so much for you.
i've destroyed my reputation, a most shameful error.
master, sir thurio is frowning at you.
but i've been paid back well.
sir, here's the queen.
yes, boy, it's because he's in love.
sir, welcome to our house. but action speaks louder than words, so i'll cut short these polite words.
oh, where have you led me, egypt? see how i hide my shame from you by turning around? i look behind me to see my past, destroyed by dishonor.
not with you.
(to nerissa) i swear by that moon over there that you're doing me wrong! i'm telling the truth! i gave it to the judge's clerk. i wish the guy i gave it to had been castrated, since you're getting so upset about it.
oh, my lord, my lord, forgive my panic! i didn't think you would follow me.
with my mistress, then.
what, an argument already? what's the matter?
queen, you knew very well that my heart was tied to your ship and that you would pull me along with you. you knew that my spirit was completely under your control and that i would ignore the gods' orders in favor of yours.
it would be good if you punched him.
we're arguing about a hoop of gold, a cheap little ring she gave me, that had a little inscription on it, nothing more than a knife-maker's attempt at poetry. it said, "love me and don't leave me."
oh, forgive me!
servant, you are sad.
how can you talk about the quality of the poem or the value of the ring? you swore to me when i gave it to you that you would wear it till you died, and that it would be buried with you. if you didn't want to take care of it for my sake, you should have just because you made so many vows that you'd take care of it. and now you claim you gave it to a judge's clerk! no, i swear to god that clerk will never grow a beard on his face.
now i will have to send my humble proposal of peace to that young man. i've done as i pleased with half the world, making and losing fortunes, but now i negotiate from a position of weakness. you knew how far you had conquered my spirit. you knew that my sword, weakened by my love for you, would obey that love no matter what.
indeed, madame, i seem to be.
he will if he lives long enough to become a man.
forgive me! forgive me!
it seems you're sad when you are not?
yes, if a woman grows up to be a man.
don't shed even one tear. one of your tears is worth everything that was won and lost. give me a kiss.
as it happens, i seem to be something i'm not.
i swear i gave it to a youth, a kind of boy, a little stunted boy, no taller than yourself. he was the judge's clerk, a chatty boy who wanted it as a fee. i didn't have the heart to say no to him.
this repays me. i sent our children's schoolmaster to caesar with our offer. has he returned? love, i am full of heaviness. (calling) servants, bring some wine and food! we have the most contempt for fortune when it goes against us.
just like a fake.
i have to be honest with you. you were wrong to give away your wife's first gift so thoughtlessly, a thing you swore to keep on your finger and bound faithfully to your body.
let the envoy from antony come in. do you know him?
you also seem to be something you're not.
i gave my lover a ring and made him swear never to lose it or give it away. and here he is. i'd swear he wouldn't leave it behind, or even take it off his finger, for all the money in the world. to tell the truth, gratiano, you're giving your wife a valid reason to get upset. if it were me, i'd be very upset too.
it's antony's schoolmaster. by sending such an insignificant emissary, antony shows us how low he has sunk. not so long ago, he had so many royal supporters that he sent along extra kings as messengers.
what do i seem like that i am not?
(to himself) maybe i should cut off my left hand and swear i lost the ring defending it.
come forward and speak.
wise.
bassanio gave his ring to the judge who asked for it, and deserved it too. and then his clerk, who went to a lot of trouble with the writing, begged for mine. neither of them would take anything but the two rings.
humble as i am, i represent antony. until recently, i was as unimportant to his affairs as the morning dew is to the wide ocean.
what proof do you have to the contrary?
which ring did you give away, my lord? not the one i gave you, i hope.
so be it. say what you're here for.
your foolishness.
if i could make things better by lying, i'd deny it. but you see my finger doesn't have the ring on it. it's gone.
he acknowledges that you are the master of his fate, and he requests to be allowed to live in egypt. if that is not granted, he reduces his requests and asks only that he be allowed to live as a private man in athens. that's all he asks for himself. cleopatra recognizes your greatness and accepts your authority. she only asks that the crown of egypt pass to her heirs, who are now at your mercy.
and what do you know of my foolishness?
just as there's no ring on your finger, there's no truth in your heart. i swear i'll never get into your bed until i see the ring again!
as for antony, i'm not interested in his requests. i'll give the queen a hearing and grant her requests if she either throws her dishonored friend out of egypt or kills him. then i'll listen to her. give my answer to them both.
because you're wearing a jerkin a short coat. jerkin .
(to gratiano) me neither, until i see mine again!
may good luck follow you!
my "jerkin" is actually a doublet a jacket. doublet .
my dear portia, if you knew who i gave the ring to, for whose sake i gave the ring to him, why i gave it to him, and how unwilling i was to leave it when he wouldn't accept anything but the ring, you wouldn't be so angry.
take him safely through the lines.
well, then, you're doubly foolish.
if you'd known how much that ring meant, how much the woman who gave it to you is worth, or how much your honor depended on your keeping the ring, you wouldn't have let it go. who would be so unreasonable as to insist on taking the ring if you'd defended it with any kind of zeal? who would have had so little self-restraint that they'd insist on getting a ring with ceremonial value? nerissa's got the right idea. i'll bet my life you gave some woman the ring!
(to thidias ) now it's time to test your eloquence. on your way. separate cleopatra from antony. in my name, promise to fulfill her petitions. you can make up additional offers, if necessary. women aren't strong, even at their best. hardship will make even a vestal virgin priestess vestal abandon her vows. use your ingenuity, thidias. you can make your own conditions, which i will authorize as law.
why?
no, i swear, madam. no woman got it from me, but an expert in civil law who refused three thousand ducats but asked instead for the ring, which i denied him. i watched him leave looking discontented, even though he had saved the life of my good friend. what could i say, my dear? i had to send it to him. i was ashamed and wanted to show my good manners. i just couldn't dishonor myself by acting ungrateful to him. please forgive me, good lady. if you'd been there, i think you would have begged me to give him the ring.
i go, caesar.
what, are you angry, sir thurio? is your face turning red?
don't let that lawyer ever come near my house! since he has the jewel i loved, which you swore you'd keep forever, i'll be as generous as you were to him. i won't deny him anything of mine, including my own body and my husband's bed. i'll recognize him all right, i'm sure of it. so don't spend one night away from this house. watch me like a hawk. if you don't, if i'm left alone, i swear i'll have that legal expert as my bedfellow.
observe how antony takes his defeat and how his attitude influences his actions.
leave him be, madame. he's just a kind of chameleon.
(to gratiano) and i'll have his clerk as mine. so be careful when you leave me to my own devices.
i will, caesar.
one that would rather feed off your blood, valentine, than its usual diet of air.
well, go ahead. but don't let me catch him, because if i do i'll break that clerk's pen.
what are we going to do, enobarbus?
so you say, sir.
all these quarrels are about me.
think about our situation, then die.
yes, sir, and it'll be done, too.
don't be upset. you're welcome in our home in spite of everything that's going on.
who is to blame for this: antony or i?
i know it's done, sir. you always end before you begin.
portia, forgive me for this mistake that i had to make. all these friends are my witnesses, so i swear to you, i swear by your beautiful eyes, in which i see myself reflected, 
only antony was at fault. he put his desire in charge of his reason. so what if you ran from the battle, terrified, as ranks of ships threatened one another? why should he have followed you? with half the world opposing the other half, it wasn't the time for antony, the pivotal player, to let love distract him. to race after your departing ships, leaving his navy to watch, was a shame as great as the resulting loss.
a fine volley of words, gentlemen, and quickly fired.
did you hear that! he sees himself in my two eyes, so there's two of him. he should swear by his two-faced self, and that's an oath i'll believe!
please, let's not talk about it.
it is indeed, madame. we have the giver to thank for that.
no, just listen to me. if you forgive my mistake, i swear i'll never break an oath with you again.
is that his answer?
and who is the giver, servant?
i lent my body once to make him rich. if it hadn't been for the gentleman who now owns your husband's ring, my body would've been lost. i'd be the guarantee again, promising my soul this time as penalty, if your husband ever breaks a vow again knowingly.
yes, my lord.
yourself, sweet lady, for you provided the spark that set it off. sir thurio gets his witty remarks from your ladyship's good looks, and appropriately he spends what he borrows in your presence.
(she gives antonio a ring) then you'll be my guarantee. give him this. and tell him to hold on to it better than the other one.
the queen will be treated fairly if she gives me up?
sir, if you spar word for word with me, i shall make your wit dry up.
(he gives bassanio portia's ring) here, bassanio, swear that you'll keep this ring.
that's what he says.
i know it well, sir. you have a whole treasury of words, and, i think, no other treasure to give your servants, since it appears, by their ragged clothing, that they live by your worthless words alone.
my god, it's the same one i gave the judge!
tell her. (to cleopatra ) if you send my aged head to that boy, caesar, he'll give you all the kingdoms you want.
no more, gentlemen, no more. here comes my father.
i got it from him. i'm sorry, bassanio, but the legal expert slept with me in exchange for this ring.
your head, my lord?
now, my daughter sylvia, you are being assaulted. sir valentine, your father is healthy. what would you say to a letter from your friends filled with good news?
(she takes out a ring) and i'm sorry too, gratiano, but that stunted lawyer's clerk slept with me last night in exchange for this ring.
(to the ambassador ) go back to him. tell him that his cheeks still bear the pink flush of youth, and that the world expects to see something remarkable from him. his treasure, his navy, and his armies might belong to a coward, and his ministers might be able to succeed just as well on behalf of a child as under the command of caesar. therefore, i dare him to lay aside his fancy trappings and meet this old man in single combat, sword against sword, just the two of us. i'll write the challenge. follow me.
my lord, i would be thankful to anyone who brought good news from home.
this is like fixing roads in the summer when they don't need to be fixed! what, did you cheat on us before we deserved it?
(aside) oh, that's likely! caesar, the great commander of troops, will surely risk all he has gained in order to fight this gladiator in the public square! i see that men's judgments are tied to their fortunes, and that external factors influence a man's internal qualities, making everything suffer. how could antony, knowing how luck stood on either side, still imagine that caesar would respond to his nonsense! caesar, you've conquered his judgment too.
do you know don antonio, who is also from your country?
don't be crass., you all look confused. (she takes out a letter) here's a letter. read it at your leisure. it comes from padua, from bellario. you'll find out that portia was the lawyer, and nerissa was her clerk. lorenzo here will testify that i left the house right when you did, and just returned. i haven't yet entered my house., antonio, welcome. i have better news than you expect in store for you. (she gives antonio another letter) open this letter. you'll find out that three of your ships have suddenly arrived in the harbor loaded with a great deal of wealth. you'll never guess what a strange coincidence it was that i came across this letter.
a messenger has arrived from caesar.
yes, my good lord. i know the gentleman is noble and has a good reputation, which is well-deserved.
i'm speechless.
with no more ceremony than that? see, ladies, how they scorn me now. they pinch their noses to avoid smelling the dying rose whose scent, as a bud, they happily inhaled. show him in, sir.
doesn't he have a son?
(to portia) you were the doctor, and i didn't even recognize you?
(aside) my integrity and i begin to contradict each other. being loyal to a fool makes loyalty foolish. but a person who can bear to keep his allegiance to a defeated lord defeats his lord's conqueror and earns a place in history.
yes, my good lord, a son that is also deserving of the honor and reputation of his esteemed father.
(to nerissa) were you the clerk with whom my wife's going to cheat on me?
what does caesar want?
do you know him well?
yes, but the clerk will never do it, unless he grows up to be a man.
it is for your ears only.
i know him as well as i know myself, since he and i have been in each other's company and spent time together since we were infants. and even though i myself have been an unproductive delinquent and have wasted my youth on frivolity, sir proteus, that's his name, you see, made good use of his time. he may be young, but he has the experience of a much older person. his hair isn't gray, but his judgment is wise. any praise i give is far less than he deserves, but in a word, he is perfect physically and mentally, with all the good graces of a true gentleman.
(to portia) my sweet lawyer, you'll be my bedfellow. when i'm not there, you can sleep with my wife.
there are only friends here. speak confidently.
damn! sir, if this account is true, he is as worthy of an empress's love as he is fit to be an emperor's adviser. well, sir, this gentleman has come to me with commendations from powerful men, and he intends to spend his time here for a while. i think it's good news for you.
madam, you've given me life and given me a living too. i've read in this letter that my ships have safely come to harbor.
so they are possibly antony's friends.
if i had wished for anything, it would have been for him to come.
how are you, lorenzo? my clerk has some comforting news for you, too.
sir, he should have as many as caesar has. if he had that many friends, then he wouldn't need us. if caesar chose, antony would jump at the chance to be his friend. as for us, you know we are antony's, and he is caesar's.
then give him the welcome he deserves. i'm speaking to you, sylvia, and you, sir thurio. valentine needs no urging. i will send him to you here shortly.
yes, and i'll give it to him for free. (she gives lorenzo a document) this is from the rich jew, for you and jessica. it's a special testament. after he dies, you'll inherit everything he owns.
so be it. this, then, this is the message caesar sends to you, famous queen: he implores you not to be concerned about your situation. just remember that he is caesar.
this is the gentlemen i told your ladyship would have come along with me had the woman he loved not captivated him with her beauty.
ladies, you're dropping bread from the heavens to starving people.
respectfully put. go on.
perhaps now she's freed him because some other lover has pledged devotion to her.
it's almost morning, but i'm sure you're not fully satisfied about what happened. let's go inside and we'll answer all your questions truthfully.
he knows that you didn't embrace antony because you loved him, but because you feared him.
no, i'm sure she still holds him prisoner.
all right, then. my first question for nerissa is whether she'd rather wait till tomorrow night or go to bed now, since there are only two more hours till morning. when the day comes, i'll wish it were nighttime, so i could sleep with the legal expert's clerk. in any case, i won't worry about anything for the rest of my life more than keeping nerissa's ring safe.
oh!
no, if that were true, then he would be blind, and if he were blind, how could he see to find his way to you?
so he regrets that any dishonorable acts were forced on you, not being performed of your own free will.
why, lady, love has twenty pairs of eyes.
get out of here! go home, you lazy men. what, is today a holiday? don't you know that working men aren't supposed to walk around on a workday without wearing their work clothes? you there, speak up. what's your occupation?
he is like a god and knows the truth. my honor wasn't given; it was only dominated.
they say that love is blind and has no eyes at all.
i'm a carpenter, sir.
(aside) i'll go get the truth of this from antony. sir, sir, are you so badly off that we must abandon you to your fate? even your dearest friend has abandoned you.
love has no eyes for people like you, thurio. love can shut its eyes to ugly things.
where are your leather apron and your ruler? what are you doing, wearing your best clothes? and you, sir, what's your trade?
shall i tell caesar what you request from him? he almost begs for the opportunity to help you. it would please him very much if you would rely on his wealth and success to support you. but he would feel even better if i could tell him that you had left antony and put yourself under his protection.
stop, stop. here comes the gentleman.
well, compared to a fine workman, you might call me a mere cobbler.
what's your name?
welcome, dear proteus! mistress, i beg you, make him feel welcome by giving him some sign of your affection.
but what's your trade? answer me straightforwardly.
my name is thidias.
his worthiness is enough for us to welcome here if he's the one you've often wished to hear from.
it is a trade, sir, that i practice with a clear conscience. i am a mender of worn soles.
most kind messenger, tell great caesar that through his deputy i kiss his conquering hand. tell him i am ready to lay my crown at his feet and kneel before him. tell him, whose decrees are obeyed by the whole world, that i will accept the fate he chooses for egypt.
mistress, it is he. sweet lady, take him into your service to be my fellow servant to your ladyship.
what trade, boy? you insolent rascal, what trade?
that's your most dignified course of action. when confronted with the choice between a prudent action and a risky one, a wise man should dare to do only what he can practically accomplish, if he follows this course, he will never be subjected to unpredictable chance. allow me to pay my respects by kissing your hand.
i'm too unworthy a mistress for so noble a servant.
sir, please, don't be angry. but if your soles are worn out, i can mend you.
when octavius caesar's father thought about conquering kingdoms, he rained kisses on my unworthy hand.
not so, sweet lady. i'm too unworthy a servant to have caught a look from a worthy mistress.
what do you mean by that? "mend" me, you impertinent fellow?!
promising favors? by jove that thunders! who are you, slave?
don't talk about unworthiness. sweet lady, ask him to be your servant.
cobble you, sir.
a person who merely follows the orders of the best man, the man most worthy of service.
i'll only boast of my duty, nothing else.
you're a cobbler, are you?
you will be whipped.
and duty never did go unrewarded. servant, i, a worthless mistress, welcome you.
sir, i make my living using an awl. i stick to my work; i don't meddle in politics or chase women. i'm a surgeon to old shoes. when they're endangered, i save them. the noblest men who ever walked on leather have walked on my handiwork.
(calling for servants) come here! (to thidias ) ah, you bird of prey! now by all the gods and devils, my authority weakens. not long ago, when i cried, "ho!" kings would jump up and cry, "what's your pleasure?" (calling to servants) are you deaf? i'm still antony.
i'll die fighting anyone who says that but you.
but why aren't you in your shop today? why are you leading these men through the streets?
take away this lout and whip him.
that you are welcome?
well, to wear out their shoes and get myself more work. seriously, though, we took the day off to see caesar, sir, and celebrate his triumph.
(aside) it's safer to toy with a lion cub than an old, dying lion.
that you are worthless.
why would you celebrate it? what victory does he bring home? what foreign lands has he conquered and captive foreigners chained to his chariot wheels? you blockheads, you unfeeling men! you hard hearts, you cruel men of rome, didn't you know pompey caesar has just conquered the sons of his deceased enemy pompey. he as won in a civil war, not a foreign conquest. pompey ? many times you climbed up on walls and battlements, towers and windows, even chimney tops, with your babies in your arms, and sat there patiently all day waiting to see great pompey ride through the streets of rome. and when you caught a glimpse of his chariot, didn't you shout so loud that the river tiber shook as it echoed? and now you put on your best clothes? and now you take a holiday?
by the moon and stars! whip him! if i saw twenty of the greatest powers that pay tribute to caesar taking such liberties with her hand, what's her name now? this woman who once was cleopatra, but now has become something different? whip him, fellows, until he screws up his face like a baby and cries aloud for mercy! take him away.
madame, my lord, your father, would like to speak with you.
and now you toss flowers in the path of caesar, who comes in triumph over pompey's defeated sons? go home! run to your houses, fall on your knees, and pray to the gods to spare you the pain that you deserve for such ingratitude.
mark antony, 
i'll be there in a moment.
go, go, good countrymen, and to make up for having done wrong, gather up all the poor men like yourselves, lead them to the tiber, and weep into the river until it overflows its banks.
pull him away, and once he has been whipped, bring him back. caesar's knave will bring him a message for us.
come, sir thurio, go with me. again, i welcome you, new servant. i'll leave you to talk with your friend about affairs back home. we look forward to seeing you when you're finished.
well, that ought to move even the most thickheaded of them. there they go, feeling so guilty they're now tongue-tied, they don't have a thing to say. you go down toward the capitol, and i'll go this way. undress the statues if they're decorated in honor of caesar.
(to cleopatra ) you were damaged goods before i met you. ha! did i desert my bed in rome, passing up the chance to have a legitimate family with a jewel of a woman, in order to be deceived by one who wastes her favors on servants?
we'll both be back to serve you shortly, your ladyship.
can we do that? you know it's the feast of lupercal the feast of lupercal is an annual celebration to honor the roman god lupercus (called pan in greek mythology). lupercal .
my good lord, 
now tell me, how is everyone back home?
it doesn't matter. make sure that none of the statues are decorated in tribute to caesar. i'll walk around and force the commoners off the streets. you do the same, wherever the crowds are thick. if we take away caesar's support, he'll have to come back down to earth; otherwise, he'll fly too high and keep the rest of us in a state of fear and obedience.
you've always been a liar. but when our vices become habits, oh, the sadness of it!, the wise gods blind us, shade our better judgment, make us love our mistakes, and laugh as we strut to our ruin.
your friends are well and send their regards.
calphurnia!
oh, has it come to this?
and how are your friends?
quiet! caesar's talking.
you were a cold crumb on dead julius caesar's plate when i met you. no, you were one of gneius pompey's leftovers, not to mention your other, more depraved affairs, which have somehow managed to avoid becoming the subject of vulgar gossip. for i'm sure that although you may know what temperance is, you've never experienced it firsthand.
they were all fine and healthy when i left.
calphurnia!
why are you doing this?
how is your lady, and is your love thriving?
i'm here, my lord.
to let a servant be familiar with my little toy, your hand, a hand that has signed royal treaties and pledged your love to me, oh, if only i were standing on the hill of basan home to herds of bulls (traditional symbols of men with adulterous wives), according to the bible basan , so that i could roar louder than that horned herd! for i have been savagely abused, and to state my grievances politely would be as absurd as a condemned criminal thanking the hangman for doing his job quickly.
my tales of love used to bore you. i know you don't enjoy talking about love.
stand right in antonius's path when he runs the race. antonius!
has he been whipped?
yes, proteus, but my life is different now. i have atoned for condemning love. overbearing thoughts of love punish me with bitter periods of not eating, remorseful groans, nightly tears, and daily lovesick sighs. in revenge for my contempt, love keeps me awake and makes my eyes watch the woman responsible for my heart's sorrow. oh, kind proteus, love's a powerful ruler and has so humbled me that i confess there is no sorrow as bad as his punishment and no joy equal to being in love. now, speak no more unless it's about love. now i can eat again, have lunch and dinner, and sleep thinking of love.
yes, caesar?
soundly, my lord.
enough. i knew how you felt from the look in your eyes. was that the woman you worship like an idol?
antonius, after you take off, don't forget to touch calphurnia, because our wise elders say that if you touch an infertile woman during this holy race, she'll be freed from the curse of sterility.
did he cry? did he beg my pardon?
that was she. isn't she a heavenly saint?
i'll remember. when caesar says "do this," it is done.
he did ask for mercy.
no, but she is a model of beauty here on earth.
continue, then, and don't forget to perform all of the rituals.
(to thidias ) if your father is alive, let him be sorry you weren't born a daughter. and you should be sorry to follow caesar in his triumphal parade, since you have been whipped for following him. from now on, you should tremble and grow feverish whenever you see the white hand of a lady. get yourself back to caesar. tell him how you've been treated. be sure you tell him he makes me angry with him, because he seems proud and disdainful, harping on what i am now rather than what he knows. he makes me angry, and that's easy to do right now, now that my lucky stars have abandoned me. if he doesn't like what i've said or done, remind him that he holds hipparchus, a slave i freed. he may whip, or hang, or torture him as he pleases. then we will be even. recommend that to him. take your whipping scars and go.
call her a goddess.
caesar!
are you done yet?
i will not fawn over her.
who's calling me?
you, my earthly moon, are now eclipsed, and that alone foretells my ruin.
oh, flatter me, then, because those who are in love delight in praise.
quiet, everyone! quiet!
(aside) i must wait for him to finish his tirade.
when i was lovesick, you gave me the hard truth, and now i must give it to you.
who in the crowd is calling me? i hear a voice more piercing than the music of these trumpets calling "caesar!" speak. caesar is listening.
in order to flatter caesar, would you flirt with the servant who laces up his pants?
then speak the truth about her. if she isn't a goddess, then call her an angel who is superior to all the creatures on earth.
beware of march th.
don't you know me still?
except my mistress.
who's that?
has your heart cooled toward me?
no exceptions, my friend, unless you mean to insult my love.
a soothsayer tells you to beware of march th.
ah, dear, if that is true, let heaven make poisonous hail grow from my heart, and let the first hailstone drop down my throat. as it dissolves, so shall my life. the next hailstone should hit caesarion, until one by one all my children, and every one of my brave egyptians, are killed by the dissolving of this pellet storm and lie unburied, covered by gnats and flies.
don't i have reason to put forward my own girl?
bring him in front of me. let me see his face.
i am satisfied. caesar has made camp in alexandria. i will fight him there. our land forces have bravely stood firm. our tattered navy has reassembled and set sail, as formidable as the sea itself. where have you been, my bravery? do you hear what i say, lady? if i come back from the battlefield again to kiss those lips, i'll be covered in blood. my sword and i will earn our place in history. we still have hope.
and i will help you to put her forward, too. she shall have the dignity of having this high honor: she can carry the train of my lady's dress so that the dirty ground can't steal a kiss of her clothing. if it did, the ground would swell so much with pride that it would no longer accept the roots of the summer flowers, and rough winter would last forever.
you, fellow, step out of the crowd. this is caesar you're looking at.
that's my brave lord!
geez, valentine, why are you bragging so much?
what do you have to say to me now? speak once again.
i'll be triple the soldier i was in strength, bravery, and stamina. i'll fight brutally. in the days when i had better luck, prisoners of war could buy their freedoms from me with simple trinkets. but now i'll grit my teeth and kill anyone who tries to stop me. come, let's have one more extravagant night. invite all my sad captains. fill our wine bowls again. let's drink through midnight.
pardon me, proteus, any praise i can give is nothing in comparison with her. she is unique and alone among women.
beware of march th.
it's my birthday. i had planned to celebrate it quietly, but since my lord is once more himself, i will be cleopatra again.
then leave her alone.
he's insane. let's leave him. let's move.
we'll win yet.
not for the world. why, man, she is mine, and having a jewel such as her, i'm as rich as if i had twenty oceans with sands made of pearls, water of nectar, and rocks of pure gold. forgive me for not paying attention to you, because i'm doting on the woman i love, as you can tell. her father likes my foolish rival, thurio, because he has so much wealth. thurio has gone with her, and i must follow after them, because love, as you know, is prone to jealousy.
are you going to watch the race?
(to enobarbus ) call all my lord's noble captains to him.
but does she love you?
not me.
do so. i'll speak to them, and then tonight i'll get them all so drunk that the wine seeps out of their old war wounds. come on, my queen. there's still life in our cause. the next time i fight, i'll make death love me. i'll compete even with his fatal scythe.
yes, and we're engaged to be married. no, what's more, we've determined all the details of how we'll sneak away and elope, how i must climb up to her window on a ladder made of rope. everything is arranged and agreed upon for my happiness. good proteus, go with me to my bedroom to give me some advice on these matters.
please, come.
now he'll work himself up to a fury. rage scares away a man's fear. in that state, a dove will attack an ostrich. i have always noticed that when my captain's reason is diminished, his bravery increases. when courage consumes reason, it destroys its only weapon. i'll look for some way to leave his service.
go on ahead. i'll find you shortly. i must go down to the harbor to bring ashore some necessities that i need. then i'll come see you right away.
i don't like sports. i'm not competitive like antony. but don't let me keep you from going, cassius. i'll go my own way.
he calls me "boy" and scolds me as if he had the power to whip me out of egypt. he whipped my messenger with rods. he dares me to personal combat, caesar against antony. let the old ruffian discover that i have many other ways to die, and in the meantime, we'll laugh at his challenge.
will you hurry?
brutus, i've been watching you lately. you seem less good-natured and affectionate toward me than usual. you've been stubborn and unfamiliar with me, your friend who loves you.
caesar must realize that when a man as powerful as antony begins to rage, he has been pursued to the point of collapse. don't give him time to catch his breath. take advantage of his unreasonable rage. anger does not protect the angry well.
i will. just as one heat can extinguish another at the time, it was believed that applying heat on a burn would take away the pain. one heat can extinguish another , or as one nail can drive another out with force, so too has a new love, sylvia, driven out the memory of my former love, julia. is it my own attraction for her, or valentine's praise, or her own perfection, or going against my love for julia that makes me feel this way? she is beautiful, but so is julia, whom i love, whom i did love, because now my love for her has melted away, like a wax figure melted by a fire that no longer looks as it did. i think that my fondness for valentine has diminished, too, and that i like him less than i used to. oh, but i love his lady, syliva, far too much, and that's why i like him less now. how can i keep from loving her after further deliberation when i begin to love her with no deliberation at all! it's only her surface i've seen so far, and that has already confused my sense of reason. but when i look at her perfection, there is no doubt i will be blind with love. if i can stop my love, i will. if not, i'll use my skill to win her.
cassius, don't take it badly. if i seem guarded, it's only because i'm uneasy with myself. lately i've been overwhelmed with private thoughts and inner conflicts, which have affected my behavior. but this shouldn't trouble my good friends, and i consider you a good friend, cassius. don't think anything more about my distraction than that poor brutus, who is at war with himself, forgets to show affection to others.
tell our top commanders that i want tomorrow's battle to be the last we fight. our army has recently acquired many of mark antony's former soldiers, enough to capture him. see that it is done, and prepare a feast for the soldiers. we have enough supplies for it, and they've earned it. poor antony!
lance, honestly, welcome to milan!
brutus, i misunderstood your feelings, and therefore kept to myself certain thoughts i might have shared. tell me, good brutus, can you see your face?
he won't fight with me, domitius?
don't lie, my friend, because i am not welcome. i always believe a man is never sunk until he's hanged, nor ever welcome to a place until the bill has been paid and the hostess says, "welcome!"
no, cassius. the eye can't see itself, except by reflection in other surfaces.
no.
come you, you lunatic, i'll go to the pub with you soon, where you can have five thousand welcomes for five pence. but tell me, pal, how did your master say goodbye to madame julia?
that's true. and it's too bad, brutus, that you don't have any mirrors that could display your hidden excellence to yourself. i've heard many of the noblest romans, next to immortal caesar, speaking of you, complaining of the tyranny of today's government, and wishing that your eyes were working better.
why won't he?
you know, after they said their earnest goodbyes, they parted with a few jokes.
what dangers are you trying to lead me into, cassius, that you want me to look inside myself for something that's not there?
he thinks that since his fortune is twenty times better than yours, it would be like pitting twenty men against one.
but will she marry him?
i'll tell you, good brutus. and since you know you can see yourself best by reflection, i'll be your mirror and show you, without exaggeration, things inside you that you can't see. and don't be suspicious of me, noble brutus. if i were your average fool, or if i made my feelings for you worthless by making the same promises of friendship to everybody, or if you'd seen me first flattering men, hugging them tightly, and later slandering them behind their backs, or if you hear that i drunkenly declare friendship at banquets with all the rabble, only then, of course, go ahead and assume i'm dangerous.
tomorrow, soldier, i'll fight by sea and land. by the end i will either live, or else i'll restore my honor by shedding my blood. will you fight well?
no.
why are they shouting? i'm afraid the people have made caesar their king.
when i strike, i'll cry, "all or nothing!"
what then? will he marry her?
really, are you afraid of that? then i have to assume you don't want him to be king.
well put. come on. call out my household servants.
no, not that either.
i don't, cassius, though i love caesar very much. but why do you keep me here so long? what do you want to tell me? if it's for the good of all romans, i'd do it even if it meant my death. let the gods give me good luck only as long as i love honor more than i fear death.
tonight let's have plenty to eat.
what, have they broken up?
i know this quality in you, brutus, it's as familiar to me as your face. indeed, honor is what i want to talk to you about. i don't know what you and other men think of this life, but as for me, i'd rather not live at all than live to worship a man as ordinary as myself. i was born as free as caesar. so were you. we both have eaten as well, and we can both endure the cold winter as well as he. once, on a cold and windy day, when the river tiber was crashing against its banks, caesar said to me, "cassius, i dare you to jump into this rough water with me and swim to that point there." as soon as he spoke, though i was fully dressed, i plunged in and called for him to follow. and he did. the water roared, and we fought against it with vigorous arms. and, thanks to our fierce competitiveness, we made progress. but before we reached the end point, caesar cried, "help me, cassius, or i will sink!" and just as aeneas, the hero who founded rome, emerged from the fires of troy with his elderly father anchises on his shoulder, so i emerged from the tiber carrying the tired caesar.
give me your hand; you've been truly honest, so have you and you, and you, you too. you have all served me well, and kings are your peers.
no, they're as whole as ever.
and this is the man who has now become a god, and i'm a wretched creature who must bow down if caesar so much as carelessly nods my way. in spain, caesar had a fever, and it made him shake. it's true, this so-called "god", he shook. his cowardly lips turned white, and the same eye whose gaze terrifies the world lost its gleam. i heard him groan, yes, i did, and the same tongue that ordered the romans to obey him and transcribe his speeches in their books cried, "give me some water, titinius," like a sick girl. it astounds me that such a weak man could beat the whole world and carry the trophy of victory alone.
(aside to enobarbus ) what is this?
well, then, where do they stand on the matter?
more shouting! i think this applause is for some new honors awarded to caesar.
(aside to cleopatra ) it's one of those nostalgic moods caused by sorrow.
indeed, that's the way it is: when he stands erect, he's in good standing with her.
why, caesar straddles the narrow world like a giant, and we petty men walk under his huge legs and look forward only to dying dishonorably, as slaves. men can be masters of their fate. it is not destiny's fault, but our own faults, that we're slaves. "brutus" and "caesar." what's so special about "caesar"? why should that name be proclaimed more than yours? write them together, yours is just as good a name. pronounce them, it is just as nice to say. weigh them, it's just as heavy.
(to another servant ) and you're honest too. i wish i could split into as many men as there are servants here before me, and that all of you could merge into a single antony, so i could give you the same good service you've given me.
what an ass you are! i don't understand you.
cast spells with them, and "brutus" will call up a ghost as well as "caesar." now, in the name of all the gods, i ask you what food does caesar eat that has made him grow so great? our era should be ashamed! rome has lost the ability to raise noble men! when was there ever an age, since the beginning of time, that didn't feature more than one famous man? until now, no one could say that only one man mattered in all of vast rome. now, though, in all of rome, there's room for only one man. you and i have heard our fathers talk of another brutus, your ancestor, who would've let the devil himself reign in his roman republic before he let a king rule.
the gods forbid!
what a blockhead you are, since you can't understand me! my wooden staff understands me.
i have no doubt that you love me. i'm beginning to understand what you want me to do. what i think about this, and about what's happening here in rome, i'll tell you later. for now, don't try to persuade me anymore, i ask you as a friend. i'll think over what you've said, i'll listen patiently to whatever else you have to say, and i'll find a good time for us to discuss further such weighty matters. until then, my noble friend, think about this: i'd rather be a poor villager than call myself a citizen of rome under the hard conditions that this time is likely to put us through.
well, my good fellows, wait on me tonight. keep my cups full and treat me as you did when my empire was one of your fellow servants, obeying my commands.
what are you talking about?
i'm glad that my weak words have provoked even this small show of protest from you.
(to enobarbus ) why is he doing this?
yes, and it's what i do, too. look here, i simply have to lean, and my staff understands me.
the games are done and caesar is returning.
(to cleopatra ) he wants to make his followers weep.
it stands under you, indeed.
as they pass by, grab casca by the sleeve, and he'll tell you if anything important happened today, in his usual sour way.
(to the servants ) wait on me tonight. it's possible that this will be the end of your service. it's possible you won't see me again, or if you do, it will only be my mangled body. perhaps tomorrow you'll be serving another master. i look upon you as a person saying good-bye. my honest friends, i won't turn you away, but like a master dependent on your good service, i will stay with you until death separates us. serve me tonight for two hours, i don't ask any more, and may the gods bless you for it.
well, standing-under, under-standing, it's all the same.
i'll do so. but look, cassius, caesar looks angry and everyone else looks as if they've been scolded. calphurnia's face is pale, and cicero's eyes are as red and fiery as they get when senators are arguing with him at the capitol.
what are you doing, sir? you're making them uncomfortable. look, they're crying. and i'm just foolish enough to tear up myself. it's embarrassing. don't turn us into women.
but tell me honestly, will they get married?
casca will tell us what's the matter.
ha, ha, ha! may the evil one take me if i meant it like that! those tears will bring blessings to you. you interpret my words in a melancholy sense, my hearty friends. i spoke to encourage you, asking that you help me make this night a brilliant one. you should know, my friends, that i have good hopes for tomorrow, and that i will lead you as if i expect victory rather than an honorable death. let's go to supper. come, and let's drown our worries.
ask my dog. if he says yes, then they will. if he says no, then they will. if he shakes his tail and says nothing, then they will.
antonio!
good night, brother. tomorrow is the day.
so no matter what then, they will get married.
caesar?
this battle will determine who wins the war. take care of yourself. have you heard about anything unusual happening in the city?
you'll never get me to reveal the secret except in riddles.
(speaking so that only antony can hear) i want the men around me to be fat, healthy-looking men who sleep at night. that cassius over there has a lean and hungry look. he thinks too much. men like him are dangerous.
no. what was it?
it's best that i find out that way. but, lance, what can you tell me about the fact that my master has become a well-known lover?
(speaking so that only caesar can hear) don't be afraid of him, caesar. he isn't dangerous. he's a noble roman with a good disposition.
it was probably just a rumor. good night.
i never knew him otherwise.
(speaking so that only antony can hear) i wish he were fatter! but i'm not afraid of him. and yet, if i were capable of fearing anyone, cassius would be the first man i'd avoid. he reads a lot, he's a keen observer, and he sees the hidden motives in what men do. he doesn't like plays the way you do, antony. he doesn't listen to music. he rarely smiles, and when he does smile, he does so in a self-mocking way, as if he scorns himself for smiling at all. men like him will never be comfortable while someone ranks higher than themselves, and therefore they're very dangerous. i'm telling you what should be feared, not what i fear, because after all, i am caesar. come over to my right side, because this ear is deaf, and tell me what you really think of cassius.
well sir, good night.
than what?
(to brutus) you tugged on my cloak. do you want to speak with me?
soldiers, watch carefully.
a well-known lubber a big, clumsy oaf. lubber , and idiot, as you've told me he is.
yes, casca. tell us what happened today that put caesar in such a serious mood.
you too. good night. good night.
why, you jackass son of a whore this term was often used jokingly. son of a whore ! you misunderstand me.
but you were with him, weren't you?
this is our station. and if our navy wins tomorrow, no doubt our army will do their part.
why, fool, i didn't mean you. i meant your master.
if i were, i wouldn't need to ask you what happened.
it's an outstanding army and highly motivated.
i tell you, my master has become an excellent lover.
a crown was offered to him, and he pushed it away with the back of his hand, like this, and then the people started shouting.
quiet! what's that sound?
well, i tell you that i don't really care, even if he burns himself from being so "hot" in love. come with me to the pub if you will. if not, then you're a hebrew, a jew, and not worthy to be called a christian.
what was the second noise for?
listen! listen!
why?
the same thing.
listen!
because you don't even have enough compassion in you to go to the church's ale festival a charitable festival in which ale was sold and the proceeds helped the church or went to the poor. the church's ale festival with a christian. so, are you coming?
they shouted three times. what was the last cry for?
there's music coming out of thin air.
i'm at your service.
for the same thing.
from under the earth.
if i leave my julia, i'll break my vow and prove it a lie. if i love the beautiful sylvia, i'll break my vow. if i wrong my friend, valentine, i'll very much break my vow. and even that love that made me first declare my devotion provokes me to break my vow three times over. love made me swear an oath, and love bids me to break it. oh, sweet, seductive love, if you have sinned, teach me, your tempted servant, how to pardon that sin. at first, i adored a twinkling star, but now i worship a heavenly sun. vows made carelessly may be broken with careful thought, and the man who doesn't have the will to teach his mind to trade something bad for something better lacks intelligence. shame, shame! what a disrespectful tongue i have to call julia bad, when my tongue has so often praised her superiority with twenty thousand devout oaths of love! i cannot stop loving her, and yet i do. but in ceasing to love her i go to the woman i should love. i lose julia, and i lose valentine. if i keep them, then i will lose myself. if i lose them, then i'll gain myself instead of valentine, and i'll gain sylvia instead of julia. i cherish myself more than i cherish any friend, for love of oneself is always most precious. and sylvia, with heaven, which made her white and beautiful, as witness, makes julia look like a dark-skinned ethiopian fair skin was part of the european ideal of beauty. dark-skinned ethiopian . i will forget that julia is alive, and remember that my love for her is gone. i'll consider valentine an enemy and focus on sylvia as a more important friend. i cannot now keep my promise to myself without acting treacherously toward valentine. tonight he plans to climb a rope ladder to the heavenly sylvia's bedroom window with me helping as his partner. now i'll go immediately and inform her father of their secret and their plan to run away. he will be enraged and will banish valentine, because he intends thurio to marry his daughter. with valentine gone, i'll ruin stupid thurio's plans with some sly trick. love, lend me wings so that i may accomplish my aims quickly, as you've lent me cleverness to plot this scheme!
the crown was offered to him three times?
it's a lucky sign, isn't it?
i need your advice, lucetta. kind girl, help me. and even in kind love i ask you to help me. you are my drawing board where all my thoughts can be visibly laid out and arranged. teach me and tell me a good way i can make a journey to my loving proteus with my honor intact.
yes, indeed, it was, and he pushed it away three times, each time more gently than the last; and at each refusal my countrymen shouted.
no.
unfortunately, the way is exhausting and long!
who offered him the crown?
quiet, i say. what does this mean?
a truly devoted traveler doesn't fear crossing entire kingdoms with small steps. she who has love's wings to help her fly will get much less tired, especially when she makes the flight to one who so dear and of such divine perfection as sir proteus.
antony.
it means that antony's patron god, hercules antony's family claimed to be descended from the demigod hercules. antony's patron god, hercules , is leaving him.
it would be better if you waited until proteus returns.
tell us how it happened, noble casca.
let's walk over and see if the other soldiers heard the same thing.
oh, don't you know that his looks are food for my soul? pity the famine i've endured by being without that food for so long. if you only knew the inner touch of love, you would as soon try to start a fire with snow as you would try to snuff the love's fire with words.
i can't explain it. it was all silly and so i paid no attention. i saw mark antony offer him a crown, though it wasn't a real crown, just a small circlet, and, as i told you, he refused it once, though in my opinion he would've liked to have it. then antony offered it to him again, and he refused it again (though, in my opinion, he was reluctant to take his hand off it). then antony offered it the third time. he refused it the third time, and as he refused it the commoners hooted and clapped their chapped hands, and threw up their sweaty hats, and let loose such a great deal of stinking breath because caesar refused the crown that it nearly choked caesar, because he fainted and fell down. as for myself, i didn't dare laugh, for fear of opening my lips and inhaling the stinking air.
hello there, good sirs.
i do not seek to snuff your love's hot fire but merely want to reduce the intensity of the fire so that it doesn't burn out of your control.
but wait a minute, please. did you say caesar fainted?
(speaking at the same time) what now? what now? do you hear that?
the more you try to smother the fire, the more it burns. a gentle current of water will rage turbulently if blocked, you know. but when the current isn't hindered, it makes a sweet noise over the smooth, shiny stones, giving a gentle kiss to every blade of sedge grass that it passes over on its journey. and so it wanders past many curvy nooks as it heads playfully to the wild ocean. so let me go, and don't hinder my course. i'll be as patient as a gentle stream and enjoy each tiring step, until the last step has brought me to my love. there i'll rest, just like a blessed soul rests in elysium the paradise of greek myth. elysium after a tumultuous life.
he fell down in the marketplace and foamed at the mouth and was speechless.
yes. isn't it strange?
but what clothing will you wear on your journey?
that's very likely. he has epilepsy, a disease where you fall down.
do you hear that, men? do you?
i won't dress like a woman so that i can prevent the shameless sexual advances of lustful men. kind lucetta, outfit me with clothing appropriate for a young man from a good family.
no, caesar doesn't have epilepsy. you and i, and honest casca, we have epilepsy, we've fallen.
let's follow the music as far as we can without leaving our station and see if it stops.
well, then, your ladyship must cut your hair.
i don't know what you mean by that, but i'm sure caesar fell down. the rabble applauded and hissed him according to whether he pleased them or displeased them, just like they do to actors in the theater. if they didn't, i'm a liar.
good idea. it's very strange.
no, girl, i'll tie it up in strange knots with silk ribbons. fancy frills would look more appropriate on a young man who is slightly older than i'll appear to be.
what did he say when he regained consciousness?
(calling) eros! bring my armor, eros.
in what style, madame, should i make your pants?
indeed, before he fell down, when he realized the commoners were glad he refused the crown, he pulled open his robe and offered them his throat to cut. if i'd been a common laborer and hadn't taken him up on his offer, to hell with me. and so he fainted. when he regained consciousness again, he said that if he'd done or said anything wrong, he wanted them to know that it was all because of his sickness. three or four women near me cried, "alas, good soul!" and forgave him with all their hearts. but never mind them, if caesar had stabbed their mothers, they would've forgiven him.
get a little sleep.
any style that won't make men ask, "tell me, good lord, how big around is the hoop in your hoop skirt?" why, you should make them in whatever style you like best, lucetta.
and after that he came back here looking so serious?
no, my dear . . . eros, come on, bring my armor, eros.
you'll need to wear a cup in your crotch, madame.
yes.
come on, good fellow, help me into that armor you're carrying. if luck deserts us today, it's because we defy it. come on.
not so, lucetta! that would be ugly.
did cicero say anything?
no, i'll help too. what's this part for?
tight leggings, madame, won't be much of a disguise unless you wear a cup.
yes, he said something in greek.
ah, leave it alone. leave it alone! you armor my heart. no! no! that part goes there.
lucetta, if you love me, let me have whatever you think is the most appropriate and fitting. but tell me, girl, what will people think of me for going on such a risky journey? i'm afraid it would make others think less of me.
what did he say?
really, i'll help. it must go like this.
if that's what you think, then stay home and don't go.
if i told you i understood greek, i'd be lying. but those who understood him smiled at one another and shook their heads. as for myself, it was greek to me. i have more news too. murellus and flavius have been punished for pulling scarves off statues of caesar. there you go. there was even more foolishness, if i could only remember it.
yes, well done. we've got it now., do you see this, my good fellow? go and put on your own armor.
no, i won't stay.
will you have dinner with me tonight, casca?
in a minute, sir.
then go, and don't worry what others might say. if proteus is happy with your journey it doesn't matter who's displeased when they find out you've left. i'm afraid, though, that he won't be pleased.
no, i have a commitment.
didn't i buckle this well?
that is the least of my fears, lucetta. a thousand oaths, an ocean of tears he cried, and many examples of his infinite love for me guarantee that proteus will welcome me.
will you dine with me tomorrow?
excellently, excellently. anyone who unbuckles this before i want to take it off to rest will be sorry., you're fumbling, eros. my queen's a better squire than you are. hurry., oh, love, if you could only watch the battle today and see how expert i am at my craft.
these are the tricks of deceitful men.
yes, if i'm still alive, and you're still sane, and your dinner is worth eating.
good morning to you. welcome. you look like a person who knows the business of war. when we love our job we get up early and go to it joyfully.
crude men who use them for crude reasons! but more honest stars were in the sky when proteus was born. he carries out what he says he will, his oaths are prophecies, his love is sincere, his thoughts are pure, his tears are honest messengers sent from his heart, and his heart is as far from lying as heaven is from earth.
good. i'll expect you.
even though it's early, there are already a thousand armored soldiers waiting for you at the harbor.
i pray to god he proves to be that way when you see him!
do so. farewell to you both.
the weather is fair. good morning, general.
now, if you love me, don't wrong him by doubting his honesty. earn my love by loving him, and go with me right now to my bedroom to take note of what other items i need for my lovesick journey. all that i own i leave in your care, including my goods, my lands, and my reputation. now help me leave right away. come, don't say anything, but let's go immediately. i'm impatient from the delay.
what a stupid man he's become! he was so sharp when he was in school.
good morning, general.
sir thurio, leave us alone a while, please. we have some private matters to discuss.
he's still sharp when it comes to carrying out a bold or noble enterprise, though he puts on this show of stupidity. he speaks roughly, but what he says is smart, and his roughness makes other people enjoy listening to him.
that was a fine fanfare, boys. like a young man who wants to amount to something, this morning begins early. (to cleopatra ) so, so. here, give me that. this is how it goes on. well done. farewell, lady.
now tell me, proteus, why did you want to see me?
you're right, that's how it is. i'll leave you for now. if you'd like to talk tomorrow, i'll come to your home. or, if you don't mind, come to my home, and i'll wait for you.
whatever happens to me, this is a soldier's kiss. it would be shameful to draw out our good-byes. i'll leave you without revealing any emotion, like a man of steel. (to the others) anyone who wants to fight, follow me now, and i'll see you get your wish. (to cleopatra ) good-bye.
my gracious lord, the rules of friendship require that i keep secret what i'm about to reveal to you. but when i think of all you've graciously done for me, undeserving as i am, my duty urges me to divulge what nothing else in the world could pull out of me. you should know, your highness, that sir valentine, my friend, intends to run away with your daughter tonight. i was informed of the plot. i know you've decided to marry her to thurio, whom your lovely daughter hates. and should she be taken away from you this way, it would greatly upset you in your old age. so, for the sake of my duty, i chose to go against my friend and his intended scheme rather than hide it and burden your mind with a pack of sorrows that would weigh you down and send you to an early grave.
i'll do so. until then, think about the well-being of rome.
if it pleases you, let's go to your room.
proteus, i thank you for your honest concern. in return, ask anything you want of me while i still live. i've often happened to see this love of theirs for myself, when they've thought me asleep, and frequently i've considered forbidding sir valentine from seeing her or attending my court. but i've been afraid my jealousy might be misplaced, and as a result i might needlessly disgrace him, i've always disdained foolish impulsiveness. so i treated him kindly, only to learn of this deceitful plot you've just revealed. and, so you know how much i fear this, i make her sleep in one of the upper towers of the castle every night, because i know how impressionable youth can be led astray. i always keep the key myself, so that she cannot be taken away.
well, brutus, you're noble. yet i see that your honorable character can be bent from its usual shape, which proves that good men should stick only to the company of other good men, because who is so firm that he can't be seduced? caesar resents me, but he loves brutus. if i were brutus now and brutus were me, i wouldn't have let him influence me. tonight i'll throw through his window a few letters in different handwriting, as if they came from several citizens, all testifying to the great respect romans have for brutus, and all alluding to caesar's unseemly ambition. and after this, let caesar brace himself, for we'll either dethrone him or suffer even worse than now.
lead the way. he goes forth to war bravely. if only he and caesar could determine the outcome of this war by single combat! then antony would, but, with circumstances as they are, well, let's go.
you should know, my noble lord, they have devised a way for him to climb up to her bedroom window and bring her down using a rope ladder. that's why this young lover has gone away, but he's coming back with it soon, allowing you to intercept him, if you like. but, my good lord, be cunning about it, so that he won't know i told you. it was because of my love for you, not hatred for my friend, that i told you of this plot.
good evening, casca. did you accompany caesar home? why are you breathless, and why are you staring like that?
may the gods bless antony today!
i swear on my honor he will never know i learned this information from you.
aren't you disturbed when the earth itself is shaking and swaying as if it were a flimsy thing? cicero, i've seen storms in which the angry winds split old oak trees, and i've seen the ocean swell, rage, and foam, as if it wanted to reach the storm clouds, but never before tonight, never until now, have i experienced a storm that drops fire. either there are wars in heaven, or else the world, too insolent toward the gods, provokes them to send destruction.
i wish you and your scarred self had convinced me to wage our last battle on land.
goodbye, my lord. sir valentine is coming.
what, have you seen something so strange that it is clearly an omen from the gods?
if you had, the kings that have revolted and the soldier that deserted this morning would still be behind you.
sir valentine, what's the rush?
a common slave, you'd know him if you saw him, held up his left hand, which flamed and burned like twenty torches together. and yet his hand was immune to the fire and didn't get burned. also, i've kept my sword unsheathed since i saw this, in front of the capitol i met a lion who looked at me and strutted by without bothering to attack me. and there were a hundred spooked women huddled together in fear who swore they saw men on fire walk up and down the streets.
who deserted this morning?
if you please, your grace, there is a messenger that waits to take my letters to my friends, and i am on my way to deliver them.
and yesterday the night owl sat hooting and shrieking in the marketplace at noon. when all these extraordinary things happen at once, we shouldn't say, "these happenings can be explained rationally. they're natural enough." i think these things are omens of things to come in our country.
you don't know? someone who was always near you. if you call for enobarbus, he won't hear you. or if he can hear you from caesar's camp, he'll reply, "i'm no longer on your side."
are they very important?
indeed, it's a strange time. but men tend to interpret things however suits them and totally miss the actual meaning of the things themselves. is caesar visiting the capitol tomorrow?
what are you saying?
in essence they describe how healthy and happy i am here in your kingdom.
he is, because he told antonius to tell you he'd be there tomorrow.
sir, he's with caesar.
no, then, they don't matter. stay with me a while. i want to tell you about some affairs that affect me personally, which you must keep secret. you're surely aware that i have sought to match my friend sir thurio with my daughter.
good night then, casca. this bad weather isn't good to walk around in.
sir, he left his belongings and treasure.
i know that very well, my lord, and surely the match would be profitable and honorable. besides, the gentleman is full of virtue, wealth, worth, and qualities fit for a wife such as your beautiful daughter. can your grace not get her to want him for a husband?
farewell, cicero
he's gone?
no, trust me. she is irritable, sullen, difficult, proud, disobedient, stubborn, irresponsible, and neither does she care that she must obey me as my child nor does she fear me as her father. and, may i tell you, after thinking about it, this pride of hers has made me love her less. i once thought she would fulfill her duty and take care of me in my old age, but now i've resolved to find a new wife and marry my daughter off to whomever will take her. her beauty will be her dowry, because she doesn't value me or my possessions.
who's there?
it's certain.
what part would your grace like me to play in this?
a roman.
eros, send his treasure to him. do it now. don't keep anything back, i insist. write to him from me, i'll sign it, sending greetings and gentle good-byes. say that i hope he never has cause to look for a new master. oh, my bad luck has forced honest men to become traitors. hurry. enobarbus!
there is a lady here in verona whom i love, but she is hard to please and coy and doesn't appreciate my old-fashioned eloquence. i'd like you to teach me how to win her over, since i long ago forgot how to court a woman, and besides, times have changed. how should i act in order for her bright eyes to take notice of me?
it's casca, i know your voice.
agrippa, go start the battle. we want antony taken alive. make sure everyone knows that.
win her with gifts if she doesn't pay attention to words. jewels, which can't speak, often sway a woman's mind more than fast-talking.
your ear is good. cassius, what a night this is!
i will, caesar.
but she already sneered at one present i sent her.
it's a very pleasing night to honest men.
an era of universal peace is about to start. if this battle goes well for us, there will be peace in all three corners of the world africa, asia, and europe, which were all under roman rule three corners of the world .
a woman will sometimes scorn the very thing that pleases her most. send her another gift. never give up, because her initial disdain will make her eventual feelings of love even stronger. if she frowns, it's not out of hatred for you but rather to make you love her even more. if she chides you, it's not so that you'll go away, because the fools that is, women. the fools will go crazy if they're left alone. don't be offended, whatever she says. by "get out of here," she doesn't really mean, "go away!" flatter and praise women, compliment them, talk about their graces. even if they have the blackest skin, say they have the faces of angels. in my opinion, any man that has a tongue isn't really a man unless he can use it to win a woman.
who ever saw the heavens threaten like this?
antony has come onto the battlefield.
but the family of the woman i'm talking about has promised her to a young, worthy gentleman, and they've strictly kept her away from other men so that no man can meet with her during the day.
those who have known how bad things are here on earth. i have walked around the streets, exposing myself to the perilous night, unbuttoned like this, as you see, casca, baring my chest to the thunderbolt. when the forked blue lightning seemed to break open the sky, i put myself right where i thought it would hit.
go order agrippa to put the men who deserted antony's army at the front. that way antony will feel like he's fighting his own men.
why, then i would see her at night.
but why did you tempt the heavens like that? mankind's role is to fear and tremble when the almighty gods send warning signals.
alexas deserted. he went to judea as if on antony's business, but he persuaded herod to support caesar instead. caesar hanged him for this service. canidius and the others that left antony are given hospitality here but no positions of trust. i've done a bad thing, for which i will blame myself so much that i'll never be happy again.
yes, but the doors are locked and the keys tightly guarded so that no man has access to her at night.
you're acting stupid, casca, and you lack the quick wits that a roman should have, or else you don't use them. you go pale, you stare, and you act in awe of the strange disturbance in the heavens. but if you thought about the real reason for all these fires, all these gliding ghosts, for why birds and animals abandon their natural behavior, why old men, fools, and children make predictions, why all sorts of things have departed from the usual course of their natures and become monstrosities, then you'd understand that heaven had them act this way so they would serve as frightening warnings of an unnatural state to come. right this minute, casca, i could name a man who's just like this dreadful night. a man who thunders, throws lightning, splits open graves, and roars like the lion in the capitol.
enobarbus, antony has sent you all your treasure, with generous gifts besides. the messenger arrived on my watch and is unloading his mules at your tent.
what's stopping anyone from entering her room through the window?
a man no mightier than you or i in ability, yet grown as huge and frightening as tonight's strange happenings.
it's yours.
her room is high up, far from the ground, and it projects out like a shelf so that one cannot climb it without risking his life.
you're talking about caesar, right, cassius?
don't joke about this, enobarbus. i'm telling you the truth. you'd better bring the messenger safely through the lines so he can return. i'd do it myself, but i can't leave my post. your emperor is still a king among gods.
why then, a skillfully made ladder of rope to toss up, with a pair of grappling hooks to anchor it, would work to scale this new hero's tower in greek myth, hero and leander were lovers. leander would swim across the hellespont each night to see her, guided by a light she set at the top of a tower. new hero's tower , allowing another daring leander to climb it.
let it be who it is. romans today still have the powerful bodies of their ancestors, but, unfortunately, we don't have their manly spirits, and instead we take after our mothers. our tolerance for slavery and oppression shows us to be weak, like women.
i am the worst person alive, and i know it the best. oh, antony, you extravagantly generous man, how would you have rewarded me for serving you faithfully when you reward my badness with all of this gold! my heart feels like it's about to explode. if grief doesn't kill me, i'll find a quicker way to kill myself, even though i think grief will do the job just as well. i, fight against you, antony? no, i'll go find some ditch to die in. the foulest fate would be most appropriate for me now in this latest phase of my life.
now, from one nobleman by birth to another, tell me where i can get such a ladder.
indeed, they say that the senators plan to establish caesar as a king tomorrow, and he'll wear his crown at sea and on land everywhere except here in italy.
retreat! we've advanced too far. caesar himself is in trouble and there are more adversaries than we expected.
when would you need to use it? please, sir, tell me that.
i know where i'll wear this dagger, then. i'll kill myself to save myself from slavery. in suicide, gods make the weak strong. in suicide, gods allow tyrants to be defeated. no stony tower, no brass walls, no airless dungeon, no iron chains can contain a strong mind. but if a man becomes weary of these obstacles, he can always kill himself. let everyone beware: i can shake off the tyranny that now oppresses me whenever i choose.
oh, my brave emperor, this is what i call a fight! if we'd fought like this before, we'd have driven them home with bandaged heads.
tonight, because love is like a child that wants everything he sees.
so can i. in fact, every imprisoned man holds in his own hand the tool to free himself.
you're bleeding a lot.
i'll get you such a ladder by seven o'clock.
how can caesar be a tyrant then? poor man! i know he wouldn't be a wolf if the romans didn't act like sheep. he couldn't be a lion if the romans weren't such easy prey. people who want to start a big fire quickly start with little twigs. rome becomes complete trash, nothing but rubbish and garbage, when it works to light up the ambitions of someone as worthless as caesar. but, oh no! what have i said in my grief? i might be speaking to someone who wants to be a slave, in which case i'll be held accountable for my words. but i'm armed and i don't care about danger.
i had a scar here that looked like a "t"; now it's an "h."
but listen, i will go see her alone. what's the best way to carry the ladder there?
you're talking to casca, not to some smiling, two-faced tattletale. say no more. shake my hand. if you're joining together to right these wrongs, i'll go as far as any one of you.
they're retreating.
it will be so light, my lord, that you'll be able to carry it under any size cloak.
that's a deal. now let me tell you, casca, i have already convinced some of the noblest romans to join me in an honorable but dangerous mission. and i know that by now they're waiting for me on the porch outside pompey's theater. we're meeting on this fearful night because no one is out on the streets. the sky tonight looks bloody, fiery, and terrible, just like the work we have to do.
we'll chase 'em into their latrines. i still have room for six more wounds.
a cloak as long as yours will do?
hide for a minute, someone's approaching fast.
they're retreating, sir, and our superiority indicates a clear victory.
yes, my lord.
it's cinna. i recognize his walk. he's a friend. cinna, where are you going in such a hurry?
let's slash their backs and grab 'em like we do rabbits, from behind. it's fair game to mark a coward.
then let me see your cloak. i'll get one of that same length.
to find you. who's that? metellus cimber?
i'll reward you once for your cheerfulness and ten times for your courage. come on.
why, any cloak will work just fine, my lord.
no, it's casca, someone who's going to work with us. aren't the others waiting for me, cinna?
i'll limp after you.
how will i get used to wearing a cloak? please, let me try on your cloak.
i'm glad casca is with us. what a fearful night this is! two or three of us have seen strange things.
we've driven him all the way back to his camp. one of you run to the queen with the news.
what's this letter? what does it say? "to sylvia"! and a tool for climbing like the kind you suggested. i'll be so bold as to break the seal.
are the others waiting? tell me.
before sunrise tomorrow, we'll kill anyone who escaped today. i want to thank all of you. you're formidable. you fought not as if you served the cause but as though it were as much your personal fight as mine. you are all hectors hector was a powerful trojan warrior hectors . go on into the city. embrace your wives and your friends. describe your feats for them while they cry for joy. their tears will wash the congealed blood from your wounds, and they will kiss those honorable cuts until they heal.
"my thoughts are with my sylvia every night. they are like my slaves, and i send them flying. oh, i wish that i could come and go to her just as easily, and lie where my thoughts, which cannot feel, are lying. let my thoughts, which come to you as my messengers, rest in your breast, while i, their king who sent them, curse the luck that has blessed them with such favor. i want to be as fortunate as my slaves. i curse myself, too, because i sent them to the place where i, their lord, should be." what's this here at the end? "sylvia, this night i will free you." so that's it, and here's the ladder you planned to use. why, phaethon, for you are merops' son in greek myth, phaethon set the world on fire when he accidentally drove the chariot of his father, helios, the sun god, too close to the earth. the duke may refer to valentine as "merops' son" as a way of calling him an illegitimate child, because even though phaethon's mother was married to merops, she had phaethon with helios. phaethon, for you are merops' son , will you try to drive the sun god's chariot and burn the world in your brash idiocy? will you grasp at the stars because they shine on you, as you grasp at my daughter for favoring you? go, vulgar intruder, arrogant slave! flash your fawning smiles on someone in your own class, and know that my patience, which is more than you deserve, allows you to leave this place. thank me for this more than you've thanked me for all the favors i've granted you, which were too many. but if you stay here in my kingdom any longer than it takes to hurry away, then by heaven my anger will be far greater than any love i've ever felt for my daughter or for you. get out of here! i will not hear your futile excuses. if you love your life, then you'll hurry on your way from here.
yes, they are. oh, cassius, if you could only convince brutus to join us, 
(to scarus ) give me your hand. i'll praise your actions to this powerful enchantress so that she will thank you with blessings. oh, light of the world, (to cleopatra ) wrap your arms around my armored neck. leap, with all your finery through my armor and go straight to my heart. there you can ride upon my heartbeats, sharing in my triumph.
why not death instead of being tortured alive? to die is to be banished from myself, and sylvia is my very being. being banished from her is like being banished from myself, a deadly banishment! what good is light if i can't see sylvia? what joy is joy if sylvia isn't nearby? unless i can be happy to think she is near and live on the mere thought of her perfection. unless i can be near sylvia in the night, there is no music in the nightingale's singing. unless i can look on sylvia in the day, the day doesn't even exist. she is my essence, and i'll cease to exist if i'm not cared for, shined upon, valued, and kept alive by her gentle power. i don't run from death if i run from the duke's deadly threats. if i stay here, i am just waiting for death, but if i flee this place, then i flee from life itself.
don't worry. good cinna, take this paper and be sure to lay it in the judge's chair where brutus sits, so he'll find it. and throw this one in his window, and attach this one with wax to the statue of brutus's ancestor, old brutus. when you've finished all this, return to the porch of pompey's theater, where you'll find us. are decius brutus and trebonius there?
lord of lords! your courage is infinite. have you returned smiling from the great battle for the world?
run, boy, run, run, and find him.
everyone's there except metellus cimber, and he's gone to look for you at your house. well, i'll hurry and put these papers where you told me.
my songbird, we have beaten them to their beds. what do you think, girl! even though there are some gray hairs among the brown, i still have a brain and muscles that will let me compete with younger men. look at this man. show him favor by letting him kiss your hand. (to scarus ) kiss it, my warrior.
i found him! i found him!
when you've finished, go back to pompey's theater.
today he fought as though he were a god who hated mankind.
what do you see?
come on, casca, you and i will go see brutus at his house before sunrise. he's three-quarters on our side already, and we'll win him over entirely at this meeting.
(to scarus ) friend, i'll give you armor made of gold. it belonged to a king.
the man we were looking for. it's a valentine, down to the last hair.
oh, the people love him well. things that would look bad if we did them, brutus could do and look virtuous, just like an alchemist turns worthless tin to gold.
he deserves it, even if it were covered with jewels like holy phoebus' car the chariot that the sun god phoebus drove across the sky phoebus' car . give me your hand. let's have a cheerful march through alexandria, proudly carrying our dented shields. if we had enough room in the palace to house this army, we'd all eat together and toast tomorrow, which promises to be full of danger. trumpeters, blast the city's ears. mix your fanfares with our drums, so that sounds from both heaven and earth will herald our approach.
valentine?
yes, you're absolutely right about how worthy brutus is and how much we need him. let's go, because it's already after midnight, and we want him on our side before daylight.
if we aren't relieved in an hour, we have to return to our barracks. the night is bright, and they say we'll be forming for battle by two a.m.
no.
lucius, are you there? i can't tell by the position of the stars how near it is to daybreak, lucius, are you there? i wish i had that weakness, to sleep too soundly. come on, lucius! wake up, i say! lucius!
that last day was a hard one for us.
who are you then? his ghost?
did you call me, my lord?
oh, listen to me, night, 
not his ghost either.
put a candle in my study, lucius. call me when it's lit.
who is this?
what are you then?
i will, my lord.
stay hidden and listen.
nothing.
the only way is to kill caesar. i have no personal reason to strike at him, only the best interest of the people. he wants to be crowned. the question is, how would being king change him? evil can come from good, just as poisonous snakes tend to come out into the open on bright sunny days, which means we have to walk carefully. if we crown him, i have to admit we'd be giving him the power to do damage.
be my witness, oh you blessed moon. the men who revolted against antony will be remembered scornfully in the history books. but poor enobarbus repented.
can "nothing" speak? master, should i attack?
rulers abuse their power when they separate it from compassion. to be honest, i've never known caesar to let his emotions get the better of his reason. but everyone knows that an ambitious young man uses humility to advance himself, but when he reaches the top, he turns his back on his supporters and reaches for the skies while scorning those who helped him get where he is. caesar might act like that. therefore, in case he does, we must hold him back. and since our quarrel is with his future behavior, not what he does now, i must frame the argument like this: if his position is furthered, his character will fulfill these predictions. and therefore we should liken him to a serpent's egg, once it has hatched, it becomes dangerous, like all serpents. thus we must kill him while he's still in the shell.
that's enobarbus?
who would you attack?
the candle is burning in your study, sir. while i was looking for a flint to light it, i found this paper on the window, sealed up like this, and i'm sure it wasn't there when i went to bed. (he gives brutus the letter)
quiet! keep listening.
"nothing."
go back to bed. it isn't daybreak yet. is tomorrow the th of march, boy?
oh, moon, you queen of sadness, drop poisonous dew on me so that my life, which continues against my wishes, will end. take my heart and throw it against my hard, stony sin. my heart, which dried out with grief, will surely break apart into a powder, and that will be the end of my disgusting mind. oh, antony! you are more noble than my revolt is dishonorable. forgive my crimes against you, but let history record me as a fugitive traitor. oh, antony! oh, antony!
stop, man.
i don't know, sir.
let's speak to him.
but, sir, i'm going to attack "nothing." please, 
check the calendar and come tell me.
let's listen to him. he may say something concerning caesar.
man, i say stop. valentine, my friend, let's talk.
i will, sir.
good idea. but he's sleeping.
my ears are plugged up and cannot hear good news, they are already filled with bad news.
the meteors whizzing in the sky are so bright that i can read by them. (he opens the letter and reads) "brutus, you're sleeping. wake up and look at yourself. is rome going to ... etc. speak, strike, fix the wrongs!" "brutus, you're sleeping. wake up." i've noticed many such calls to action left where i would find them. "is rome going to ... etc." what does this mean? will rome submit to one man's power? my ancestors drove tarquin from the streets of rome when he was pronounced a king. "speak, strike, fix it!" is this asking me to speak and strike? oh, rome, i promise you, if you're meant to receive justice, you'll receive it by my hand!
it looks more like he fainted. no one ever gave a prayer like that before going to sleep.
then i'll stay silent and not tell you, because my news is harsh, uncomfortable to hear, and bad.
sir, fifteen days of march have gone by.
let's go to him.
is sylvia dead?
good. go to the gate. somebody's knocking.
wake up, sir, wake up. speak to us.
no, valentine.
i haven't slept since cassius first began to turn me against caesar.
do you hear us, sir?
there is no valentine, indeed, for sacred sylvia. has she renounced her love for me?
from the time when you decide to do something terrible to the moment you do it, everything feels unreal, like a horrible dream. the unconscious and the body work together and rebel against the conscious mind.
the hand of death has taken him.
no, valentine.
sir, it's your brother-in-law cassius at the door. he wants to see you.
listen. the drums softly wake the sleepers. let's carry him to the barracks. he's an important person. our hour is up.
there's no valentine if sylvia ever stops loving me. what's your news?
is he alone?
come on, then. he may recover yet.
sir, there's been an announcement that you are banished.
no, sir. there are others with him.
they've switched their operation to the sea today. we didn't please them on land.
that you are banished. oh, that's the news! banished from here, from sylvia, and from me, your friend.
do you know them?
we're ready for both, my lord.
oh, i've already had my fill of this awful news, and now hearing more of it will make me sick. does sylvia know that i'm banished?
no, sir, their hats are pulled down over their ears and their faces are half buried under their cloaks, so there's no way to tell who they are.
i wish they'd fight in fire or in the air. we'd meet them there too. but here's the plan: our army will stay with us on the hills by the city. orders have been given to the navy and they've left port. we'll be able to analyze and direct the battle better from the hills.
yes, yes, and she's responded to the sentence, which, if not revoked, will be enforced, by crying a sea of melting pearls, which some people call tears. she cried them out at the feet of her ill-mannered father, and did so upon her knees, wringing her hands, whose beautiful whiteness appropriately seemed to result from her sorrow. but neither begging on her knees, nor extending her pure hands, nor heaving sad sighs, deep groans, or crying tears that flow like silver streams would move her unsympathetic father to change his order that valentine must die if captured. besides, her begging to repeal the order of banishment against you bothered him so much that he ordered her locked away and threatened to keep her there permanently.
let them in.
we won't move our land forces unless we're attacked. and i doubt that will happen, since most of antony's men are with his navy. let's take up the best positions we can in the valleys.
don't say any more, or the next word you say may kill me! if so, i beg you to whisper it into my ear as a final hymn for my endless misery.
it's the faction that wants to kill caesar. oh, conspiracy, are you ashamed to show your face even at night, when evil things are most free? if so, when it's day, where are you going to find a cave dark enough to hide your monstrous face? no, don't bother to find a cave, conspiracy. instead, hide your true face behind smiles and friendliness.
they still haven't joined the battle. i'll be able to see better from that pine tree over there. i'll let you know right away how it's going.
stop grieving over things you can't help, and think of ways to fix the things that cause you grief. time nurtures and breeds all good things. if you stay here, you can't see your love. besides, staying here will shorten your life. hope is a lover's crutch, walk forward with it and use it to prop yourself up against despair. your letters can be here though you are far away, and if you write them to me i will deliver them to the milk-white breast of your love. now is not the time to complain. come, i'll escort you through the city gate, and we can talk about everything concerning your love affairs before i part with you. consider the danger you're in, if not for yourself then for your love of sylvia, and come along with me!
if you went ahead and exposed your true face, hell itself wouldn't be dark enough to keep you from being found and stopped.
swallows have built nests in cleopatra's sails. the fortunetellers won't say whether that's a good sign or a bad one, but they don't look happy. antony is valiant and dejected. his mood changes by fits and starts; his checkered luck vacillates between hope and fear, winning and losing.
please, lance, if you see my servant boy, tell him to hurry and meet me at the north gate.
i'm afraid we're intruding too boldly on your sleep time. good morning, brutus. are we bothering you?
all is lost! this treacherous egyptian has betrayed me. my fleet has surrendered to the enemy. you can see them over there throwing their hats up in the air and drinking together like long lost friends. three-time traitor and whore! it's you who have sold me to this youth, caesar. now my war is only with you. tell the army to flee. revenge on cleopatra will be my last act. order them to escape. go!
go, boy, find him. come, valentine.
i was awake. i've been up all night. do i know these men who are with you?
oh, sun, i will never see another one of your sunrises. luck and antony separate here and now. here we'll shake hands good-bye. is it all come to this? the brave men who followed me like little dogs, whom i rewarded, have left me to follow caesar. i've been stripped of everything, betrayed. oh, that devious egyptian spirit! her charms launched my wars and called them back again. pleasing her was my main goal, and she lured me to total defeat. (calling out) where are you, eros! eros!
oh, my dear sylvia! unlucky valentine!
yes, every one of them. there isn't one of them who doesn't admire you, and each one of them wishes you had as high an opinion of yourself as every noble roman has of you. this is trebonius.
ah, you sorceress! be gone!
you know, i'm just a fool, but i still have enough brains to think my master is kind of a scoundrel. but it's fine if he is a scoundrel if he's only a scoundrel regarding love. no one thinks i am in love, yet i am. but a whole team of horses couldn't tear that secret, or who it is i love, out of me. and yet it's a woman, but what kind of woman i won't even say to myself. it's a milkmaid, but she's not a virgin since she has given birth the term "gossips" in shakespeare's original language refers to women who assist in childbirth and the people who serve as sponsors in the baptism of a newborn, suggesting that the woman has had a child. since she has given birth . yet she is a maid, because she is her master's maid and works for wages. she has more abilities than a water spaniel, which is a lot for a simple christian.
he's welcome here.
why is my lord enraged against his love?
here is a list of all her traits. "in the first place, she can fetch and carry." why, a horse can't do more. no, a horse can't fetch. it can only carry. therefore, she is better than a horse. "also: she can milk." look at that! what a sweet virtue for a maid with clean hands.
this is decius brutus.
get out of my sight, or i'll give you what you deserve and spoil caesar's victory. let him hoist you up in front of the shouting crowds! follow his chariot, like the greatest disgrace to your whole gender. let them exhibit you to the public for meager coins, like a monstrosity. then let octavia dig up your face with her nails.
how goes it, signor lance? any news of your mastership?
he's welcome too.
if you wish to live, you had better get out of here. but i think it would have been better if you'd let me kill you. one death would have prevented the deaths of many others., eros, ho!, i'm wearing the shirt of nessus. hercules was killed by a shirt poisoned with nessus' blood. wild with pain, he threw his servant lichas all the way to the sea. i'm wearing the shirt of nessus. hercules, my ancestor, teach me how to feel your rage. i'll toss lichas to the moon and use my mighty hands to kill my better self. the witch shall die. she sold me to that young roman boy and now i'm ruined. she'll die for it., eros, ho!
about my master's ship? well, it's at sea.
this is casca. this is cinna. and this is metellus cimber.
help me, ladies! oh, antony is more furious than telamon, who killed himself in a jealous rage. the wild boar of thessaly, which the goddess diana sent to punish king caledon for neglecting her sacrifices, didn't foam at the mouth as much as antony does now.
there you go again, you misunderstand me. what news is that, then, on your piece of paper?
they're all welcome. what worries have kept you awake tonight?
go to your tomb! lock yourself in and send him word that you're dead. when a great person departs, it causes more pain than when the soul leaves the body.
the darkest news that you've ever heard.
can i have a word with you?
to my tomb! mardian, go tell him i've killed myself. say the last word i spoke was "antony," and please word it pathetically. go, mardian, and let me know how he reacts to my death. (to the others) to the tomb!
why, man, how dark?
here's the east. won't the dawn come from here?
eros, can you still see me?
well, as dark as ink.
no.
yes, noble lord.
let me read it.
excuse me, sir, it will. these gray lines that lace the clouds are the beginnings of the dawn.
sometimes we see a cloud that looks like a dragon. sometimes there's a cloud like a bear or a lion, a castle, a floating rock, a craggy mountain. or it might look like a blue cliff with trees on it that bow to the ground. these things fool our eyes by seeming solid, when they are actually only air. you've seen these illusions. they're spectacles that appear at sunset.
get away, you blockhead! you can't read.
you're both wrong. (pointing his sword) here, where i point my sword, the sun rises. it's quite near the south, since it's still winter. about two months from now, the dawn will break further toward the north, and due east is where the capitol stands, here.
yes, my lord.
you lie. i can.
(coming forward with cassius) give me your hands, all of you, one by one. (he shakes their hands)
what looks like a horse is quick as thought disfigured by the wind, made as difficult to distinguish as water poured into water.
i'll test you. tell me: who conceived you?
and let us swear to our resolution.
that's true, my lord.
the son of my grandfather, of course.
no, let's not swear an oath. if the sad faces of our fellow men, the suffering of our own souls, and the corruption of the present time aren't enough to motivate us, let's break it off now and each of us go back to bed. then we can let this ambitious tyrant continue unchallenged until each of us is killed at his whim. but if we have reasons that are strong enough to ignite cowards into action and to make weak women brave, and i think we do, then, countrymen, what else could we possibly need to spur us to action? what bond do we need other than that of discreet romans who have said what they're going to do and won't back down? and what oath do we need other than that we honest men have told each other that this will happen or we will die trying? swearing is for priests, cowards, overly cautious men, feeble old people, and those long-suffering weaklings who welcome abuse. only men whom you wouldn't trust anyway would swear oaths, and for the worst reasons. don't spoil the justness and virtue of our endeavor nor weaken our own irrepressible spirits by thinking that we need a binding oath, when the blood that every noble roman contains within him would be proven bastard's blood if he broke the smallest part of any promise he had made.
eros, my young friend, your captain is now just like that cloud. here and now i seem like antony, but i can't keep myself in this form, my boy. i went to war to save cleopatra, whose love i thought i had, since she had mine, and mine carried with it a million others, those of my soldiers, now lost. the queen conspired with caesar to undermine my success and assure his victory. no, don't cry, kind eros. we still have the option of killing ourselves.
oh, illiterate loafer! it was the son of your grandmother. this proves that you cannot read.
but what about cicero? should we see what he thinks? i think he will stand strong with us.
oh, your contemptible lady! she has disarmed me.
come on, fool, come on. test me with the paper.
let's not leave him out.
no, antony. my mistress loved you, and her destiny was completely joined with yours.
(giving him the paper) there, and saint nicholas patron saint of scholars and schoolchildren. saint nicholas protect you!
no, by no means.
get out, insolent eunuch! silence! she has betrayed me and shall die.
(reads) "in the first place, she can milk."
yes, we should get his support, for his mature presence will make others think well of us and speak out in support of our actions. they'll assume that cicero, with his sound judgment, ordered the actions. his dignified maturity will distract attention from our youth and wildness.
a person can only pay with their life once, and she has paid in full. what you wanted is yours. her last words were "antony! most noble antony!" then, as she was speaking your name, a strangled groan split her words. "antony" was divided between her heart and lips. she gave up her life with your name still within her.
yes, that she can.
no, don't even mention him. we shouldn't tell him about our plans. he'll never follow anything that other men have started.
is she dead, then?
"also: she can brew good beer."
then leave him out.
dead.
and that's where the proverb comes in, "blessing of your heart, you brew good ale."
indeed, he's not right for this.
remove your armor, eros. the long day's work is over, and it is time to sleep. (to mardian ) permission to leave unharmed is abundant payment for your news. go!
"also: she can sew."
but should we only go after caesar? no one else?
off! take off my armor. not even ajax's famous shield, made of seven layers of oxhide and covered in bronze, could protect my heart from this attack. oh, chest, obey me! heart, for once be stronger than all the rest of the body combined. break out of my ribcage! faster, eros, faster. i won't be a soldier anymore. battered armor, be off. you were worn with honor. (to eros ) leave me awhile.
to that i say, "can she so?"
good point, decius. i don't think it would be wise to let mark antony, whom caesar is so fond of, outlive caesar. we'd find that he was a dangerous plotter. and as you know, his connections, if he put them to good use, might be enough to hurt us all. to prevent this, mark antony should die along with caesar.
i will catch up with you, cleopatra, and weep for your forgiveness. it's the only way left, because now any extension of my life would be torture. since the light of my life has gone out, i'll stop here. now any effort ruins what it attempts. yes, even power gets in its own way. end it, then, and everything is over., eros!, i'm coming, my queen!, eros!, wait for me. in the place where souls recline on beds of flowers we'll walk hand in hand and amaze the other ghosts with our spirited demeanor. those famous lovers, dido and aeneas, will lose their admirers, and the whole place will be devoted to us., come, eros. eros!
"also: she can knit."
our action will seem too bloody if we cut off caesar's head and then hack at his arms and legs too, caius cassius, because mark antony is merely one of caesar's arms. it'll look like we killed caesar out of anger and mark antony out of envy. let's be sacrificers but not butchers, caius. we're all against what caesar stands for, and there's no blood in that. oh, how i wish we could oppose caesar's spirit, his overblown ambition, and not hack up caesar himself! but, unfortunately, caesar has to bleed if we're going to stop him. noble friends, let's kill him boldly but not with anger. let's carve him up like a dish fit for the gods, not chop him up like a carcass fit for dogs. let's be angry only long enough to do the deed, and then let's act like we're disgusted by what we had to do. this will make our actions seem practical and not vengeful. if we appear calm to the people, they'll call us surgeons rather than murderers. as for mark antony, forget him. he'll be as useless as caesar's arm after caesar's head is cut off.
what can i do for my lord?
what does a man care if a girl's dowry doesn't include stockings, when she can knit him a stocking?
but i'm still afraid of him, because the deep-rooted love he has for caesar, 
since cleopatra died, i have lived in such dishonor that the gods despise my disgrace. though i have made conquests throughout the four corners of the world and sailed with fleets so large they looked like floating cities, i don't have as much courage as a woman. i have less nobility than the lady who, by killing herself, says to caesar, "only cleopatra can defeat cleopatra." you promised me, eros, that should the ultimate moment arrive, which it has, when dishonor and disgust are inevitable, that upon my command, you would kill me. do it. this is that time. you won't be striking me down, but defeating caesar. call up your courage.
"also: she can wash and scour."
alas, good cassius, don't think about him. if he loves caesar, then he can only hurt himself, by grieving and dying for caesar. and i'd be surprised if he even did that, for he prefers sports, fun, and friends.
the gods forbid! can i do what all the parthian arrows, though shot by enemies, could not?
that's a special virtue, because then she doesn't need to be washed and scoured to keep her in line "washed and scoured" was a slang phrase meaning "knocked down and beaten." washed and scoured to keep her in line .
there's nothing to fear in him. let's not kill him. he'll live and laugh at this afterward.
eros, would you like to look through a window in rome and watch your master marching in caesar's victory parade, his arms crossed and tied, his head bowed in submission, his face red from shame, while the chariot of triumphant caesar precedes him, putting the final stamp to his humiliation?
"also: she can spin yarn."
quiet! count how many times the clock chimes.
i would not.
then i can take it easy, since she can spin for a living.
the clock struck three.
then come on. i must be restored to health by an injury. draw your trustworthy sword, which you have used in such service to your country.
"also: she has many virtues that can't be named."
it's time to leave.
oh, sir, pardon me!
that's the same as saying they're bastard virtues that don't know their fathers and therefore have no names.
but we still don't know whether caesar will go out in public today or not, because he's become superstitious lately, a complete turnaround from when he used to have such a bad opinion of fortune-tellers, dream interpreters, and ritual mumbo-jumbo. it might happen that these strange signs, the unusual terror of this night, and the urgings of his fortune-tellers will keep him away from the capitol today.
when i freed you from slavery, didn't you swear to do this when i asked you? do it immediately, or all your previous services to me were accidental, without purpose. take out your sword and come on.
now comes a list of her vices.
don't worry about that. if he's reluctant, i can convince him. he loves to hear me tell him how men can be snared by flatterers, just like unicorns can be captured in trees, elephants in holes, and lions with nets. when i tell him he hates flatterers, he agrees, just at the moment when i'm flattering him the most. let me work on him. i can put him in the right mood, and i'll bring him to the capitol.
then turn your noble face away from me, that face that the whole world adores.
following right behind her virtues.
no, we'll all go there to bring him.
look!
"also: she is not to be kissed while fasting, because of her bad breath."
by eight o'clock. is that the latest we can do it?
i have drawn my sword.
well, that fault can be fixed with some breakfast. read on.
let's make that the latest, but be sure to get there before then.
now let it carry out its purpose immediately.
"also: she has a sweet tooth."
caius ligarius doesn't like caesar, who berated him for speaking well of pompey. i wonder that none of you thought about getting his support.
my dear master, my captain, my sovereign, let me say before i strike this fatal blow: farewell.
that makes up for her sour breath.
good metellus, go to him now. he likes me, and i've given him good reason to. just send him here, and i'll persuade him.
you've said it, friend, and farewell to you.
"also: she talks in her sleep."
the morning is approaching. we'll leave, brutus. friends, go your separate ways. but all of you, remember what you've said and prove yourselves true romans.
good-bye, great commander. should i do it now?
that doesn't matter, as long as she doesn't sleep while she talks.
good gentlemen, look like you're rested and happy. don't let our faces betray our plans. instead, carry yourselves like roman actors, with cheerful spirits and well-composed faces. and so, good morning to all of you.
now, eros.
"also: she is slow with words."
boy! lucius! fast asleep? well, enjoy the sweetness of deep sleep. your brain isn't stuffed with the strange shapes and fantasies that come to men who are overwhelmed by worries. that's why you sleep so soundly.
well, then, there!
what a scoundrel who listed this among her vices! to speak little is a woman's only virtue! please, cross that out and list it as her chief virtue.
brutus, my lord.
with this i avoid the grief of antony's death.
"also: she is proud."
portia, what are you doing awake? it isn't good for your health to expose your weak body to the raw, cold morning.
brave eros, three times more honorable than i am! you teach me what i should do but could not. my queen and eros have by their brave examples beaten me to the history books. but i will embrace death as a bridegroom does his bride, and rush to it as to a lover's bed. come then. eros, your master dies your student. i learned to do this from you.
cross that out, too. it was eve's legacy to all women, so it can't be taken from her.
it's not good for your health, either. you rudely snuck out of bed. and last night at dinner, you got up abruptly and paced back and forth with your arms crossed, brooding and sighing, and when i asked you what was the matter, you gave me a dirty look. i asked you again, and you scratched your head and stamped your foot impatiently. i still insisted on knowing what the matter was, but you wouldn't answer me, instead giving me an angry wave of your hand and telling me to leave you alone. so i left, afraid of further provoking anger that was already inflamed but still hoping this was merely moodiness, which everyone is affected by once in awhile. your strange mood won't let you eat or talk or sleep. if it had changed your outward appearance as much as it has affected you on the inside, i wouldn't even be able to recognize you, brutus. my dear lord, tell me what's bothering you.
what! i'm not dead? not dead?, guard, here! oh, kill me!
"also: she has no teeth."
i'm not feeling well, that's all.
what's the trouble?
i don't care about that either, because i love gums.
you're smart, though, and if you were sick, you'd take what you needed to get better.
i've botched the job, friends. oh, finish what i've begun.
"also: she's a bitch."
i'm doing so. good portia, go to bed.
our guiding light is out.
well, at least she has no teeth with which to bite.
are you sick? and is it healthy to walk uncovered and breathe in the dampness of the morning? you're sick, yet you sneak out of your warm bed and let the humid and disease-infested air make you sicker? no, my brutus, you have some sickness within your mind, which by virtue of my position i deserve to know about. (she kneels) and on my knees, i urge you, by my once-praised beauty, by all your vows of love and that great vow of marriage which made the two of us one person, that you should reveal to me, who is one half of yourself, why you're troubled and what men have visited you tonight. for there were six or seven men here, who hid their faces even in the darkness.
and time itself is ended.
"also: she will taste and appraise her liquor before buying it."
don't kneel, noble portia.
sadness and despair!
if her liquor is good, then she should. and if she won't, i will, because good things should be praised.
(getting up) i wouldn't need to if you were acting nobly. tell me, brutus, as your wife, aren't i supposed to be told the secrets that concern you? am i part of you only in a limited sense, i get to have dinner with you, sleep with you, and talk to you sometimes?
whoever's a real friend should strike me dead.
"also: she is too loose."
is my place only on the outskirts of your happiness? if it's nothing more than that, then i'm your whore, not your wife.
not me.
that can't mean her tongue, since it's already written down that she's slow with words. and it isn't about her purse, because i'll keep that shut. now she may be loose in another way, and that i can't help. well, keep going.
you're my true and honorable wife, as dear to me as the blood that runs through my sad heart.
me neither.
"also: she has more hair than brains, and more faults than hair, and more wealth than faults."
if that were true, then i'd know your secret. i admit i'm only a woman, but nevertheless i'm the woman lord brutus took for his wife. i admit i'm only a woman, but i'm still a woman from a noble family, i'm cato's daughter. do you really think i'm no stronger than the rest of my sex, with such a father and such a husband? tell me your secrets. i won't betray them. i've proved my trustworthiness by giving myself a voluntary wound here in my thigh. if i can bear that pain, then i can bear my husband's secrets.
none of us.
stop right there. i'll take her. she was mine and then not mine two or three times in that last item. repeat it once more.
oh, gods, make me worthy of this noble wife!
your death and destiny advise your followers to escape.
"also: she has more hair than brains, "
listen! someone knocks. portia, go inside awhile, and soon enough you'll share the secrets of my heart. i'll explain all that i have committed to do and all the reasons for my sad face. leave me quickly.
i only need to show your sword to caesar and tell him about your death to get into his good favor.
more hair than brains? maybe that's so. i'll prove it. the top of a saltshaker hides the salt, so therefore it is more than the salt. the hair that covers the brains is more than the brains, because the larger thing hides the smaller thing. okay, what's next?
lucius, who's that knocking?
where's antony?
"and more faults than hair, "
here's a sick man who wants to speak with you.
there, diomedes, there.
that's awful. oh, i wish that weren't on the list!
it's caius ligarius, whom metellus spoke of. boy, stand aside. caius ligarius! how are you?
is he still alive? why don't you answer me, man?
"and more wealth than the faults."
please accept my feeble "good morning."
is that you, diomedes? draw your sword and give me enough blows to kill me.
why, that line makes the many faults a good thing. well, i'll have her. if it is a good match, since nothing is impossible, "
oh, what a time you've chosen to be sick, brave caius! how i wish you felt better!
most powerful lord, my mistress cleopatra sent me to you.
what then?
i'm not sick if you've prepared some honorable exploit for me.
when did she send you?
why, then i'll tell you that your master is waiting for you at the north gate.
indeed, i would have such an exploit for you, ligarius, if you were healthy enough to hear it.
just now, my lord.
for me?
(takes off his head covering) by all the gods that romans worship, i hereby throw off my sickness! soul of rome! brave son of honorable ancestors! you've conjured up my deadened spirit like an exorcist. now say the word, and i will tackle all kinds of impossible things, and succeed too. what is there to do?
where is she?
for you? yeah, who are you? he's been waiting for a better man than you.
a deed that will make sick men healthy.
locked in her tomb. she had a premonition of what has actually happened. she saw that you suspected her of negotiating a treaty with caesar, which never will be true. afraid that your anger would not subside, she sent you word she was dead. but later, fearing how that news might affect you, she sent me to tell you the truth. i'm afraid i've come too late.
and i have to go to him?
but aren't there some healthy men whom we have to make sick?
too late, good diomedes. call my guard, please.
you must run to him, because you have stayed so long that simply walking isn't going to cut it.
that too. my dear caius, i'll explain the task at hand to you as we walk toward the man we must do it to.
hey out there! emperor's guards! guards, hey! come! your lord calls for you!
why didn't you tell me sooner? a disease take your love letters!
start walking, and with an energized heart, i'll follow you, to what, i don't know, but i'm satisfied, simply knowing that brutus leads me.
carry me, good friends, to where cleopatra is. it's the last command i shall ever give you.
now he'll get beaten for reading my letter. what a rude slave for having stuck his nose in someone else's secrets. i'll follow after him, to rejoice in seeing his master whip him.
follow me, then.
we're very sorry, sir, that you may not live to wear us out with your commands.
sir thurio, don't worry. she is sure to love you now that valentine has been banished from her sight.
neither the sky nor the earth have been quiet tonight. calphurnia cried out three times in her sleep, "help, someone! they're murdering caesar!" who's there?
it's a very sad day.
since his exile she has despised me even more, she has refused to be around me, and she has condemned me, so that i have no hope of winning her.
my lord?
no, my friends, don't please fate by giving it your sorrow as well. if we welcome our punishment, we punish it right back by seeming to take it lightly. pick me up. i have often led you, now you must carry me, my good friends, and take my thanks for everything.
the weak impression love makes on the heart is like an ice sculpture, which melts into water and loses its form after being exposed to heat for just an hour. a little time will ease her disdain, and worthless valentine will be forgotten.
go tell the priests to perform a sacrifice immediately, and bring me their interpretation of the results.
oh, charmian, i will never leave this tomb!
how's it going, sir proteus? is your countryman gone, as our proclamation commands?
i will, my lord.
be calm, dear lady.
he's gone, my good lord.
what are you doing, caesar? are you planning to go out? you're not leaving the house today.
no, i won't. strange and terrible events are all welcome, but i despise comforts. the size of my sorrow must be as great as its source.
my daughter is upset over his departure.
i will go out. the things that threaten me have only seen my back. when they see the face of caesar, they will vanish.
what's the news! is he dead?
a little time, my lord, will kill that grief.
caesar, i never believed in omens, but now they frighten me. a servant told me the night-watchmen saw horrid sights too, but different ones from what we heard and saw. a lioness gave birth in the streets, and graves cracked open and thrust out their dead.
he is close to death, but not dead yet. look out the other window; his guard has brought him here.
that's what i believe, too, but thurio doesn't think so. proteus, the high esteem i have for you, for you've shown me that you deserve it, makes me more inclined to discuss this matter with you.
fierce, fiery warriors fought in the clouds in the usual formations of war, ranks and squadrons, until the clouds drizzled blood onto the capitol. the noise of battle filled the air, and horses neighed, and dying men groaned, and ghosts shrieked and squealed in the streets. oh, caesar! these things are beyond anything we've seen before, and i'm afraid.
oh, sun, burn up the orbit in which you move, so that the world may be dark forever! oh, antony, antony, antony! help, charmian, help, iras, help! help, friends below; lift him up here.
let me die if i ever live to see the day i am disloyal to your grace.
how can we avoid what the gods want to happen? but i will go out, for these bad omens apply to the world in general as much as they do to me.
be calm! it was not caesar's bravery that conquered antony but antony's that has triumphed over himself.
you know how much i would like to arrange a marriage between sir thurio and my daughter.
when beggars die there are no comets in the sky. the heavens only announce the deaths of princes.
that's the way it should be, only antony should conquer antony. but how terrible that it has happened!
i do, my lord.
cowards die many times before their deaths. the brave experience death only once. of all the strange things i've ever heard, it seems most strange to me that men fear death, given that death, which can't be avoided, will come whenever it wants.
i am dying, cleopatra, dying. i just beg death to wait awhile, until i place the last of our many thousands of kisses on your lips.
and also, i think, you're aware that she refuses to obey my will?
what do the priests say?
i don't dare come down, forgive me, my lord, i don't dare, for fear of capture. i will never be exhibited as lucky caesar's prize. if knives, poison, or snakes have edge, effect, or venom, i am safe from that fate. your wife octavia, with her self-effacing eyes and self-righteous assumptions, won't get any praise from patronizing me. but come. come up here, antony, help me, ladies, we must carry you up. help us, good friends.
she refused when valentine was here, my lord.
they don't want you to go out today. they pulled out the guts of the sacrificed animal and couldn't find its heart.
oh, quick, before i'm gone.
yes, and oddly enough she continues to oppose me. what can we do to make this girl forget her love for valentine and love sir thurio?
the gods do this to test my bravery. they're saying i'd be an animal without a heart if i stayed home today out of fear. so, i won't.
such exercise! my lord is so heavy! our strength has all turned into sadness. that's what makes the weight. if i had the goddess juno's power, i would make the strong-winged messenger, mercury, pick you up and seat you beside jove. up just a little more, wishes are always foolish, oh, come on, come on, come on!
the best way is to slander valentine and make up lies about his infidelity, cowardice, and poor parentage, three things women strongly hate.
danger knows that caesar is more dangerous than he is. we're two lions born on the same day in the same litter, and i'm the older and more terrible. i will go out.
and welcome, welcome! die where you have lived, in my arms. let me revive you with my kisses. if my lips had the power to give life, i would wear them out like this.
yes, but she'll think these things are only said out of hatred for him.
alas, my lord, your confidence is getting the better of your wisdom. don't go out today. say that it's my fear that keeps you inside and not your own. we'll send mark antony to the senate house, and he'll say that you're sick today. (she kneels) let me, on my knees, win you over to this plan.
what a sad sight!
yes, if his enemy tells her these things. therefore, someone she believes to be his friend must tell her the details.
all right. mark antony will say i'm not well, and to please you i'll stay at home.
i am dying, cleopatra, dying. give me some wine and let me say a few words.
then you must make it your job to slander him.
here's decius brutus. he'll tell them so.
no, let me talk, and let me scold to the heavens, so that fortune, that deceitful hussy, will become so upset that she breaks her wheel. fortune was often depicted as a woman with a wheel, which controlled human beings' fates. fortune, that deceitful hussy, will become so upset that she breaks her wheel.
i would hate to do that, my lord. it's a job unsuitable for a gentleman, especially against his own friend.
hail, caesar! good morning, worthy caesar. i've come to take you to the senate house.
one thing, dear queen: request honor, as well as safety, from caesar. oh!
if your praise can't help him, then your slander can't do him any harm. therefore the task is neither good nor bad, since i, your friend, ask you to do it.
and you've come at a good time, so you can convey my greetings to the senators and tell them i won't come today. it wouldn't be true to say that i can't come, and even less true to say that i don't dare come. i simply won't come today. tell them so, decius.
honor and safety do not go together.
you've convinced me, my lord. if i do what i can to speak against him, she won't love him much longer. but even if she stops loving valentine, it doesn't mean she will love sir thurio.
say he's sick.
dear, listen to me: don't trust any of caesar's men besides proculeius.
so, as you break down her love for him, you must build it back up around me, so that it doesn't come apart and become useless to everyone. you must do this by praising me as much as you dispraise sir valentine.
would i send a lie? have i accomplished so much in battle, but now i'm afraid to tell some old men the truth?
i'll trust my determination and my hands, but none of caesar's men.
and, proteus, we feel we can trust you with this task because we know, from what valentine told us, that you're already in love and can't quickly fall out of love. for this reason you will be allowed to speak to sylvia as you like. she is sad, sullen, and melancholy, and she'll be happy to see you because you're close to valentine. then you can shape her by your persuasion to hate young valentine and love my friend, sir thurio.
decius, go tell them that caesar won't come.
don't mourn over this unhappy reversal of fortune at the end of my life. remember my earlier lot, when i lived as the greatest, most noble prince in the world. i'm not dying shamefully, doffing my helmet to my countryman like a coward, but as a roman, honorably conquered by another roman. now i feel my soul leaving. i can't speak any more.
i will do as much as i can. but you, sir thurio, aren't doing enough to win her. to entice her and capture her desires, you must write sonnets whose well-crafted rhymes should be filled with vows of devotion.
most mighty caesar, give me some reason, so i won't be laughed at when i tell them so.
most noble man, will you die? don't you care about me? shall i stay in this dreary world, which is no better than a pigsty without you? oh, look, ladies. the best of the world disappears. my lord!
yes, poetry bred by heaven is very powerful.
the reason is that it's what i want. i'm not coming. that's enough for the senate. but for your private satisfaction, because i love you, i'll tell you. calphurnia, my wife, is keeping me at home. last night, she dreamed she saw a statue of me with a hundred holes in it, like a fountain with pure blood flowing from it, and many happy romans came smiling and washed their hands in it. she takes these signs for warnings and predictions of terrible evils to come, and, on her knee, she begged me to stay home today.
oh, the glory of war has faded. the flags have fallen. young boys and girls are equal to men. there is nothing distinctive, nothing remarkable left in the world.
say that you sacrifice your tears, your sighs, and your heart on the altar of her beauty. write until your ink dries up and then moisten it again with your tears, and craft some emotional line that reveals your sincerity, after all, orpheus's lute in greek myth, orpheus was known as such a masterful musician that animals and even inanimate objects would follow him. he played the lute, a stringed instrument played by plucking. orpheus's lute was made from the same stuff as poetry and could soften steel and stones, make tigers tame, and cause huge whales to leave the deep ocean and dance on the sand. after you give her your love poems, go to her bedroom window at night with a group of musicians. while they play, sing a sad melody, and the silent night will enhance such sweet heartsick yearning. if that doesn't win her, nothing will.
this dream has been interpreted all wrong. it was a good and lucky vision. your statue spouting blood through many holes, in which many smiling romans bathed, means that you'll provide great rome with sustaining blood, and that great men will strive to get some token of approval from your holy blood. this is what calphurnia's dream means.
oh, stay calm, lady!
your instructions show that you've been in love before.
you've offered an excellent interpretation.
our queen is dead too.
and i'll act on your advice tonight. therefore, good proteus, my guide, let's go into the city to find some gentlemen skilled at playing instruments. i have a sonnet that will work to set your plan into action.
i will have when you hear the rest of what i have to say. the senate has decided to give mighty caesar a crown today.
lady!
let's do it, gentlemen!
if you send them word that you won't come, they might change their minds. besides, someone's likely to joke, "adjourn the senate until some other time, when caesar's wife has had better dreams." if you hide yourself, won't they whisper, "caesar is afraid?" pardon me, caesar. my high hopes for your advancement force me to tell you this. my love gets the better of my manners.
madam!
we'll visit your grace after supper and then determine our next move.
how foolish your fears seem now, calphurnia! i'm ashamed that i yielded to them. give me my robe, because i'm going.
oh, madam, madam, madam!
like i said, let's do it! you're excused.
and look, here's publius, come to fetch me.
royal egypt, empress!
men, get ready. i see a traveler.
good morning, caesar.
quiet, quiet, iras.
even if there are ten of them, don't back down. take them down.
welcome, publius. what, brutus? are you up this early too? good morning, casca. caius ligarius, i was never your enemy so much as the sickness that's made you so thin. what time is it?
now i am no more than a woman, ruled by the same lowly passion as the maid who milks and does the humblest chores. i might now hurl my scepter at the destructive gods and tell them that this earthly world was as good as their heavenly one, until they stole away its jewel, antony. now all is for nothing. patience is foolish. impatience suits a mad dog. so why should it be a sin to rush toward death, to seek it out in its hiding place before it dares to come to find me? how are you, my ladies? tell me! cheer up! how are you, charmian? my gallant girls! ah, ladies, look: the light of our lives has gone out. good noble ladies, be brave. we'll bury him, and then we'll commit acts as brave and fine as any romans, and make death proud to take us. come on, you can go. the container of that great soul is now cold. ah, ladies, ladies! let's go. we have no friends but determination and the quickest death.
stop, sir! give us what you have on you. if you don't, we'll make you sit and we'll search you.
caesar, the clock has struck eight.
dolabella, go see antony. tell him to surrender. his position is hopeless. this delay makes him look ridiculous.
sir, we're ruined. these are the bandits that all the travelers in this area fear so much.
i thank you all for your trouble and courtesy.
right away, caesar.
my friends, 
see! even antony, who stays up all night partying, is awake. good morning, antony.
what are you doing with a sword? who do you think you are coming in here armed?
that's not how it is, sir. we are your enemies.
and to you, most noble caesar.
my name is decretus. i served mark antony, who was the commander most worthy of my services. while he was alive, i lived only to serve him and oppose his enemies. if you accept my service, i'll serve you the same way. if not, you can kill me.
quiet! let's hear him out.
tell them to prepare the other room for guests. i'm to blame for making you wait for me. now, cinna. now, metellus. trebonius! i have an hour-long matter to discuss with you. remember to see me today. stay near me so i'll remember.
what are you saying?
yeah, by the hair on my chin we'll hear him out, because he is a handsome man.
caesar, i will. (speaking quietly to himself) in fact, i'll be so near that your best friends will wish i'd been further away.
caesar, i'm telling you that antony is dead.
you should know that i have little wealth to lose. i am a man who's been struck by hardship. my only riches are these poor clothes i'm wearing, and if you take them then you take the sum total of everything i own.
good friends, go in and have some wine with me. and we'll leave together, like friends.
when such a great man dies there should be a thunderclap. the fractured world, in its confusion, should send lions into the city streets and humans into the wilderness to live in lions' dens. this isn't the death of one man. it's the death of half the world.
where are you going?
(quietly to himself) that we are now only "like" friends, oh caesar, makes my heart ache.
he's dead, caesar. not by public execution or an assassin's knife. he killed himself with the same hand that performed such brave acts. with the courage his heart lent his hand, his hand in turn split his heart. this is his sword. i pulled it from his wound. look, his noble blood is still on it.
to verona.
(reading aloud from the letter) "caesar, beware of brutus. watch cassius. don't go near casca. keep an eye on cinna. don't trust trebonius. pay attention to metellus cimber. decius brutus doesn't love you. you've wronged caius ligarius. these men all have one intention, and it's directed against caesar. if you aren't immortal, watch those around you. a sense of security opens the door to conspiracy. i pray that the mighty gods defend you! your friend, artemidorus." i'll stand here until caesar passes by, and i'll give him this as though it's a petition. my heart regrets that good men aren't safe from the bite of jealous rivals. if you read this, caesar, you might live. if not, the fates are on the side of the traitors.
listen, sad friends, though the gods may rebuke me, this news would make kings cry.
where did you come from?
boy, i beg you to run to the senate house. don't stay to answer me, get going. why are you still standing there?
it's strange that human nature makes us grieve for the very thing we've been trying to achieve.
from milan.
to find out what you want me to do there, madam.
his faults were equally matched by his virtues.
how long were you there?
i want you there and back again before i can even tell you what you should do there. (to herself, so that no one can hear her) oh, let my determination keep me from speaking what is in my heart! i have a man's mind, but only a woman's strength. how hard it is for women to keep secrets! (to lucius) are you still here?
there was never a ruler as excellent as he. but gods, you give us faults so we'll be human. caesar is upset.
about sixteen months, and i might have stayed longer if bad luck hadn't thwarted me.
madam, what should i do? run to the capitol and nothing else? and then return to you and nothing else?
it's impossible for him not to see himself in antony.
what! were you banished?
yes, return and tell me if your master looks well, because he was sick when he left. and pay attention to what caesar does and which men are close to him. listen, boy! what's that noise?
oh, antony. i drove you to this. but we have to get rid of a disease if it threatens our body. either i had to ruin you, or you would have ruined me. there wasn't enough room in the world for both of us. even so, let me mourn, with tears that heal like a bloodletting, that you, my brother, my greatest competitor, my partner in rule, my friend and companion on the battlefield, the very arm of my body, and the heart in which mine own heart's thoughts lived, that our fates could not be reconciled, which caused us to divide ourselves from one another. let me tell you, friends, 
i was.
i don't hear anything, madam.
i'll tell you at a better time. this man looks like his business is urgent. let's hear what he has to say. (to egyptian ) who are you?
for what crime?
i beg you, listen well. i heard a noise like a scuffle. the wind brings it from the capitol.
a poor egyptian, but my mistress, the queen, sent me to find out what your intentions are concerning her. she's locked up in her tomb and wants to prepare herself for her fate.
for something that now hurts me to repeat: i killed a man, whose death i greatly regret, even though i killed him in a fair fight without deceit or wicked treachery.
truly, madam, i don't hear anything.
tell her to put her mind at rest. she'll find out soon enough by one of our messengers how respectfully and kindly we plan to treat her. i cannot be taught how to be cruel.
why, never regret it if that's the way it happened. were you really banished for such a small offense?
come here, you. where are you coming from?
may the gods bless you.
i was, and was grateful to have just been banished.
my own house, good lady.
come here, proculeius. tell her we mean her no disrespect. give her whatever assurances you feel she needs to keep her from killing herself. i need her alive, so that i can exhibit her in my triumphal procession and gain eternal fame. go, and hurry back to bring us her reply and news of her state of mind.
do you speak any other languages?
what time is it?
i will, caesar.
i traveled when i was young, which made me happy. otherwise, i would have been miserable.
around nine o'clock, madam.
gallus, you go with him.
by the bald head of robin hood's fat friar tuck! this fellow would make a great king for our group of bandits!
has caesar gone to the capital yet?
where's dolabella? he's supposed to support proculeius.
we'll take him. sirs, a word with you all.
madam, not yet. i'm going to stand so i can see him pass on the way to the capitol.
dolabella!
master, become one of them. it's an honorable kind of thievery.
you have some plea for caesar, don't you?
never mind. i remember he's already occupied. he'll be done in time. come with me. in my tent i'll show you how unwillingly i was drawn into this war. you'll see how calm and gentle my letters to antony always were. come and see the proof.
quiet, rascal!
yes, i do, lady. if it pleases caesar to be so good to himself as to hear me, i'll try to get him to do what's good for him.
being alone has helped me better understand my life. it's pathetic to be caesar. he can't be fortune; he's only fortune's errand boy. it would be a great deed to commit suicide, that act which ends all other things, which makes all accidents and changes stop. which causes you to sleep, and takes you away from earthly concerns.
(returning to valentine) tell us this: do you have any way to support yourself?
why, do you know of any harm intended toward him?
caesar greets the queen of egypt and asks that you consider what you will ask from him.
nothing but my luck.
nothing that i know for sure, but a lot that i'm afraid might happen. good morning to you. the street is narrow here. the crowd that follows caesar at his heels, senators, justices, common petitioners, will suffocate a feeble man almost to death. i'll move to a more open place and there speak to great caesar as he walks past.
what's your name?
you should know, then, that some of us are gentlemen who were forced out of respectable society by our unrestrained youth. i myself was banished from verona for planning to elope with a lady, an heir who was close to the duke.
i must go in. (speaking quietly to herself) oh, a woman's heart is so weak! oh brutus, may the gods aid you in your endeavor! surely, the boy heard me. (to lucius) brutus has a claim that caesar won't grant. oh, i feel faint. run, lucius, and speak well of me to my lord. say that i'm happy. then return to me and tell me what he says to you.
my name is proculeius.
and i am from mantua. i stabbed a gentleman in the heart out of anger.
(to the soothsayer) march th has come.
antony told me about you. he said you were a man i could trust. but i don't worry about being deceived because i don't need to trust. if your master wants a queen to beg from him, you should tell him that a queen will beg for no less than a kingdom. if he will grant me conquered egypt, so that i may give it to my son, i will kneel to him with thanks.
and i was banished for such petty crimes like these. but to get to the point, we state our crimes in part because they explain why we live lives of lawlessness, and also partly because seeing that you're attractive, and by your own description a linguist, and since we are in need of a man of such qualities in our profession, 
yes, caesar, but it's not gone yet.
be content. you're in the charge of an honorable man. don't be afraid. you can ask for anything from my lord. his generosity flows to anyone in need. if i can tell him that you have submitted to him sweetly, he'll request your assistance in finding ways in which he can support you.
in fact, because you are a banished man, and for that more than any other reason, we'd like to speak to you. would you like to be our leader, to consider poverty an asset, and live as we do in this forest?
(offering his letter) hail, caesar! read this schedule.
please tell him i have surrendered to his fortune. i give up to him the glory he has won. i'm learning every hour how to be subservient. i'd be happy to meet with him in person.
what do you say? will you join our band of highwaymen? say yes, and become our captain. we'll respect you, be ruled by you, and love you as our leader and our king.
(offering caesar another paper) trebonius wants you to look over his humble petition, at your leisure.
i'll tell him all of this, dear lady. be at ease. i know he's sorry for your situation, especially since he caused it.
but if you reject our offer you die.
oh, caesar, read mine first, for my petition affects you more directly. read it, great caesar.
(to proculeius ) see how easy it was to capture her? (to soldiers) guard her until caesar arrives.
you won't live to brag about what we've offered.
whatever pertains to myself i will deal with last.
your majesty!
i accept your offer and will live with you, provided that you do not harm any helpless women or poor passengers.
don't delay, caesar. read it instantly.
oh, cleopatra! you've been betrayed, my queen!
no, we detest such vile, wicked practices. come, go with us. we'll take you to the rest of our band and show you all the treasure we have, which along with ourselves is at your disposal.
what, is the man insane?
quick, quick good hands!
i've already had to lie to valentine, and now i must be just as unfair to thurio. under the guise of praising him, i now have the ability to express my own feelings of love to sylvia. but sylvia is too beautiful, too faithful, too holy to be corrupted by my worthless praises. when i declare my loyalty to her, she criticizes me for being false to my friend, valentine. when i praise her beauty, she tells me to think about how i've been unfaithful to julia, whom i once loved. and yet, despite all of her scolding, the least of which could kill a lover's hopes, my love grows and fawns on her like a dog the more she spurns it. but here comes thurio. now we must go to her window and play some evening music for her to hear.
(to artemidorus) stand aside, you.
stop, brave lady, stop! don't do such a shameful thing to yourself. we've rescued you from yourself. we have not betrayed you.
how's it going, sir proteus? did you creep over here before us?
(to artemidorus) what? are you pressing your petition on the street? go to the capitol.
what, am i being denied death, as well? the thing which even dogs are given, to rid them of their suffering?
yes, kind thurio, because you know that love has to creep where it isn't allowed to walk.
(to cassius) i hope your endeavor goes well today.
don't insult my master's generosity by killing yourself. the world will see how noble he is by the way he treats you. your death would prevent that.
yes, but i hope, sir, that you aren't in love in this situation.
what endeavor, popillius?
where are you, death? come here. come, and you can have a queen. one queen is worth more than a whole number of babies and beggars, your cheapest conquests.
but i am, or else i wouldn't be here.
good luck.
oh, control yourself, lady!
who are you in love with? sylvia?
(to cassius) what did popillius lena say?
sir, i won't eat. i won't drink. and don't expect me to talk. i won't sleep either. i'll destroy my body. let caesar do whatever he wants. you'd better understand that i won't wait till i'm chained up in your master's court, and i won't let myself be scolded even once by dull octavia. shall i let them exhibit me to the shouting mobs of rome? i'd rather die in a ditch in egypt, and make it my gentle grave. i'd rather lie in the nile mud with flies laying their eggs in me, making me disgusting. i'd rather be hung in chains from one of our pyramids!
yes, sylvia, for your sake.
(speaking so that only brutus can hear) he wished that our endeavor would go well today. i'm afraid we've been found out.
you're letting yourself get carried away with these horrible thoughts. you'll see that caesar is giving you no reason to do so.
i thank you for your own sake. now, gentlemen, let's start playing, and be sure to give it all you've got.
look, he's approaching caesar. keep an eye on him.
proculeius, caesar has heard about what you've done here and has sent for you. i'll take the queen into my custody.
now, my young guest, it seems to me you feel melancholy. please tell me, why is it?
casca, be quick, because we're worried we might be stopped. brutus, what will we do? if our secret's known, either caesar or i will die, for i'll kill myself.
so be it, dolabella. caesar's thanks are my greatest reward. be kind to her. (to cleopatra ) i'll relay to caesar any request you want to give me.
in fact, my host, it's because i cannot be happy.
cassius, stand firm. popillius lena wasn't talking about our plot, for, look, he's smiling, and caesar's expression is the same.
tell him i'd like to die.
come, we'll make you happy. i'll take you where you shall hear music and see the gentleman that you asked for.
trebonius knows his cue. see, brutus, he's pulling mark antony aside.
have you heard of me, most noble empress?
but will i hear him speak?
where's metellus cimber? he should go up and offer his petition to caesar now.
i don't remember.
yes, you will.
they're speaking to him. go up there and second his petition.
i'm sure you've heard of me.
that's music that i hear.
casca, you'll be the first to raise your hand.
it doesn't matter what i've heard or known. you must be the one who laughs when boys or women tell you their dreams. isn't that your habit?
listen! listen!
are we all ready? what problem should i discuss with you first?
i don't know what you mean, madam.
is he among these musicians?
(kneeling) most high, most mighty, and most powerful caesar, metellus cimber kneels before you with a humble heart, 
i dreamed about an emperor called antony. oh, i wish i could sleep again, so i could have another dream like that!
yes, but be quiet! let's listen to them.
i have to stop you, cimber. these kneelings and humble courtesies might excite ordinary men, flattering them into turning roman law into children's games. but don't be so foolish as to think you can sway me from what's right by using the tactics that persuade fools, i mean this flattery, low bows, and puppy-like fawning. your brother has been banished by decree. if you kneel and beg and flatter for him, i'll kick you out of my way like i would a dog. know that i am not unjust, and i will not grant him a pardon without reason.
if you'd like, 
who is sylvia? what is she like, that all our young men praise her? she is holy and fair and wise; and heaven has lent her such grace so that she may be admired. is she as kind as she is beautiful? because beauty and kindness are joined. cupid makes visits to her eyes to cure him of his blindness, and, being cured, he stays there to live. then let us sing to sylvia, that sylvia is superior. she surpasses every mortal thing that lives on this dull earth. let us bring her flower garlands.
is there no voice worthier than my own to appeal to caesar to repeal the order that my brother be banished?
authority radiated from his face, and his presence brought knowledge and order to the people of earth.
what's this? are you sadder than you were before? what's going on, man? you don't like the music?
(kneeling) i kiss your hand, but not in flattery, caesar. i ask you to repeal publius cimber's banishment immediately.
your majesty, 
you're mistaken. the musician doesn't like me.
what, even you, brutus?
his power extended from one shore to the other, as if he straddled the ocean with his legs. when he raised his arm in command, the world trembled. he spoke exquisitely to his friends, but when he wanted to terrify the world, his voice was like thunder. there was no end to his generosity. the more he gave, the more he wanted to give. his amusements showed another side of him, one detached from his world of responsibility and duty. kings and noblemen served him. kingdoms and provinces dropped from his pockets like loose change.
why, my young friend?
(kneeling) pardon him, caesar, pardon him. i fall to your feet to beg you to restore publius cimber to citizenship.
cleopatra, 
he is being false, sir.
i could be convinced if i were like you. if i could beg others to change their minds, begging would convince me, too. but i'm as immovable as the northern star, whose stable and stationary quality has no equal in the sky. the sky shows countless stars. they're all made of fire, and each one shines. but only one among all of them remains in a fixed position. so it is on earth. the world is full of men, and men are flesh and blood, and they are capable of reason. yet out of all of them, i know only one who is unassailable, who never moves from his position. to show you that that's me, let me prove it a little even in this case. i was firm in ordering that cimber be banished, and i remain firm in that decision.
do you think there ever was, or could there ever be, a man such as the one i dreamed about?
how so? are his instrument's strings out of tune?
(kneeling) oh, caesar, 
no, gentle madam.
no, but he's being so false that it hurts my very heartstrings.
enough! would you try to lift mount olympus?
the gods can hear you lying! but if there ever were such a man, simple dreams could never contain his greatness. when it comes to creating fantastical things, the natural world cannot compete with imagination. and yet, if the natural world could create something like antony, it would have a masterpiece to rival anything fantasy might construct. antony would easily outshine all imaginary beings.
you have a good ear.
(kneeling) great caesar, 
listen to me, madam. you are a remarkable person and your loss is equally remarkable. you are responding appropriately to the greatness of that loss. i hope i never achieve success if i don't feel some of your heartbroken grief right now.
yes, but i wish i were deaf. it makes my heart sad.
haven't i resisted even brutus, begging from his knees?
thank you, sir. do you know what caesar intends to do with me?
i see you don't enjoy listening to music.
hands, speak for me!
i'm reluctant to tell you what i wish you knew.
not at all, when it sounds so awful.
and you too, brutus? in that case, die, caesar. (he dies)
please, sir, 
listen, how they change their tune!
liberty! freedom! tyranny is dead! run and proclaim it in the streets.
though he is honorable, 
yes, that "change" is the problem.
some should go to the public platforms and cry out, "liberty, freedom, and democracy!"
he'll still parade me through rome as a trophy of war.
would you prefer that they always play just one thing?
people and senators, don't be afraid. don't run away, stay where you are. only caesar had to die for his ambition.
i know he will, madam.
i would always have one of them play only one song. but, host, does this sir proteus we're talking about often go to this lady?
go to the platform, brutus.
stand aside for caesar.
i'll tell you what lance, his servant, told me: he loved her more than anything.
and cassius too.
which of these ladies is the queen of egypt?
where is lance?
where's publius?
(to cleopatra ) it's the emperor, madam.
gone to find his dog, which he must deliver as a present to sylvia tomorrow upon his master's command.
here. he's completely stunned by this mutiny.
arise. you need not kneel to me. please rise, queen.
quiet! step aside. the musicians are leaving.
stand close together, in case someone loyal to caesar tries to, 
the gods have ordained it to be like this, sir. you are my lord and master. i must obey.
sir thurio, don't worry. i will plead to sylvia so effectively that you'll say my cunning scheme is excellent.
don't talk about standing together., publius, cheer up. we don't intend any harm to you, nor to anyone else. tell them this, publius.
don't think i blame you. whatever injuries i received in the war, i put down to the fortunes of war.
where will we meet?
and leave us, publius, in case the people storming us should harm you.
you are now the sole lord of the entire world. i can't explain my cause very clearly. i must admit to having the weaknesses that all women are accused of.
at saint gregory's well.
do so. and let no one suffer for this deed except us, the perpetrators.
cleopatra, understand that, rather than emphasize our power over you, we will soften if you accept our intentions, which are very compassionate toward you. your acceptance will benefit you, but if you try to make me look cruel by committing suicide as antony did, i won't be so generous. your children will be destroyed, a fate your submission will save them from. i'll leave you now.
farewell.
where's antony?
you may do whatever you want in the world. it's yours, and you may hang us, your trophies of war, anywhere you like. here, my good lord.
madame, good evening to your ladyship.
he ran to his house, stunned. men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run in the streets as though it were doomsday.
you shall advise me in everything having to do with cleopatra.
i thank you for your music, sir. who is that who spoke?
we'll soon find out what fate has in store for us. all we know is that we'll die sometime, which is all anyone ever knows, though we try to draw out our days for as long as possible.
this is the inventory of the money, silverware, dishes, and jewels that are still in my possession. it's an exact list. not even trivial things were left out. where's seleucus?
someone, lady, whom you would quickly learn to recognize by his voice if you knew how he truly felt.
why, the man who shortens his life by twenty years cuts off twenty years of worrying about death.
here, madam.
sir proteus, i take it.
so, then, death is a gift, and we are caesar's friends, for we've done him a service by shortening his time spent fearing death. kneel, romans, kneel, and let's wash our hands, up to the elbows, in caesar's blood and smear it on our swords. then we'll go out, even to the marketplace, and, waving our bloody swords over our heads, let's cry, "peace, freedom, and liberty!"
this is my treasurer. my lord, he will swear on his life that i haven't kept a thing., tell the truth, seleucus.
sir proteus, gentle lady, and also your servant.
kneel then, and wash.
madam, i'd rather sew my lips shut than tell a lie when my life depends upon it.
what do you want?
how many years from now will this heroic scene be reenacted in countries that don't even exist yet and in languages not yet known!
what did i keep for myself?
for you to want me.
how many times will caesar bleed again in show, though he now lies at the base of pompey's statue, as worthless as dust!
enough to buy everything you have declared.
then you have your wish. i want this of you: that you take yourself home to bed. you sly, lying, false, disloyal man! do you think i'm so shallow, so stupid, that you can seduce me with your flattery when you've deceived so many others with your vows? go back, go back, and apologize to your love. i swear on the moon, i am so far from granting your request that i despise you for your misguided plea. in a moment i intend to scold myself for spending even this much time talking to you.
as often as it's replayed, our group will be hailed as the men who gave their country liberty.
no, don't be ashamed, cleopatra. you're very prudent to set a little aside.
i admit, sweet love, that i did love a lady. but she is dead.
well, should we go out?
look around you, caesar. oh, just see what happens after the pageantry is over! what is mine will be yours now. if we were to change places, what is yours would be mine. seleucus' ingratitude makes me wild. (to seleucus ) oh, you slave! i can't trust you any more than a prostitute. what are you doing? cringing away? i'll give you a good reason to cringe, i promise you. i'll scratch out your eyes, even if they could fly. you slave! soulless villain! dog! oh, that was unbelievably low!
(aside) that's false, if i do say so myself, because i'm sure she's not dead and buried.
yes, every man forward. brutus will lead, and we'll follow him with the boldest and best hearts of rome.
good queen, let me implore you, 
even if she is dead, valentine, your friend, is still alive, and you know that i'm betrothed to him. aren't you ashamed to wrong him with your disrespect?
wait a minute. who's that coming? it's a friend of antony's.
oh, caesar, i am so ashamed. you condescended to visit me here, honoring my humble self with your lordly presence. and one of my own servants increases my disgrace by adding his envy! suppose, good caesar, that i have saved a few feminine trifles, some unimportant trinkets. these have worth only as gifts to friends. and suppose i have kept a few more expensive gifts aside for livia octavius caesar's wife livia and octavia, to solicit their good wishes. must i then be exposed by a person i've supported? by the gods! it adds another blow to the many i have already. (to seleucus ) please leave, or i'll show you what's left of my spirit since my fortune was ruined. if you were a real man, you would have had mercy on me.
i also hear that valentine is dead.
(kneeling) brutus, my master ordered me to kneel like this. (he kneels, head bowed low) he ordered me to kneel low, and, from the ground, like this, he ordered me to say: "brutus is noble, wise, brave, and honest. caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving. antony loves brutus and honors him. antony feared caesar, honored him, and loved him.
leave, seleucus.
then consider me dead, too, because you can be sure my love is buried with him in his grave.
if brutus will swear that antony may come to him safely and be convinced that caesar deserved to be killed, mark antony will love dead caesar not nearly as much as living brutus, and with true faith he'll follow the destiny and affairs of noble brutus through the difficulties of this unprecedented state of affairs." that's what my master, antony, says.
you should also know that as head of state, we are often blamed for the crimes of others. and though we may fall, we are still responsible for their offenses. i am therefore to be pitied.
sweet lady, let me dig up your love from the earth.
your master is a wise and honorable roman. i never thought any less of him. tell him, if he comes here, i'll explain everything to him and, on my word, he'll leave unharmed.
cleopatra, our conquest won't include either the things you kept back or the ones you listed. it's all still yours. do whatever you like with it. you can trust that caesar is not a merchant to haggle with you over your property. so cheer up. don't be captured by your depressed thoughts. no, dear queen. we want to follow your own counsel when making arrangements for you. eat and sleep. i have so much care and pity for you that you could call me friend. and so, good-bye.
go to your lady's grave and dig up her love then. or at least bury yours in her tomb.
(getting up) i'll get him now.
my master and my lord!
(aside) he didn't hear that.
i know that he'll be on our side.
not true. good-bye.
madame, if your heart is so stubborn, at least indulge my love by giving me a portrait of yourself, the picture that is hanging in your bedroom. i'll speak, sigh, and weep to that. since you are completely devoted to someone else, i am nothing, and therefore i will love your image and not you.
i hope we can count on him, but i still fear him, and my hunches are usually accurate.
he's trying to talk me into forgetting my nobility, girls. but listen, charmian.
(aside) if it were a real woman you would certainly deceive her and make her into nothing, just as i am nothing now.
but here comes antony., welcome, mark antony.
it's time to end it, good lady. the bright day of our lives is over, and now there will only be darkness.
i don't want to be your idol, sir. but since it's appropriate that your deceiving self should worship shadows and adore images rather than the real thing, send your servant to me in the morning, and i'll send you the portrait. so go on, and good night.
oh, mighty caesar! do you lie so low? have all your conquests, glories, triumphs, achievements, come to so little? farewell. gentlemen, i don't know what you intend to do, who else you intend to kill, who else you consider corrupt.
(to charmian ) go out again. i've already given the order, and it is ready. hurry with your errand.
i'll have as good a night as the condemned man who awaits execution in the morning.
if it's me, there's no time as good as this hour of caesar's death, and no weapon better than your swords, covered with the noblest blood in the world. i ask you, if you have a grudge against me, to kill me now, while your stained hands still reek of blood. i could live a thousand years and i wouldn't be as ready to die as i am now. there's no place i'd rather die than here by caesar, and no manner of death would please me more than being stabbed by you, the masters of this new era.
i will, madam.
host, are you leaving?
oh, antony, don't beg us to kill you. though we seem bloody and cruel right now, with our bloody hands and this deed we've done, you've only seen our hands and their bloody business; you haven't looked into our hearts. they are full of pity for caesar. but a stronger pity, for the wrongs committed against rome, drove out our pity for caesar, as fire drives out fire, and so we killed him. for you, our swords have blunt edges, too dull to harm you, mark antony. our arms, which can be strong and cruel, and our hearts, filled with brotherly love, embrace you with kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.
where's the queen?
my goodness, i was fast asleep.
your vote will be as strong as anyone's in the reordering of the government.
look, sir.
please, where is sir proteus staying?
but just be patient until we've calmed the masses, who are beside themselves with fear. then we'll explain to you why i, who loved caesar even while i stabbed him, have taken this course of action.
dolabella.
why, at my house. oh my word, i think it's almost dawn.
i don't doubt your wisdom. each of you, give me your bloody hand. (he shakes hands with the conspirators) first, marcus brutus, i shake your hand. next, caius cassius, i take your hand. now, decius brutus, yours. now yours, metellus. yours, cinna. and yours, my brave casca. last but not least, yours, good trebonius. you are all gentlemen, alas, what can i say? now that i've shaken your hands, you'll take me for either a coward or a flatterer, in either case, my credibility stands on slippery ground. it's true that i loved you, caesar, nothing could be truer. if your spirit is looking down upon us now, it must hurt you more than even your death to see your antony making peace, shaking the bloody hands of your enemies, in front of your corpse. if i had as many eyes as you have wounds, and they wept as fast as your wounds stream blood, even that would be more becoming than joining your enemies in friendship. forgive me, julius! on this very spot you were hunted down, like a brave deer. and here you fell, where your hunters are now standing. the spot is marked by your death and stained by your blood. oh world, you were the forest to this deer, and this deer, oh world, was your dear. now you lie here, stabbed by many princes!
madam, according to my promise, which my love to you has made a religious vow, i tell you that caesar intends to travel through syria. within three days you and your children will be sent ahead. make the best use of this information you can. i have done your bidding and fulfilled my promise.
no, it isn't. it's been the longest night i've ever had, and the saddest.
mark antony, 
dolabella, i will always be in debt to you.
this is the time that madame sylvia asked me to come by so that she could tell me something. there's an important matter she'd like my help with. madame! madame!
pardon me, caius cassius. even caesar's enemies would say the same. from a friend, it's a cool assessment, no more than that.
and i your servant. good-bye, good queen. i must go attend caesar.
who's there?
i don't blame you for praising caesar like this, but what agreement do you intend to reach with us? will you be counted as our friend, or should we proceed without depending on you?
farewell, and thanks.
your servant and your friend, one that is here to obey your ladyship's orders.
i took your hands in friendship, but, indeed, i was distracted when i looked down at caesar. i am friends with you all and love you all, on one condition, that you prove to me that caesar was dangerous.
now, iras, what do you think? you will be exhibited in rome along with me, like egyptian puppets. crude slaves with greasy aprons, rulers, and hammers shall lift us up so everyone can see. their stinking breath will form a cloud around us, and we'll be forced to inhale it.
sir eglamour, good morning a thousand times over.
without that proof, this would've been a savage action! our reasons are so well considered that even if you, antony, were caesar's son, you would be satisfied with them.
the gods forbid!
as many to you, my worthy lady. i've come as your ladyship asked and have arrived a little early to find out what you'd like me to do for you.
that's all i ask, and that you let me carry his body to the marketplace and, as a friend ought to do, stand on the platform and give a proper funeral oration.
no, it's certain, iras. insolent lictors roman officers who assisted the judge lictors will paw us as if we were streetwalkers. disreputable minstrels will write bawdy songs about us. hotheaded comedians will stage impromptu impersonations of us and depict the celebrations we had in alexandria. antony will be portrayed as a drunk, and i'll see some boy with a squeaking voice play cleopatra as if i were a whore.
oh, eglamour, you are a gentleman, valiant, wise, and very successful. don't think i'm trying to flatter you, because i swear i'm not. i'm sure you know how dearly i feel about the banished valentine, and how my father wants to force me to marry that conceited thurio, whom i hate down to my very soul. you've been in love before, and i've heard you say you've never experienced more grief than when your lady and true love died. you swore a vow of chastity on her grave. sir eglamour, i want to go to valentine in mantua, where i hear he is living. because the journey there is a dangerous one, i'd like you to accompany me, as i trust in your faith and honor. don't use my father's anger as an excuse, eglamour, but think about my grief, a lady's grief, and about why it's fair that i run away to avoid this terrible marriage, the kind heaven always afflicts with problems. even though my heart is as full of sorrow as the sea is full of sand, i want you to keep me company and go with me. if you don't want to go, then please don't reveal what i've said to you, so that i can leave without anyone knowing.
you may, mark antony.
oh, the good gods!
madame, i pity you for your grievances. since i know they are legitimate, i agree to go along with you. i'm not concerned what may happen to me, and i wish you the best of luck. when will you go?
brutus, may i have a word with you? (speaking so that only brutus can hear) you don't know what you're doing. don't let antony speak at his funeral. don't you know how much the people could be affected by what he says?
no, that's the truth.
this evening.
(speaking so that only cassius can hear) with your permission, i'll stand on the platform first and explain the reason for caesar's death.
i'll never see it. i know my nails are stronger than my eyes; i'll scratch them out.
where should i meet you?
what antony says, i'll announce, he says only by our permission and by our conviction that caesar should be honored with all the usual and lawful ceremonies. it'll help us more than hurt us.
why, that's just the way to frustrate their plans and defeat their absurd intentions.
at friar patrick's chambers, where i intend to take holy confession.
(speaking so that only brutus can hear) i'm worried about the outcome of his speech. i don't like this plan.
now, charmian! women, dress me like a queen. go get my best clothes. i will once again be as fine as when i went to cydnus to meet marc antony., iras, go., now, charmian, we'll be quick indeed. and after you've done this chore, i'll give you permission to amuse yourself until doomsday. (to iras ) bring our crown and all the royal symbols of office.
i won't fail you, your ladyship. good day, gentle lady.
mark antony, take caesar's body. you will not blame us in your funeral speech, but will say all the good you want to about caesar and that you do it by our permission. otherwise, you'll have no role at all in his funeral. and you'll speak on the same platform as i do, after i'm done.
what's that noise?
good day, kind sir eglamour.
so be it. i don't want anything more.
there's a farmer here who won't leave without seeing your highness. he has brought you figs.
when a man's pet behaves like a stupid mongrel, mind you, it's hard to take, a dog that i brought up from a puppy, one that i saved from drowning when three or four of his newborn brothers and sisters were drowned. i have trained him quite literally "as i would teach a dog," as the saying goes. i was sent to deliver him as a present to mistress sylvia from my master, but no sooner had i stepped into the dining room than he ran ahead of me to the plate and stole her drumstick. oh, it is a foul thing when a mongrel can't behave himself in front of company! it seems i have a dog that tries to be a dog indeed, dog-gone good at all things, as one would say. if i hadn't had the brains to take the blame for what he'd done, i honestly think he would have been hanged for it. as sure as i'm alive he would have been punished for it. you be the judge. he thrusts himself under the duke's table and into the company of three or four fancier dogs. he hadn't been there a second or two before everyone in the whole room could smell his piss, pardon my french! "out with the dog!" says one person; "what mangy mutt is that?" asks another. "whip him," says a third. "hang him!" says the duke. i, having smelled that smell before, knew it was crab, so i went to the fellow whose job it is to whip the dogs. "friend," i said, "are you going to whip the dog?" "yes, in fact, i am," he replied. "then you're doing him a great injustice," i answered back, "because it was i who peed all over the place." he didn't say anything else but just whipped me out of the room. how many masters would do this for their pets? no, i swear i've sat in the stocks for meat pies he has stolen, otherwise he would have been executed. i have stood on the pillory for geese he has killed, otherwise he would have suffered the consequences. you don't remember any of this now, do you, crab? no, i remember the trick you pulled on me when i said goodbye to madame sylvia. didn't i tell you that you should still obey me and do as i do? when did you ever see me lift up my leg and urinate on a noble woman's undergarments? did you ever see me do such a thing?
prepare the body, then, and follow us.
let him come in.
(to julia) your name is sebastian, right? i like you, and i'd like to hire you for a job i need done.
oh, pardon me, you bleeding corpse, for speaking politely and acting mildly with these butchers! you are what's left of the noblest man that ever lived. pity the hand that shed this valuable blood. over your wounds, which, like speechless mouths, open their red lips, as though to beg me to speak, i predict that a curse will fall upon the bodies of men.
what a poor instrument, that can do such a noble deed! he brings me freedom. my mind is made up. there's nothing of the weak woman left in me. now from head to foot i'm as firm as marble. now the inconstant moon has nothing to do with me.
name it. i'll do what i can.
fierce civil war will paralyze all of italy. blood and destruction will be so common and familiar that mothers will merely smile when their infants are cut to pieces by the hands of war. people's capacity for sympathy will grow tired and weak from the sheer quantity of cruel deeds. and caesar's ghost, searching for revenge with the goddess ate ate is the greek goddess of discord and vengeance. ate by his side, just up from hell, will cry in the voice of a king, "havoc!" and unleash the dogs of war. this foul deed will stink up to the sky with men's corpses, which will beg to be buried.
this is the man.
i hope you will.
you serve octavius caesar, right?
leave us.
how's it going, you poor son of a bitch? where have you been hanging around these past two days?
i do, mark antony.
do you have in there the pretty snake of the nile that kills without pain?
well, sir, i brought the dog to mistress sylvia, as you instructed.
caesar wrote for him to come to rome.
i certainly do have him, but i wouldn't advise you to touch him. his bite is fatal. people who die of it seldom or never recover.
what did she say about my little jewel of a gift?
he received caesar's letters, and he is coming. he told me to say to you, (seeing caesar's body) oh, caesar!, 
do you remember anyone who died of it?
actually, she said your dog was a mongrel and said that a shabby thanks is good enough for such a present.
your heart is big; go ahead and weep. grief seems to be contagious, for my eyes, seeing the tears in yours, began to fill. is your master coming?
many people, men and women alike. i heard of one just yesterday. she was a very honest woman but rather inclined to lie, which a woman shouldn't do unless she's protecting her reputation. i heard how she died of its bite, how much pain she felt. indeed, she gives a very good testimony of the snake's power. but if you believe everything they say, you won't be saved by half of what they do. but this is a sure thing: the snake's an odd snake.
but she accepted my dog?
he rests tonight within twenty-one miles of rome.
you may leave now. farewell.
no, indeed, she didn't. here, i've brought him back again.
report back to him fast and tell him what has happened. this is now a rome in mourning, a dangerous rome. it's not safe enough for octavius yet. hurry away and tell him so. no, wait, stay a minute. don't go back until i've carried the corpse into the marketplace. there i'll use my speech to test what the people think of these bloody men's cruel action. you'll report back to young octavius how they respond. help me here.
i hope you are pleased with the snake.
what, did you offer her this mutt from me?
we want answers. give us answers.
farewell.
yes, sir. the other runt was stolen from me by a gang of boys in the marketplace. so, i offered her my own, which is a bigger dog than ten of your little dogs, and so a better gift.
then follow me and listen to my speech, friends. cassius, go to the next street and divide the crowd. let those who will hear me speak stay. lead those away who will follow you, and we'll explain publicly the reasons for caesar's death.
you must know that the snake will act according to his nature.
go on and get out of here, and find my dog again, or never let me see you again. away, i say! are you staying here to make me angry?
i'll listen to brutus.
yes, yes. farewell.
what a scoundrel, who never fails to disgrace me! sebastian, i've hired you partly because i have need of a young man who can take care of some business for me quietly, and there's no trusting that foolish lout lance. but i've chiefly hired you for the way you look and act, which if my intuition doesn't deceive me mean you are honest, lucky, and have been brought up well. know that this is why i hired you. now go, and take this ring with you.
i'll listen to cassius, and we will compare their reasons.
listen, the snake is dangerous unless handled by people who are used to him. there isn't any kindness in the snake.
the woman who gave it to me loved me very much. deliver it to madame sylvia.
quiet! noble brutus has mounted the platform.
don't worry; we'll remember your warnings.
it seems you didn't love her if you're giving away her gift. is she dead?
be patient until i finish. romans, countrymen, and friends! listen to my reasons and be silent so you can hear. believe me on my honor and keep my honor in mind, so you may believe me. be wise when you criticize me and keep your minds alert so you can judge me fairly. if there's anyone in this assembly, any dear friend of caesar's, i say to him that my love for caesar was no less than his. if, then, that friend demands to know why i rose up against caesar, this is my answer: it's not that i loved caesar less, but that i loved rome more.
good. don't feed it, i beg you. it's not worth feeding.
no. i think she's alive.
would you rather that caesar were living and we would all go to our graves as slaves, or that caesar were dead and we all lived as free men? i weep for caesar in that he was good to me. i rejoice in his good fortune. i honor him for being brave. but his ambition, for that, i killed him. there are tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor for his bravery, and death for his ambition. who here is so low that he wants to be a slave? if there are any, speak, for it is he whom i've offended. who here is so barbarous that he doesn't want to be a roman? if there are any, speak, for it is he whom i've offended. who here is so vile that he doesn't love his country? if there are any, speak, for it is he whom i have offended. i will pause for a reply.
will it eat me?
oh no!
no one, brutus, no one.
don't think i'm so dumb that i don't know that the devil himself won't eat a woman. i know that a woman is a dish fit only for the gods, as long as the devil hasn't prepared the meal. but devils cause a lot of trouble for the gods regarding their women. for every ten women the gods make, the devils ruin five.
why do you cry "oh no!"?
then i have offended no one. i've done no more to caesar than you will do to me. the reasons for his death are recorded in the capitol. his glory has not been diminished where he earned it, nor have those offenses for which he was killed been exaggerated.
well, you can go now. farewell.
i can't help but feel sorry for her.
here comes his body, mourned by mark antony, who, though he had no part in the killing, will benefit from his death, receiving a share in the commonwealth, as you all will. with these words i leave. just as i killed my best friend for the good of rome, so will i kill myself when my country requires my death.
yes, truly, i wish you good luck with the snake.
why would you feel sorry for her?
live, brutus! live, live!
give me my robe. put on my crown. i long to be immortal. i won't drink egyptian wine again.
because i suspect she loved you as much as you love your lady sylvia. she dreams of that man who has forgotten her love. you dote on a woman who doesn't care for your love. it's a pity love is so difficult, and thinking about it makes me cry "oh no!"
let's carry him in triumph to his house!
quickly, quickly, good iras, quickly. i think i hear antony call me. i see him revive himself to praise my noble act. i hear him mock caesar's luck, which the gods give to men in order to balance out their subsequent wrath. husband, i'm coming! now let my courage prove my title as wife. i am now made of fire and air, and i leave the other elements, earth and water, to this mortal life. so, are you done? come then, kiss me and take the last bit of warmth from my lips. good-bye, kind charmian. iras, i won't see you again for a long time.
well, give her that ring and with it this letter. (giving a letter) that's her room. tell her i want the heavenly picture she promised me. when you've finished delivering the message, return home to my room, where you'll find me sad and alone.
let's build a statue of him, near those of his ancestors!
do i have the asp's poison on my lips? did you fall? if you can leave your body so easily, then the touch of death is like a lover's pinch, which hurts but is desired. do you lie still? if you leave like that, you tell the world that it's not worthy of a good-bye.
how many women would deliver such a message? too bad, poor proteus! you've hired a fox to be the shepherd of your lambs. why, poor fool that i am, do i pity the man who despises me? he despises me because he loves her, and i feel sorry for him because i love him. this is the ring i gave him when he left, and it was to remind him always of my feelings. and now i'm an unhappy messenger who is supposed to ask for the picture i don't want him to have, to deliver the ring i want sylvia to refuse, and to praise his loyalty, which i want to disparage. i am my master's true love, but i can't be a loyal servant to my master without being a traitor to myself. still i'll woo sylvia for him, but heaven knows i'll do it coldly, because i don't want him to win her.
let him become caesar!
clouds, dissolve into rain, so that i could say the gods themselves are weeping!
gentlewoman, good day! would you please take me to madame sylvia so that i may speak with her?
caesar's better qualities exist in brutus, and we will crown him.
this proves that i'm petty: if iras meets antony before me, he'll want her first and give her the kiss that is my bliss to have. come, you deadly villain.
what do you want with her, assuming i am she?
we'll bring him to his house with shouts and celebration!
separate me from life with your sharp teeth. poor poisonous fool, be angry and bite. oh, if you could speak, i might hear you call caesar an ass who's been outsmarted!
if you are she, i ask your patience to hear me deliver the message i've been instructed to bring you.
my countrymen, 
oh, eastern star!
from whom?
silence! brutus speaks.
quiet, quiet! don't you see my baby suckling at my breast so that its nurse will fall asleep?
from my master, sir proteus, madam.
quiet there!
oh, if my heart would only break!
oh, did he send you for a picture of me?
good countrymen, let me leave alone. i want you to stay here with antony to pay respects to caesar's corpse and listen to antony's speech about caesar's glories, which he gives with our permission. i ask that none of you leave, except myself, until antony has finished.
the poison is as sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle, oh, antony!, no, i'll take you too.
yes, madame.
let's stay and hear mark antony.
why should i stay, 
ursula, bring my picture there.
let him mount the pulpit. we'll listen to him. noble antony, mount the podium.
in this vile world? so, good-bye. now, death, you can boast that you have an incomparable girl in your possession. close, soft eyes.
go, give your master this. tell him from me that a woman named julia, whom his fickle heart has forgotten, would be more appropriate for his bedroom than this image of me.
for brutus's sake, i am indebted to you. (he steps up into the pulpit)
the sun will never be seen by such royal eyes again. your crown is crooked. i'll straighten it, then play, 
madame, please read this letter.
what does he say about brutus?
where's the queen?
pardon me, madame, i accidentally gave you a paper i shouldn't have.
he says that for brutus's sake he finds himself indebted to us all.
speak softly. don't wake her.
this is the letter for your ladyship.
he'd better not speak badly of brutus here.
caesar has sent, 
please, let me look at that other letter again.
caesar was a tyrant.
too slow a messenger.
i can't do that. forgive me, good madam.
that's for sure. we're lucky that rome is rid of him.
oh, come quickly! i almost feel you.
wait, stop! i will not look at your master's letter. i know it is filled with vows and full of newly made oaths, which he will break as easily as i tear up his letter.
quiet! let's hear what antony has to say.
(calling) come in. ho! all's not well. caesar's been deceived.
(offering the ring) madame, he sends your ladyship this ring.
you gentle romans, 
there's dolabella, who was sent from caesar. call him.
he should be even more ashamed for sending it to me, since i have heard him say a thousand times that his love julia gave it to him when he departed. even though his deceitful finger has sullied the ring, my finger will not mistreat julia so much.
quiet there! let us hear him.
what kind of work is this, charmian? is this well done?
she thanks you.
friends, romans, countrymen, give me your attention. i have come here to bury caesar, not to praise him. the evil that men do is remembered after their deaths, but the good is often buried with them. it might as well be the same with caesar. the noble brutus told you that caesar was ambitious. if that's true, it's a serious fault, and caesar has paid seriously for it. with the permission of brutus and the others, for brutus is an honorable man; they are all honorable men, i have come here to speak at caesar's funeral. he was my friend, he was faithful and just to me. but brutus says he was ambitious, and brutus is an honorable man. he brought many captives home to rome whose ransoms brought wealth to the city.
it is well done, and appropriate for a princess who has descended from so many royal kings. ah, soldier!
what did you say?
is this the work of an ambitious man? when the poor cried, caesar cried too. ambition shouldn't be so soft. yet brutus says he was ambitious, and brutus is an honorable man. you all saw that on the lupercal feast day i offered him a king's crown three times, and he refused it three times. was this ambition? yet brutus says he was ambitious. and, no question, brutus is an honorable man. i am not here to disprove what brutus has said, but to say what i know. you all loved him once, and not without reason. then what reason holds you back from mourning him now? men have become brutish beasts and lost their reason! bear with me. my heart is in the coffin there with caesar, and i must pause until it returns to me. (he weeps)
what's going on in here?
i thank you, madam, that you consider her feelings. poor gentlewoman! my master mistreats her very much.
i think there's a lot of sense in what he says.
they're all dead.
do you know her?
if you think about it correctly, caesar has suffered a great wrong.
caesar, you thought this would happen. you're coming here yourself to see the dreaded act you had tried to stop.
almost as well as i know myself. i swear i've wept several hundred times thinking about her sorrows.
has he, sirs? i'm worried there will be someone worse to replace him.
step aside, step aside for caesar!
she probably thinks that proteus has rejected her.
did you hear antony? caesar wouldn't take the crown. therefore it's certain that he wasn't ambitious.
oh, sir, you are too good at predicting the future. what you were afraid of has happened.
i think she does, and that's the cause of her sorrow.
if it turns out he wasn't, certain people are going to get it.
she was bravest at the end. she knew what i intended to do with her and, being royal, she took her own way out. how did they die? i don't see any blood.
isn't she very beautiful?
poor man! antony's eyes are fiery red from crying.
who was with them last?
she has been more beautiful, madam, than she is now. when she thought my master loved her deeply, she was as beautiful as you, in my opinion. but since she no longer takes care of her appearance and has thrown her sunblocking mask a mask worn by women to keep the sun off their faces. sunblocking mask away, the air has taken the rosiness from her cheeks and stolen the whiteness from her face, so that now she is as ugly as i am.
there isn't a nobler man than antony in all of rome.
a simple country farmer who brought her figs. this was the basket.
how tall was she?
now listen, he's going to speak again.
they were poisoned, then.
about my height. when we put on a pageant at pentecost a religious holiday period that followed seven weeks after easter. pentecost , the young men got me to play the part of a woman, and i was dressed in madam julia's gown, which everyone said fit me very well, as if the garment had been made for me. therefore, i know she is about my height. and at the time i made her cry a lot, because i played a really sad part, i was ariadne in greek myth, ariadne fell in love with theseus and promised to help him find his way out of the minotaur's labrynth if he would take her to athens and marry her. but on the way, theseus abandoned her, either accidentally or deliberately depending on the account. ariadne , madame, suffering from theseus' lies and unfair departure. i acted the part so convincingly with my tears that poor julia, moved with the performance, wept bitterly. i would wish i were dead if i didn't feel her very sorrow!
only yesterday the word of caesar might have stood against the world. now he lies there worth nothing, and no one is so humble as to show him respect. oh, sirs, if i stirred your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage, i would offend brutus and cassius, who, you all know, are honorable men. i will not do them wrong. i would rather wrong the dead, and wrong myself and you, than wrong such honorable men. but here's a paper with caesar's seal on it. i found it in his room, it's his will. if you could only hear this testament, which, excuse me, i don't intend to read aloud, you would kiss dead caesar's wounds and dip your handkerchiefs in his sacred blood, and beg for a lock of hair to remember him by. and when you died, you would mention the handkerchief or the hair in your will, bequeathing it to your heirs like a rich legacy.
oh, caesar, this charmian lived until a moment ago. she stood and spoke. i found her adjusting the crown on her dead mistress. she stood trembling, then suddenly dropped dead.
she is indebted to you, young man. such a shame, the poor lady, desolate and abandoned! i weep myself just hearing your story. here, young man, there is my purse.
we want to hear the will. read it, mark antony.
oh, noble weakness! if they had swallowed poison, it would be evident by external swelling. but she looks like she's asleep, as if she would charm another antony.
i give this to you for your sweet mistresses' sake, because you love her. farewell.
the will, the will! we want to hear caesar's will.
here on her breast there's a little bloody mark. there's a similar mark on her arm.
and she will thank you for it, if you ever meet her. a virtuous gentlewoman, kind and beautiful! i hope my master's endeavors to win her love will fail since she respects the love i feel for him so much. it's too bad how love can fool itself! here is her picture.
be patient, gentle friends, i must not read it. it isn't proper for you to know how much caesar loved you. you aren't wood, you aren't stones, you're men. and, being men, the contents of caesar's will would enrage you. it's better that you don't know you're his heirs, for if you knew, just imagine what would come of it!
this is an asp's trail, and these fig leaves have slime on them, just like the kind that asps deposit on the caves by the nile.
let me see, i think if i had a similar headdress my face would be as lovely as hers. and yet the painter made her prettier than she is, unless i flatter myself too much in thinking i'm as pretty. her hair is auburn, while mine is perfect yellow. if that's the only thing he likes better about her, then i'll get myself a blond wig. her eyes are as gray as glass, and so are mine. yes, but her forehead's low, and mine is as high as hers is low. if love is really blind, what does he value in her that i can't make him value in myself? let's go, sebastian. let's go and get rid of this picture, since it's your rival.
read the will. we want to hear it, antony. you have to read us the will, caesar's will.
that's probably how she died. her doctor told me she had searched for an infinite number of easy ways to die. pick up her bed and carry her ladies out of the tomb. she shall be buried next to her antony. no other grave on earth shall hold a pair this famous. momentous events like these strike those that cause them. antony and cleopatra's story is as pitiable as my military exploits are glorious. our army shall somberly attend this funeral and then depart for rome. come, dolabella. see that there is a dignified splendor to this great solemnity.
oh you unfeeling image, you'll be worshipped, kissed, loved, and adored! were there any sense in his worship, it would be the real me he worships instead. i'll treat this picture kindly for the sake of its mistress, who treated me so well. otherwise, by jove, i would have scratched out your unseeing eyes to make my master fall out of love with you!
will you be patient? will you wait awhile? i've said too much in telling you of it. i'm afraid that i wrong the honorable men whose daggers have stabbed caesar.
the setting sun begins to color the western sky, and now it's almost the time that sylvia is supposed to meet me at friar patrick's chamber. she will not fail, because those who are in love are always on time, unless they arrive early to speed up their progress.
they were traitors. "honorable men!"
see, here she comes now. good evening, my lady!
the will! the testament!
thank god, thank god! go on, my good eglamour. go out to the back door by the abbey wall. i'm afraid some spies have followed me.
they were villains, murderers. the will! read the will!
don't worry. the forest is less than nine miles away. if we make it there, we are safe.
you force me to read the will, then? then make a circle around caesar's corpse, and let me show you the man who made this will. shall i come down? will you let me?
sir proteus, what does sylvia have to say about my declarations of love for her?
come down.
oh, sir, she's not as cold as she used to be, though she still objects to you.
descend.
what, because my leg is too long?
we'll let you.
no, because it's too skinny.
make a circle; stand around him.
i'll wear a boot with spurs, then, to make it look thicker.
stand away from the hearse. stand away from the body.
(aside) but love can't be spurred to like what it hates.
make room for antony, most noble antony!
what does she have to say about my face?
no, don't press up against me. stand further away.
she says it is an attractive one.
stand back. give him room.
no, then, she's lying, my face is ugly.
if you have tears, prepare to shed them now. you all know this cloak. i remember the first time caesar ever put it on. it was a summer's evening; he was in his tent. it was the day he overcame the nervii warriors. look, here's where cassius's dagger pierced it. see the wound that casca made. through this hole beloved brutus stabbed. and when he pulled out his cursed dagger, see how caesar's blood came with it, as if rushing out a door to see if it was really brutus who was knocking so rudely. for brutus, as you know, was caesar's angel. the gods know how dearly caesar loved him! this was the most unkind cut of all. for when the noble caesar saw him stab, he understood his beloved brutus's ingratitude; it was stronger than the violence of traitors, and it defeated him, bursting his mighty heart. and at the base of pompey's statue, with his cloak covering his face, which was dripping with blood the whole time, great caesar fell. oh, what a fall it was, my countrymen! then you and i and all of us fell down, while bloody treason triumphed. oh, now you weep, and i sense that you feel pity. these are gracious tears. but if it overwhelms you to look at caesar's wounded cloak, how will you feel, kind men, now? look at this, here is the man, scarred, as you can see, by traitors. (he lifts up caesar's cloak)
but pearls are beautiful, and the old saying is that ugly men are pearls in beautiful women's eyes.
oh, what a sad sight!
(aside) it's true, the kind of pearls that make ladies go blind meaning cataracts, a condition in which the lens of the eye grows opaque and white, blurring vision and making the eye somewhat resemble a pearl. pearls that make ladies go blind . i'd rather shut my eyes than look at them.
oh, noble caesar!
how does she like my conversation?
oh, sad day!
not much, when you talk about war.
oh, traitors, villains!
but she likes it when i talk about love and peace?
oh, most bloody sight!
(aside) but even better when you hold your peace and don't talk at all.
we will get revenge.
what does she have to say about my bravery?
revenge! let's go after them! seek! burn! set fire! kill! slay! leave no traitors alive!
oh, sir, she doesn't question it at all.
wait, countrymen.
(aside) she doesn't need to, since she knows he's a coward.
quiet there! listen to the noble antony.
what does she have to say about my lineage?
we'll listen to him, we'll follow him, we'll die with him.
that you are of good descent.
good friends, sweet friends, don't let me stir you up to such a sudden mutiny. those who have done this deed are honorable. i don't know what private grudges they had that made them do it. they're wise and honorable, and will no doubt give you reasons for it. i haven't come to steal your loyalty, friends. i'm no orator, as brutus is. i'm only, as you know, a plain, blunt man who loved his friend, and the men who let me speak know this well. i have neither cleverness nor rhetorical skill nor the authority nor gesture nor eloquence nor the power of speech to stir men up. i just speak directly. i tell you what you already know. i show you sweet caesar's wounds, poor, speechless mouths!, and make them speak for me. but if i were brutus and brutus were me, then i'd stir you up, and install in each of caesar's wounds the kind of voice that could convince even stones to rise up and mutiny.
(aside) true, he's descended from a gentleman to a fool.
we'll mutiny.
has she thought about all the lands that i own?
we'll burn brutus's house.
oh, yes, and she pities them.
let's go, then! come, find the conspirators!
why?
wait, and listen to me, countrymen.
(aside) because an ass like him owns them.
quiet! wait! listen to antony. most noble antony!
because you've leased them to others.
why, friends, you don't even know what you're doing yet. what has caesar done to deserve your love? alas, you don't know. i must tell you then. you've forgotten the will i told you about.
here comes the duke.
yes! the will! let's stay and hear the will!
how are you, sir proteus? how are you, thurio? has either of you seen eglamour lately?
here's the will, written under caesar's seal. to every roman citizen he gives, to every individual man, seventy-five drachmas.
i haven't.
most noble caesar! we'll revenge his death.
nor have i.
oh, royal caesar!
have you seen my daughter?
listen to me patiently.
i haven't seen her either.
quiet, there!
that means she's run off to that rascal valentine, and eglamour is with her. i know it's true, because friar lawrence met them both as he wandered through the forest in penance. he knew eglamour well and guessed that the girl was sylvia, but he wasn't sure since she had a mask on. besides, she'd planned to take confession at friar patrick's chamber tonight, but she didn't show up. these coincidences confirm that she's run away. therefore, i beg you, stop talking and mount your horses immediately. meet me on the rise at the foot of the mountain that leads toward mantua, where they fled to. hurry, kind gentlemen, and follow me.
also, he's left you all his walkways, in his private gardens and newly planted orchards, on this side of the tiber river. he's left them to you and to your heirs forever, public pleasures in which you will be able to stroll and relax. here was a caesar! when will there be another like him?
why, what a silly girl she is to throw away everything good that was coming to her. i'll follow them, more to get revenge on eglamour than out of love for reckless sylvia.
never, never. let's go! we'll burn his body in the holy place and use the brands to set the traitors' houses on fire. take up the body.
and i'll follow, too, more out of love for sylvia than hatred of elgamour, who goes with her.
we'll start a fire.
and i will follow as well, more to thwart proteus's love for sylvia than out of any hatred of sylvia, who flees because of love.
we'll use benches for wood, 
come on, come on. be patient. we must bring you to our captain.
and windowsills, anything.
a thousand misfortunes worse than this one have taught me how to endure this patiently.
now, let it work. trouble, you have begun, take whatever course you choose!
go on, take her away.
what's up, my man?
where is the gentleman that was with her meaning eglamour. the gentleman that was with her ?
sir, octavius has already arrived in rome.
he was fast so he outran us, but moses and valerius are following him. go with her to the west end of the woods. our captain is there. we'll follow the guy who fled. the woods are surrounded by our men, he cannot escape.
where is he?
come on, i must take you to our captain's cave. don't be afraid. he is an honorable man and will not rape you.
he and lepidus are at caesar's house.
oh, valentine, i endure all this for you!
i will go straight to visit him. i ask for him, and he comes. fortune is happy today and, in this mood, will give us anything we want.
repetition can make a man accustomed to anything! this shadowy deserted place, these woods that are rarely visited, i can take them better than bustling towns with lots of people. here i can sit alone without anyone seeing me, and accompanied by the nightingale's sad song i can sing about my worries and list all my troubles. oh you, sylvia, who lives in my heart, don't leave your home empty for long, or rotting from within, the entire building falls and leaves no trace of what it was! heal me with your presence, sylvia. gentle nymph, cherish your sad lover!
i heard octavius say that brutus and cassius have ridden like madmen through the gates of rome.
what's all this shouting and commotion i hear? those are my friends, the outlaws who do whatever they like, who are chasing some unfortunate traveler. they like me enough, but i have to work hard to keep them from violent crimes. hide yourself, valentine. who is this that comes here?
they probably received warning about how much i stirred up the people. take me to octavius.
madame, i've helped you, even though you don't value what i do, and risked my life to rescue you from that man who would have raped you. for my reward, give me just one kind look. i can't beg for a smaller favor than this, and i'm sure that you can't give anything less than this.
i dreamed last night that i feasted with caesar, and unlucky signs overwhelmed my imagination. i have no desire to go outside, yet something leads me there.
(aside) what i see and hear is like a dream! love, give me strength to be patient just a little while longer.
what's your name?
oh, what a miserable, unhappy woman i am!
where are you going?
you were unhappy, madam, before i came. but in coming i've made you happy.
where do you live?
your advances make me very unhappy.
are you a married man or a bachelor?
(aside) and makes me unhappy when he flirts with you.
answer all of us, now.
if a hungry lion had seized me, i would rather have been eaten by the beast than have treacherous proteus rescue me. oh, heaven knows how i love valentine, whose life is as precious to me as my own soul! and with just as much feeling, for i couldn't feel any more strongly, i hate the lying, deceitful proteus. so get out of here, and stop trying to win me.
yes, and be brief.
what dangerous action, even if it put me at risk of death, would i not undertake for just one gentle look from you? oh, it is the curse of love, and it is always the case that women never love those who love them!
yes, and be wise.
you mean proteus never loves those who love him. think of julia's feelings for you. she was your first, best love, and for her sake you swore your fidelity a thousand times. now those oaths of faithfulness have sunk into lies, so that you can love me. you have no loyalty left now, unless you were to love two women, and that's far worse than loving no one. better not love at all than love two women, which is too many by one. you deceiver of your true friend!
yes, and be truthful, if you know what's good for you.
who honors their friendships when it comes to love?
what's my name? where am i going? where do i live? am i a married man or a bachelor? then, to answer every man briefly, wisely, and truthfully, wisely i say, i am a bachelor.
all men but you, proteus.
you imply that married men are fools. you'll get a blow from me for that, i think. go on with what you were saying, right this instant.
no, if the gentle spirit of heartfelt words can't persuade you to think kindly of me, then i'll woo you at knifepoint like a soldier and make love to you in a manner contrary to the nature of love, by raping you.
right this instant, i'm going to caesar's funeral.
oh, heaven!
as a friend or an enemy?
(proteus assaults her.) i'll force you to yield to my desire.
as a friend.
(valentine comes out of hiding.) scoundrel, keep your savage hands off her, you foul friend!
he answered that question straight.
valentine!
as for where you live, tell us quickly, get to the point.
you lying friend, without loyalty or love! that's what you are now. treacherous man, you tricked me with my hopes. nothing could have persuaded me of what you really are but seeing it with my eyes. now i won't even say i have one friend alive, if i did, you'd prove me wrong. who can you trust when your closest friend is false down to his core? proteus, i'm sorry i must never trust you again, and because of you i'll never think again that i know the world. personal treachery makes the deepest wounds. curse the day when a friend is the worst of all your enemies!
getting right to the point, i live near the capitol.
shame and guilt overwhelm me. forgive me, valentine. if heartfelt sadness is enough punishment for what i've done, then i offer it to you here. i feel truly miserable for everything i've done.
tell us your name, sir, truthfully.
then you've paid your debt to me, and i consider you to be honest once again. whoever isn't satisfied by such heartfelt repentence is neither from heaven nor earth, for repentance is enough to please both. god's wrath comes in the form of penitence. and, so that you know my love for you is honest and free, i give you any claim i had to sylvia.
truthfully, my name is cinna.
oh, unhappy me!
tear him to pieces. he's a conspirator.
look at the boy!
i am cinna the poet, i am cinna the poet!
hey, boy! hey, kid! are you okay? what's the matter? open your eyes. say something.
tear him apart for his bad verses, tear him up!
(recovering) oh, good sir, my master ordered me to deliver a ring to madam sylvia, which, out of neglect on my part, i never did.
i'm not cinna the conspirator.
where is that ring, boy?
it doesn't matter. his name's cinna. pull only his name out of his heart and let him go.
(giving her own ring) here it is. this is it.
tear him apart, tear him up!
how? let me see that. why, this is the ring i gave to julia.
come, firebrands, over here! to brutus's, to cassius's, let's burn them all. some of you go to decius's house and some to casca's. some to ligarius's. go!
oh, please forgive me, sir, i've made a mistake. this is the ring you sent to sylvia.
these ones, then, will be assassinated. their names are marked.
but how did you get this ring? i gave it to julia when i departed from verona.
(to lepidus) your brother has to die too. do you agree, lepidus?
and julia herself gave it to me. and julia herself has brought it here.
i agree, 
what? julia?
put a mark next to his name too, antony.
it's me, the woman who was the object of all your oaths and believed them deeply in her heart. your lies have often cut me to the core! oh, proteus, i hope my appearance makes you blush! you should be ashamed that i have put on such an immodest outfit, if shame can live in someone who fakes love. modesty says it's better for women to transform their appearances than for men to change their minds.
on the condition that your sister's son, publius, also must die, mark antony.
than for men to change their minds! it's true. oh, god! were men more constant and less fickle, he would be perfect. that one error leads to numerous faults and makes him commit all the deadly sins. the fickle man begins deceiving before he even tries to be constant. what does sylvia have that i wouldn't see to be even better in julia if i were faithful?
he will die. see, i've sealed his fate with this mark next to his name. but, lepidus, go to caesar's house. bring his will here, and we'll figure out a way to reduce his bequests to the people.
come, come on, each of you give me a hand. let me be blessed to bring this to a happy end. it would be a pity if two such good friends as you were enemies forever.
will you be here when i return?
as god as my witness, i have what i want forever.
either here or at the capitol.
and i as well.
he's an unremarkable man, fit only to be sent on errands. does it really make sense, once we divide the world into three parts, that he should be one of the three rulers?
a prize! a prize! a prize!
you thought it made sense, and you listened to him about who should be marked to die in these harsh death sentences.
stop, stop, i say! this is my lord, the duke. they release the duke and thurio.
octavius, i'm older than you are. and although we're giving these honors to this man so that he shares some of the blame for what we're doing, he'll carry these honors like a jackass carries gold, groaning and sweating under the load, either led or pushed, as we direct him. once he's carried our treasure where we want it, we'll free him of the load and turn him loose like a jackass, to shake his ears and graze in the public pastures.
i welcome you, your grace, as a disgraced man, banished valentine.
you can do what you want, but he's an experienced and honorable soldier.
sir valentine!
so is my horse, octavius, and for that reason i give him all the hay he wants. but my horse is a creature that i teach to fight, to turn, to stop, to run in a straight line. i govern the motion of his body. and in some ways, lepidus is just like that. he has to be taught and trained and told to go forward. he's an empty man, who pays attention to fashions and tastes that other men took up and got tired of long ago. don't think about lepidus except as a means to an end. and now, octavius, listen to more important things. brutus and cassius are raising armies. we have to raise our own immediately. so, we should combine forces and organize our allies, pull together our friends, and stretch our resources as far as they'll go.
(advancing) sylvia is over there, and she's mine.
let's immediately organize a council to discuss the best way to find out their secrets and the safest way to confront the threats we're already faced with.
(drawing his sword) thurio, move back, or else be prepared to die. don't come within a step of my anger. do not call sylvia yours. if you do it again, you'll never be welcome in verona. go ahead, try to even touch her. i dare you to even breathe upon my love.
let's do that, because we're hemmed in by many enemies. and even some of the people who smile at us are in fact plotting against us, i'm afraid.
sir valentine, i don't care about her. i consider anyone a fool who will endanger his life for a girl who doesn't love him. i don't claim her, and therefore she is yours.
stop.
then you are even more degenerate and awful, having made such great efforts to win her as you have and now leaving her for such minor reasons. now, by the honor of my ancestors, i applaud your spirit, valentine, and think you worthy of an empress' love. i disregard all my former grievances with you, cancel all grudges, welcome you home again, and give you a clean record because of your unrivaled excellence, which i bear witness to. sir valentine, you are a gentleman and well-born. take your sylvia, for you have earned her.
pass on the command to halt!
i thank your grace. your gift has made me happy. now i beg you, for your daughter's sake, to grant one favor that i'll ask of you.
what's happening now, lucillius? is cassius nearby?
i grant it for your own sake, whatever it may be.
he's nearby, and pindarus has come to salute you on behalf of his master.
these banished men, whom i have lived with, are men with good qualities. forgive the crimes they've committed here, and declare an end to their exile. they are reformed, peaceful, goodhearted, and fit for great work, worthy lord.
he sends his greetings through a good man. your master, pindarus, either because he's changed his mind or been influenced by bad officers, has made me wish we hadn't done some of the things we did. if he's nearby, i want an explanation.
you win: i pardon them and you. i'll leave you in charge of them, since you know what they deserve. come, let's go. we'll put all quarrels behind us with pageants, happiness, and festivities.
i have no doubt that my noble master will prove himself to be what he is: honorable and noble.
and, as we walk along, i'd like to be so bold as to tell you something to make your grace smile. what do you think of this young servant boy, my lord?
i don't doubt him. can i have a word with you, lucillius? (takes lucillius aside) tell me how cassius treated you. put my mind at rest.
i think the boy has a feminine charm. look, he's blushing.
he received me with courtesy and sufficient respect, but not with affection, nor with as much open and friendly conversation as he once greeted me.
i tell you, my lord, there's more feminine charm in him than boy.
you've described a warm friend who's cooling off. remember this, lucillius. when a friend starts to get sick of you, he treats you artificially. plain and simple loyalty doesn't make anyone act phony. but insincere men, like horses who are too lively at the start of a race, make a big show of their spirit.
what do you mean by that?
but when push comes to shove, they droop like those horses that are all show and slow to a crawl. is his army approaching?
if it please you, i'll tell you on the way, and you'll be amazed at what's been going on. come, proteus, it's your punishment to hear the story of your two loves revealed. when that's done, our wedding day will also be yours: one feast, one house, and one mutual happiness.
they plan to spend the night in sardis. the larger part, the main body of cavalry, are coming with cassius.
look! he's arrived. march to meet him at a dignified pace.
halt.
halt! pass the order along.
halt!
halt!
halt!
most noble brother, you have done me wrong.
let the gods judge me! do i mistreat even my enemies? no. so how could i possibly wrong a brother?
brutus, your sober expression is a mask to hide the fact that you've wronged me. and when you do, 
cassius, calm down. we know each other well, and you can speak your grievances quietly. let's not argue here in front of both our armies, which ought to see nothing but love between us. order them to move back. then, in my tent, you can elaborate on your complaints, and i'll listen.
pindarus, order our commanders to lead their charges a little ways away from this ground.
lucillius, you do the same, and don't allow anyone to come into our tent until we've finished our conference. have lucius and titinius guard the door.
my evidence that you have wronged me is that you condemned and disgraced lucius pella for taking bribes here from the sardinians, and you ignored my letters, where i argued that he was innocent; i know the man.
you wronged yourself to write on behalf of such a man.
in a time like this, it doesn't make sense to criticize every offense.
i'll tell you, cassius, you yourself have been called greedy and been accused of giving your positions to undeserving men in exchange for gold.
me, "greedy"! you know, if you were anyone other than brutus, that speech would be your last.
the name of cassius gives credit to these corrupt actions, and so they go unpunished.
unpunished!
remember march, march th. didn't great caesar bleed for the sake of justice?
who among us stabbed him for any cause but justice? what, did one of us strike down the most powerful man in the world in order to support robbers? should we now dirty our fingers with lowly bribes and sell the mighty offices that we hold for whatever money we can get our hands on? i'd rather be a dog and howl at the moon than be that kind of roman.
brutus, do not provoke me. i will not take it. you're forgetting yourself when you back me into a corner. i'm a soldier, more experienced than you, and better able to give orders.
get lost! you are not, cassius.
i am.
i say you're not.
don't provoke me any further or i'll forget to restrain myself. if you care about your health, you won't push me any further.
leave, you little man.
is this possible?
listen to me, for i have something to tell you. am i required to indulge your rash anger? does a madman scare me when he stares at me?
oh gods, oh gods! must i endure all this?
"all this"? yes, and more. go ahead, rage till your proud heart breaks. show your slaves how mad you are, and make your servants tremble. but me, am i going to cower at you and your irritable moods? you'll have to swallow your own poison till it makes you burst before i'm going to respond; from now on, i'll make you the butt of my jokes whenever you get sharp with me.
has it come to this?
you say you're a better soldier. show it! make your boasts come true, and i'll be thrilled. i'm always happy to hear about brave men.
you wrong me in every way. you wrong me, brutus. i said an older soldier, not a better one. did i say "better"?
if you did, i don't care.
when caesar was alive, even he wouldn't dare anger me like this.
oh, be quiet. you wouldn't have dared to tempt him so.
i wouldn't have dared!
no.
what? not dared to tempt him?
you wouldn't have dared, out of fear for your life.
don't take my love for granted. i might do something i'll be sorry for.
you've already done something you should be sorry for. your threats don't scare me, cassius, because i'm so secure in my honesty and integrity that they pass me by like a weak breeze. i asked you for a certain amount of gold, which you wouldn't give me. i myself can't raise money by unethical means. i'd rather turn my heart into money and my drops of blood into coins than use crooked tactics to wring petty cash from the hardworking hands of peasants. i asked you for gold to pay my soldiers, and you wouldn't give it to me. was that the caius cassius that i knew? and would i have ever done that to you? if i ever get so greedy that i hoard such petty cash from my friends, may the gods dash me to pieces with their thunderbolts!
i didn't refuse you.
you did.
i didn't. the man who brought my answer to you was a fool. you have broken my heart. a friend should put up with his friend's weaknesses, but you exaggerate mine.
i don't until you practice them on me.
you don't love me.
i don't like your faults.
a friend would never see those faults.
no, a flatterer wouldn't, even if the faults were as huge as mount olympus.
come, antony and young octavius! get your revenge on cassius, because cassius has grown tired of the world. he's hated by someone he loves, defied by his brother, rebuked like a servant, all his faults observed, catalogued in a notebook, read, and committed to memory so they can be thrown in his face. oh, i could weep my soul right out of myself! there's my dagger (he offers brutus his unsheathed dagger), and here's my bare chest. inside it is a heart more valuable than pluto's pluto is the god of the underworld, and plutus is the god of wealth. the two are often confused or combined, as they are here. pluto's silver mine and richer than gold. if you're a roman, take my heart out. i, who denied you gold, will give you my heart. strike as you did at caesar, for i know even when you hated him the most, you still loved him better than you ever loved me.
put away your dagger. be angry whenever you like, it's all right with me. do whatever you want, and i'll say your insults are just a bad mood. oh, cassius, you're partners with a quiet lamb. my anger is like a flint striking, a brief spark, and then i'm cold again.
have i lived this long only to be the butt of a joke whenever you're angry or frustrated?
when i said that, i was angry too.
you admit it, then? give me your hand.
and my heart too.
oh, brutus!
what's the matter?
do you have enough love for me to be patient when my bad temper, which i inherited from my mother, makes me forget how i should behave?
yes, cassius. and from now on, when you get hot with me, i'll assume it's your mother speaking and leave it at that.
(offstage) let me in to see the generals. there's a grudge between them, and it isn't a good idea for them to be alone.
(offstage) you can't see them.
(offstage) you'd have to kill me to stop me.
what's this! what's the matter?
you should be ashamed, generals! what do you think you're doing? love each other and be friends, like two such men should be. listen to me, because i'm older than you, surely.
ha ha! this man's rhymes are terrible!
(to poet) get out of here, you! get away, you rude fellow!
be patient with him, brutus. that's just how he is.
i'll humor him when he learns how to behave. what should we do with all these rhyming fools that follow us from post to post? get out of here, my friend.
away, away, be gone.
lucillius and titinius, order the commanders to have the men camp for the night.
and return to us immediately, bringing messala with you.
(calling offstage) lucius, bring a bowl of wine.
i didn't think you could even be so angry.
oh cassius, i'm tired out by many sorrows.
you're forgetting your stoic the stoics were philosophers who maintained that people should accept suffering without complaining. stoic philosophy if you allow chance misfortunes to upset you.
no one bears sorrow better than me. portia is dead.
portia!
she is dead.
how did you manage not to kill me when we argued just now? what an irreplaceable and grievous loss! what sickness did she die of?
she was worried about my absence, and about the fact that young octavius and mark antony have grown so strong, which i found out at the same time as the news of her death. she became full of despair and, when her attendants were away, swallowed burning coals.
and that's how she died?
yes, like that.
oh, immortal gods!
don't talk about her anymore. give me a bowl of wine. with this toast i bury all bad feelings between us, cassius. (he drinks)
my heart is thirsty for that noble promise. fill my cup, lucius, until the wine overflows it. i cannot drink too much of brutus's love. (he drinks)
come in, titinius! welcome, good messala. now let's sit closely around this candle and discuss our needs.
portia, are you really gone?
no more about that, please. messala, i have received these letters explaining that young octavius and mark antony are rushing toward philippi and bearing down upon us with a mighty power.
i have received letters that say the same.
and anything else?
that with a series of legal writs, octavius, antony, and lepidus have put a hundred senators to death.
on that point, our letters don't agree. my letters say only seventy senators were killed, one being cicero.
cicero too?
cicero is dead, by their decree. (to brutus) have you received letters from your wife, my lord?
no, messala.
and you haven't heard any news about her in your letters?
nothing, messala.
i think that's strange.
why do you ask? have you heard something of her in your letters?
no, my lord.
now, as you're a roman, tell me the truth.
then you must take the truth i have to tell like a roman. it's certain that she is dead, and she died in a strange way.
well, good-bye, portia. we all must die, messala. having already thought about the fact that she would have to die sometime, i can endure her death now.
that's the way great men ought to endure great losses.
i've practiced stoicism with as much devotion as you, but i still couldn't bear this news like you do.
well, let's move on to our work with the living. what do you think of marching to philippi immediately?
i don't think it's a good idea.
why not?
here's why: it'd be better for the enemy to come after us. that way, he'll waste his provisions and tire out his soldiers, weakening his own capacities, while we, lying still, are rested, energetic, and nimble.
your reasons are good, but i have better reasons for doing the opposite. the people who live between here and philippi are loyal to us only because we force them to be. we made them contribute to our efforts against their will. the enemy, marching past them, will add them to its numbers, then come at us refreshed, newly reinforced, and full of courage. thus we must cut him off from this advantage. if we meet him at philippi, these people will be at our backs.
listen to me, good brother.
begging your pardon, i'll continue what i was saying. you must also take into account that we've gotten as much from our friends as they can give. our regiments are full to the brim; our cause is ready. the enemy gets larger each day. we, now at our largest, can only decrease. there's a tidal movement in men's affairs. seizing the highest tide leads on to fortune. if high tide is let to pass, all the rest of the voyage of their lives will be marked by difficulty and misery. it's on such a high tide that we're now floating, and we must take the current when it is offered, or lose our campaign.
if that's what you want, all right. we'll go forward with you and meet them at philippi.
it's now late at night, and actions must accommodate bodily needs, which we'll satisfy with only a short rest. that's all there is to say.
there's nothing else. good night. we'll rise and leave early tomorrow.
lucius!
my nightgown.
farewell, good messala. good night, titinius. noble, noble cassius, good night and sleep well.
oh my dear brother! this was a bad start to the night. let's pray that we never come into conflict like that again. let's not, brutus.
everything's fine.
good night, my lord.
good night, good brother.
good night, lord brutus.
farewell, everyone.
give me the gown. where's your lute?
here in the tent.
what, are you sleepy? poor boy, i don't blame you; you've stayed awake too long. call claudio and some of my other men. i'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent.
varrus and claudio!
did you call, my lord?
sirs, i ask you to sleep in my tent. i might wake you up in a while to send you on an errand to my brother cassius.
if you like, we'll stand by and wait to do whatever you need.
no, please, lie down, good sirs, because i might change my mind. look, lucius, here's the book i was searching for. i put it in the pocket of my nightgown.
i was sure that you hadn't given it to me.
bear with me, good boy. i've become very forgetful. can you stay awake a bit longer and play a few tunes on your lute?
yes, my lord, if you would like.
i would, my boy. i ask too much of you, but you're always willing.
it's my duty, sir.
i shouldn't make you do more than you're able. i know that young men look forward to their rest.
i've already slept, my lord.
that was good planning, and you'll sleep some more. i won't keep you very long. if i live through this, i'll be good to you.
this is a sleepy tune. oh, deadening sleep, have you taken over my boy who plays music for you? gentle boy, good night. i won't trouble you so much as to wake you. if you were to droop down, you'd break your instrument, and so i'll take it from you. good night, good boy. let me see, let me see. didn't i turn down the page where i left off reading? here it is, i think. this candle doesn't give much light.
what! who goes there? i think it's my bad eyesight that's making me see this horrible vision. it's coming toward me. are you real? are you a god, an angel, or a devil, that you make my blood turn cold and my hair stand up? tell me what you are.
i'm your evil spirit, brutus.
why do you come here?
to tell you that you'll see me at philippi.
then i'll see you again?
yes, at philippi.
alright, then i'll see you at philippi.
just as you go, i find the courage to talk to you. evil spirit, i want to talk some more. boy, lucius! varrus! claudio! sirs, awake! claudio!
my lord, the strings are out of tune.
he thinks he's still playing his instrument. lucius, wake up!
my lord?
were you dreaming, lucius? is that why you cried out?
my lord, i don't think i cried out.
yes, you did. did you see anything?
nothing, my lord.
go back to sleep, lucius. claudio! (to varrus) you there, wake up!
my lord?
my lord?
why did you cry out in your sleep?
did we, my lord?
yes. did you see anything?
no, my lord, i didn't see anything.
me neither, my lord.
go to my brother cassius. order him to advance his forces first thing, and we'll follow.
yes, my lord.
now, antony, our prayers have been answered. you said the enemy wouldn't come down but keep to the hills and upper regions. it seems not. their forces are nearby. they intend to challenge us here at philippi, responding to our challenge before we've even challenged him.
i know how they think, and i understand why they're doing this. they really wish they were somewhere else, but they want to descend on us, looking fierce so we'll think they're brave. but they aren't.
prepare yourselves, generals. the enemy approaches with great display. they show their bloody heralds of battle, and something must be done immediately.
octavius, lead your forces slowly out to the left side of the level field.
i'll go to the right side. you stay on the left.
why are you defying me in this urgent matter?
i'm not defying you, but it's what i'm going to do.
they've stopped. they want to talk.
stay here, titinius. we have to go out and talk to them.
mark antony, should we give the signal to attack?
no, octavius caesar, we'll respond to their charge. go forward. the generals want to speak with us.
(to his army) don't move until we give the signal.
words before fighting. is that how it is, countrymen?
not that we love words more than fighting, like you do.
good words are better than bad strokes, octavius.
brutus, you give a nice speech along with your evil strokes. think of the hole you made in caesar's heart when you cried, "long live caesar! hail caesar!"
antony, we don't yet know what kind of blows you can inflict. but your words are as sweet as honey, you've stolen from the bees and left them with nothing.
i took their stings too, wouldn't you say?
oh, yes, and you've left them silent too, because you stole their buzzing, antony. you very wisely warn us before you sting.
villains, you didn't do even that much when your vile daggers struck each other as they hacked up caesar's sides. you smiled like apes and fawned like dogs and bowed like servants, kissing caesar's feet. and all the while, damned casca, like a dog, struck caesar on the neck from behind. oh, you flatterers!
flatterers! now, brutus, you have only yourself to thank. antony wouldn't be here to offend us today if you'd listened to me earlier.
come, come, let's remember why we're here. if arguing makes us sweat, the real trial will turn that water to blood. (he draws his sword) look: i draw my sword against conspirators. when do you think i'll put it away? never, until caesar's thirty-three wounds are well avenged, or until i too have been killed by you.
caesar, you're not going to be killed by a traitor, unless you kill yourself..
i hope you're right. i wasn't born to die on your sword.
if you were the noblest of your family, young man, you couldn't die more honorably.
an annoying schoolboy, unworthy of such an honor, joined by a masquerader and a partier!
still the same old cassius!
come antony, let's go. traitors, we defy you. if you dare to fight today, come to the field. if not, come when you have the courage.
now let the wind blow, waves swell, and ships sink! the storm has begun and everything is at stake.
lucillius! i'd like a word with you.
(coming forward) my lord?
messala!
(coming forward) what is it, my general?
messala, today is my birthday, i was born on this very day. give me your hand, messala. you'll be my witness that i've been forced, as pompey was, to wager all of our freedoms on one battle.
you know that i used to believe in epicurus and his disregard for omens. i've changed my mind now and partly believe in omens. traveling from sardis, two mighty eagles fell on our front flag and perched there, eating from the hands of the soldiers who'd accompanied us to philippi. this morning, they've flown away and in their place are ravens, crows, and kites, flying over our heads and looking down on us, as though we were sickly prey. their shadows are like a deadly canopy, under which our army lies, ready to die.
don't believe in this.
i only partly believe it, for i'm enthusiastic and resolved to meet all dangers without wavering.
(returning with lucillius) , right, lucillius.
now, most noble brutus, the gods are friendly with us today so that we, who want peace, can live on to old age! but since the affairs of men are always uncertain, let's think about the worst that may happen. if we lose this battle, this is the last time we'll speak to each other. if we lose, what do you plan to do?
by the same principle that made me condemn cato for committing suicide, i plan to be patient and submit to what the gods decide. i don't know why, but i find it cowardly and vile to kill oneself early to prevent possible suffering later on.
then if we lose this battle, you'll be willing to be led in chains through the streets of rome?
no, cassius, no. don't imagine that i'll ever allow myself to return to rome in chains. my mind is too great for that. but today, the work that march th began must end, and i don't know if we'll meet again. therefore, accept my everlasting farewell. forever and forever, farewell, cassius! if we meet again, then we'll smile. if not, then this parting was well done.
forever and forever, farewell, brutus! if we meet again, then we'll smile indeed. if not, it's true, this parting was well done.
well, lead on. oh, i wish i could know what will happen today before it happens! but it's enough to know that the day will end, and then the end will be known. come! let's go!
ride, ride, messala, ride, and give these dispatches to our forces on the other side.
they should advance immediately, because i sense octavius's side is a bit fainthearted right now, and a sudden push would overthrow him. ride, ride, messala. let cassius's wing mount a surprise attack.
oh, look, titinius, look! those villains, our soldiers, flee! i've become an enemy to my own soldiers! this standard-bearer here of mine was running away, so i killed him and took the flag from him. (points to his flag)
oh, cassius, brutus gave the orders too soon. having an advantage over octavius, he took it too eagerly, and his soldiers began looting, and now we're surrounded by antony's men.
retreat further, my lord, retreat further. mark antony is in your tents, my lord. therefore you must run, noble cassius.
this hill is far enough. look, look, titinius. are those my tents on fire?
they are, my lord.
titinius, if you love me, get on your horse and spur him on until he's brought you to those troops and back again, so that i can find out whether those troops are friends or enemies.
i'll be back quicker than you can think a thought.
go, pindarus, climb a little higher on this hill. my eyesight has always been bad. watch titinius and tell me what you see in the field.
today was the day i breathed my first breath. time has come round, and i'll end where i began. my life has run its circle. (to pindarus) what can you see, boy?
(above) oh, my lord!
what news?
(above) titinius is surrounded by horsemen who are quickly approaching him, yet he spurs onward. now they're almost on him. now, titinius! now some dismount. oh, he gets down too. he's taken.
and listen! they shout for joy.
come down, look no more. oh, i'm such a coward for living long enough to see my best friend taken before my eyes!
come here, boy. i took you prisoner in parthia, and at that time i made you swear to try to do whatever i ordered you to, except take your own life. come now, keep your oath. (gives his sword to pindarus) now you'll be a free man. take this good sword, which ran through caesar's bowels, and plunge it in my chest. don't hesitate. here, take the handle, and when my face is covered as it is now, use the sword.
caesar, you are revenged with the very same sword that killed you. (he dies)
so i'm free. but i didn't want to be free like this. oh, cassius, i'll run far from this country to where no romans can find me.
the armies have merely changed places, titinius, because octavius has been overthrown by noble brutus's forces at the very moment that antony overthrew cassius's legions.
this news will comfort cassius.
where did you leave him?
on this hill and in despair, with his slave pindarus.
isn't that him on the ground?
he doesn't seem to be alive. oh, my heart!
isn't that him?
no, it was him, messala, but cassius is no more. just as the sun's rays turn red when it sets, so cassius has ended his life in a pool of red blood. the sun of rome has set! our day is over. clouds, dew, and dangers approach. we're finished! he didn't believe i would ever return on my mission, and so he killed himself.
yes, he killed himself because he thought we'd lost the whole battle. sadness, which misconstrues reality, gave birth to his errors in thinking, and then destroyed him.
pindarus! where are you, pindarus?
look for him, titinius, while i go to meet the noble brutus and force him to hear this news. i say "force" because brutus would rather i stuck sharp blades and poisoned arrows in his ears than fill them with this.
hurry, messala, and i'll look for pindarus in the meantime.
why did you send me out, brave cassius? didn't i meet up with your allies? and didn't they place the wreath of victory on my brow and order me to give it to you? didn't you hear their shouts? alas, you misunderstood everything! but let me place this wreath on your head. your brutus ordered me to give it to you, and i'll do what he says. (he lays a wreath on cassius's head) brutus, come this way and see how much i admired caius cassius. with your permission, gods, this is a roman's duty. come, cassius's sword, and strike titinius's heart. (he stabs himself with cassius's sword and dies.)
where is his body, messala?
over there, where titinius mourns it.
titinius is lying face-up.
he's been killed.
oh, julius caesar, you are still powerful. your ghost walks the earth and turns our swords toward our own stomachs.
brave titinius! look, he even put the crown on dead cassius!
could you have found two romans as good as these two? good-bye to you, the last of all the romans. rome will never produce your equal. friends, i owe more tears to this dead man than you will see me shed. i will find the time to cry for you, cassius, i'll find the time. come, then, and send his body to thasos. we won't have his funeral at our camp, because it might make us too sad to fight. lucillius, come. and come, young cato. let's proceed to the field. labio and flavio, push our armies onward. it is three o'clock, and, romans, before night, we will try our luck in a second battle.
keep on, countrymen. oh, keep your heads up, even now!
who is so low that he wouldn't? who will advance with me? i will proclaim my name around the field. i am the son of marcus cato! an enemy to tyrants and a friend to my country. i am the son of marcus cato!
and i am brutus, marcus brutus. brutus, my country's friend. know that i am brutus!
oh, young and noble cato, have you been slain? why, you die now as bravely as titinius. and you, being cato's son, will be honored.
(to lucillius ) surrender or you will die.
i'd rather die. here is some money for you to kill me immediately. kill brutus and be honored by the killing.
we must not. he is a noble prisoner!
make room! tell antony that brutus has been taken.
i'll tell him the news. oh, here comes the general, brutus has been caught, brutus is taken, my lord.
where is he?
he's safe, antony. i can assure you that no enemy will ever take the noble brutus alive. the gods protect him from so great a shame! when you do find him, alive or dead, he'll be found on his own terms.
(to soldiers) this isn't brutus, friend, but, i assure you, he is a valuable prize. keep this man safe. be kind to him. i would rather have such men as friends than enemies. move on, find out if brutus is alive or dead, then return to octavius's tent to tell us what you've learned.
come, last of my friends, rest on this rock.
statilius waved the torchlight at us, but he hasn't come back. he's been captured or killed.
sit down, clitus. killed, most likely, it's become a trend. listen, clitus. (he whispers to clitus)
who, me, my lord? no, not for all the world.
silence, then! don't give it away.
i'd rather kill myself.
listen, dardanius. (he whispers to dardanius)
would i dare do something like that?
oh dardanius!
oh clitus!
(speaking so that only dardanius can hear) what awful thing did brutus ask of you?
(speaking so that only clitus can hear) to kill him, clitus. look, he's meditating on what to do.
(speaking so that only dardanius can hear) that noble man is so full of grief that it spills out of his eyes.
come here, good volumnius. listen a minute.
what is it, my lord?
just this, volumnius. the ghost of caesar has appeared to me at night twice. once at sardis and once last night, here in philippi fields. i know that my hour has come.
no, it hasn't, my lord.
no, i'm sure it has, volumnius. you see how the world goes, volumnius. our enemies have driven us to the edge of the grave.
it's nobler to leap in ourselves than dawdle until they push us. good volumnius, you know that we went to school together. for the sake of our old friendship, i ask you, hold my sword handle while i run on it.
that's not a job for a friend, my lord.
run, run, my lord. we can't wait here.
farewell to you, and you, and you, volumnius. strato, you've slept this whole time. farewell to you too, strato. countrymen, my heart rejoices that in all my life i knew no men who were untrue to me. i'll have glory in this losing day, more than octavius and mark antony will gain by their foul conquest. so farewell, all, for my tongue has almost finished with its life. i can't see ahead of me. my bones want to rest after helping me up to this hour.
run, my lord, run.
go on! i'll follow.
i beg you, strato, stay by me. you're a man with a good reputation. your life has had honor in it. then, hold my sword and turn your face away while i run on it. will you, strato?
give me your hand, first. (holds brutus' sword) farewell, my lord.
farewell, good strato. (runs on his sword) caesar, you can rest now. i didn't kill you half as willingly. (he dies)
what man is that?
my master's man. strato, where's your master?
free from the bondage you are in, messala. the conquerors can only make a fire of him, because only brutus triumphed over himself, and no other man gets to triumph in his death.
it's fitting that brutus be found like this. thank you, brutus, for proving my prediction true.
i'll take all who served brutus into my service. you, will you join with me?
yes, if messala recommends me to you.
do so, good messala.
how did my master die, strato?
i held the sword and he ran on it.
then take this man into your service, octavius, for he did the final service to my master.
this was the noblest roman of them all. all the rest of the conspirators acted out of jealousy of great caesar. only he acted from honesty and for the general good. his life was gentle, and the elements mixed so well in him that nature might stand up and say to all the world, "this was a man."
let's treat him according to his virtue, with all the respect and rituals of burial. his body will lie in my tent tonight, with the honorable observance that suits a soldier. so order the armies to rest, and let's go home to share the glories of this happy day.
