i thought the king had more affected the duke of albany than cornwall.
now, fair hippolyta, our nuptial hour draws on apace. four happy days bring in another moon. but oh, methinks how slow this old moon wanes! she lingers my desires, long withering out a young man's revenue.
when shall we three meet again? in thunder, lightning, or in rain?
it did always seem so to us. but now in the division of the kingdom, it appears not which of the dukes he values most, for equalities are so weighed that curiosity in neither can make choice of either's moiety.
four days will quickly steep themselves in night. four nights will quickly dream away the time. and then the moon, like to a silver bow of our solemnities.
when the hurly-burly's done, when the battle's lost and won.
(indicating edmund) is not this your son, my lord?
go, philostrate, stir up the athenian youth to merriments. awake the pert and nimble spirit of mirth. turn melancholy forth to funerals.
that will be ere the set of sun.
his breeding, sir, hath been at my charge. i have so often blushed to acknowledge him that now i am brazed to it.
hippolyta, i wooed thee with my sword and won thy love doing thee injuries. but i will wed thee in another key, with pomp, with triumph, and with reveling.
where the place?
i cannot conceive you.
happy be theseus, our renownèd duke.
upon the heath.
sir, this young fellow's mother could, whereupon she grew round-wombed, and had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she had a husband for her bed. do you smell a fault?
thanks, good egeus. what's the news with thee?
there to meet with macbeth.
i cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so proper.
full of vexation come i with complaint against my child, my daughter hermia., stand forth, demetrius., my noble lord, stand forth, lysander., and my gracious duke, this man hath bewitched the bosom of my child., thou, thou, lysander, thou hast given her rhymes, and interchanged love tokens with my child. with feigning voice verses of feigning love, and stol'n the impression of her fantasy with bracelets of thy hair, rings, gauds, conceits, knacks, trifles, nosegays, sweetmeats, messengers with cunning hast thou filched my daughter's heart, turned her obedience (which is due to me) to stubborn harshness., and, my gracious duke, be it so she will not here before your grace i beg the ancient privilege of athens. as she is mine, i may dispose of her, which shall be either to this gentleman or to her death, according to our law
i come, graymalkin!
but i have, sir, a son by order of law, some year older than this, who yet is no dearer in my account. though this knave came something saucily to the world before he was sent for, yet was his mother fair, there was good sport at his making, and the whoreson must be acknowledged., do you know this noble gentleman, edmund?
what say you, hermia? be advised, fair maid: to you your father should be as a god, one that composed your beauties, yea, and one to whom you are but as a form in wax, to leave the figure or disfigure it. demetrius is a worthy gentleman.
paddock calls.
no, my lord.
so is lysander.
anon.
(to edmund) my lord of kent. remember him hereafter as my honorable friend.
in himself he is. but in this kind, wanting your father's voice,
fair is foul, and foul is fair hover through the fog and filthy air.
my services to your lordship.
i would my father looked but with my eyes.
what bloody man is that? he can report, as seemeth by his plight, of the revolt the newest state.
i must love you and sue to know you better.
rather your eyes must with his judgment look.
this is the sergeant who like a good and hardy soldier fought say to the king the knowledge of the broil as thou didst leave it.
sir, i shall study deserving.
i do entreat your grace to pardon me. i know not by what power i am made bold in such a presence here to plead my thoughts, but i beseech your grace that i may know the worst that may befall me in this case, if i refuse to wed demetrius.
doubtful it stood, as two spent swimmers that do cling together and choke their art. the merciless macdonwald, the multiplying villanies of nature do swarm upon him, from the western isles of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied, and fortune, on his damnèd quarrel smiling, for brave macbeth, well he deserves that name, disdaining fortune, with his brandished steel, which smoked with bloody execution, like valor's minion carved out his passage which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him, till he unseamed him from the nave to th' chops, and fixed his head upon our battlements.
he hath been out nine years, and away he shall again.
forever the society of men. therefore, fair hermia, question your desires. know of your youth. examine well your blood, whether, if you yield not to your father's choice, for aye to be in shady cloister mewed, to live a barren sister all your life, chanting faint hymns to the cold, fruitless moon. thrice-blessèd they that master so their blood but earthlier happy is the rose distilled than that which, withering on the virgin thorn, grows, lives, and dies in single blessedness.
o valiant cousin! worthy gentleman!
the king is coming.
so will i grow, so live, so die, my lord, unto his lordship, whose unwishèd yoke my soul consents not to give sovereignty.
shipwracking storms and direful thunders break, so from that spring whence comfort seemed to come discomfort swells. mark, king of scotland, mark: no sooner justice had, with valor armed, but the norweyan lord, surveying vantage, with furbished arms and new supplies of men, began a fresh assault.
attend the lords of france and burgundy, gloucester.
take time to pause, and by the next new moon, the sealing day betwixt my love and me upon that day either prepare to die for disobedience to your father's will, or else to wed demetrius, as he would, or on diana's altar to protest
dismayed not this our captains, macbeth and banquo?
i shall, my lord.
relent, sweet hermia, and, lysander, yield thy crazèd title to my certain right.
if i say sooth, i must report they were as cannons overcharged with double cracks, so they doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe. except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds, i cannot tell, but i am faint, my gashes cry for help.
meantime we shall express our darker purpose., in three our kingdom, and 'tis our fast intent to shake all cares and business from our age, conferring them on younger strengths while we unburdened crawl toward death., our son of cornwall, we have this hour a constant will to publish
you have her father's love, demetrius. let me have hermia's. do you marry him.
so well thy words become thee as thy wounds; they smack of honor both. go get him surgeons.
our daughters' several dowers, that future strife may be prevented now. the two great princes, france and burgundy, long in our court have made their amorous sojourn, and here are to be answered., tell me, my daughters, (since now we will divest us both of rule, interest of territory, cares of state) that we our largest bounty may extend where nature doth with merit challenge?, goneril, our eldest born, speak first.
and what is mine my love shall render him. and she is mine, and all my right of her i do estate unto demetrius.
who comes here?
sir, i do love you more than words can wield the matter, beyond what can be valued, rich or rare, no less than life, with grace, health, beauty, honor, as much as child e'er loved or father found, a love that makes breath poor and speech unable.
(to theseus) i am, my lord, as well derived as he, my fortunes every way as fairly ranked, (if not with vantage) as demetrius'. and, which is more than all these boasts can be, i am beloved of beauteous hermia. demetrius, i'll avouch it to his head, made love to nedar's daughter, helena, and won her soul. and she, sweet lady, dotes, devoutly dotes, dotes in idolatry
the worthy thane of ross.
(aside) what shall cordelia speak? love, and be silent.
i must confess that i have heard so much and with demetrius thought to have spoke thereof, but being overfull of self-affairs, my mind did lose it., but, demetrius, come. i have some private schooling for you both., for you, fair hermia, look you arm yourself to fit your fancies to your father's will, or else the law of athens yields you up to death, or to a vow of single life., come, my hippolyta. what cheer, my love?, demetrius and egeus, go along. i must employ you in some business of something nearly that concerns yourselves.
what a haste looks through his eyes! so should he look that seems to speak things strange.
of all these bounds, even from this line to this, with shadowy forests and with champains riched, with plenteous rivers and wide-skirted meads, be this perpetual., what says our second daughter, our dearest regan, wife of cornwall? speak.
with duty and desire we follow you.
god save the king.
sir, i am made of that self mettle as my sister, and prize me at her worth. in my true heart, only she comes too short, that i profess
how now, my love? why is your cheek so pale? how chance the roses there do fade so fast?
whence cam'st thou, worthy thane?
myself an enemy to all other joys, which the most precious square of sense possesses. and find i am alone felicitate
beteem them from the tempest of my eyes.
from fife, great king, where the norweyan banners flout the sky norway himself, with terrible numbers, assisted by that most disloyal traitor, the thane of cawdor, began a dismal conflict, till that bellona's bridegroom, lapped in proof, point against point, rebellious arm 'gainst arm, curbing his lavish spirit; and to conclude, the victory fell on us.
(aside) then poor cordelia! and yet not so, since i am sure my love's more ponderous than my tongue.
ay me! for aught that i could ever read, could ever hear by tale or history, the course of true love never did run smooth.
great happiness!
to thee and thine hereditary ever no less in space, validity, and pleasure than that conferred on goneril., but now, our joy, although our last and least, to whose young love the vines of france and milk of burgundy a third more opulent than your sisters? speak.
o cross! too high to be enthralled to low.
that now sweno, the norways' king, craves composition. till he disbursed at saint colme's inch ten thousand dollars to our general use.
nothing, my lord.
or else misgraffèd in respect of years, 
no more that thane of cawdor shall deceive our bosom interest: go pronounce his present death,
nothing?
o spite! too old to be engaged to young.
i'll see it done.
nothing.
or else it stood upon the choice of friends, 
what he hath lost, noble macbeth hath won.
how? nothing will come of nothing. speak again.
o hell, to choose love by another's eyes!
where hast thou been, sister?
unhappy that i am, i cannot heave my heart into my mouth. i love your majesty according to my bond, no more nor less.
or, if there were a sympathy in choice, war, death, or sickness did lay siege to it, making it momentary as a sound, swift as a shadow, short as any dream, that, in a spleen, unfolds both heaven and earth, and ere a man hath power to say "behold!" the jaws of darkness do devour it up. so quick bright things come to confusion.
killing swine.
how, how, cordelia? mend your speech a little,
it stands as an edict in destiny. then let us teach our trial patience, because it is a customary cross, as due to love as thoughts and dreams and sighs,
sister, where thou?
good my lord, you have begot me, bred me, loved me. i return those duties back as are right fit, 
a good persuasion. therefore, hear me, hermia. i have a widow aunt, a dowager of great revenue, and she hath no child. from athens is her house remote seven leagues, there, gentle hermia, may i marry thee. and to that place the sharp athenian law cannot pursue us. if thou lovest me then, steal forth thy father's house tomorrow night.
a sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap, quoth i. "aroint thee, witch!" the rump-fed runnion cries. her husband's to aleppo gone, master o' th' tiger; but in a sieve i'll thither sail, and like a rat without a tail,
obey you, love you, and most honor you. why have my sisters husbands if they say that lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry half my love with him, half my care and duty. sure, i shall never marry like my sisters, to love my father all.
where i did meet thee once with helena to do observance to a morn of may, there will i stay for thee.
i'll give thee a wind.
but goes thy heart with this?
my good lysander! i swear to thee by cupid's strongest bow, by the simplicity of venus' doves, by that which knitteth souls and prospers loves, and by that fire which burned the carthage queen when the false troyan under sail was seen, (in number more than ever women spoke), in that same place thou hast appointed me, tomorrow truly will i meet with thee.
thou 'rt kind.
ay, good my lord.
keep promise, love. look, here comes helena.
and i another.
so young and so untender?
godspeed, fair helena! whither away?
i myself have all the other, all the quarters that they know i' th' shipman's card. i'll drain him dry as hay. sleep shall neither night nor day he shall live a man forbid. weary sev'nnights nine times nine shall he dwindle, peak and pine.
so young, my lord, and true.
call you me "fair"? that "fair" again unsay. demetrius loves your fair. o happy fair! your eyes are lodestars, and your tongue's sweet air more tunable than lark to shepherd's ear sickness is catching. oh, were favor so, yours would i catch, fair hermia, ere i go. my ear should catch your voice. my eye, your eye. my tongue should catch your tongue's sweet melody. the rest i'd give to be to you translated.
though his bark cannot be lost, look what i have.
let it be so. thy truth then be thy dower. the mysteries of hecate and the night, by all the operation of the orbs from whom we do exist and cease to be, here i disclaim all my paternal care, and as a stranger to my heart and me hold thee from this for ever. the barbarous scythian, or he that makes his generation messes to gorge his appetite, shall to my bosom as thou my sometime daughter.
o, teach me how you look and with what art you sway the motion of demetrius' heart.
show me, show me.
good my liege, 
i frown upon him, yet he loves me still.
here i have a pilot's thumb, wrecked as homeward he did come.
peace, kent. come not between the dragon and his wrath. i loved her most and thought to set my rest
oh, that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill!
macbeth doth come.
(to cordelia) hence, and avoid my sight!, so be my grave my peace as here i give her father's heart from her., call france. who stirs? call burgundy., 
i give him curses, yet he gives me love.
(dancing together in a circle) the weird sisters, hand in hand, posters of the sea and land, thus do go about, about, and thrice again, to make up nine. peace! the charm's wound up.
cornwall and albany, let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her. i do invest you jointly with my power, preeminence, and all the large effects that troop with majesty. ourself, by monthly course, by you to be sustained, shall our abode make with you by due turns. only shall we retain the name, and all th' additions to a king. the sway, revenue, execution of the rest, this coronet part between you. (gives cornwall and albany the coronet)
oh, that my prayers could such affection move!
so foul and fair a day i have not seen.
royal lear, whom i have ever honored as my king, loved as my father, as my master followed,
the more i hate, the more he follows me.
how far is 't called to forres?, what are these that look not like th' inhabitants o' th' earth, and yet are on 't?, live you? or are you aught that man may question? you seem to understand me, by each at once her choppy finger laying and yet your beards forbid me to interpret that you are so.
the bow is bent and drawn. make from the shaft.
the more i love, the more he hateth me.
speak, if you can: what are you?
let it fall rather, though the fork invade the region of my heart. be kent unmannerly when lear is mad. what wouldst thou do, old man? when power to flattery bows? to plainness honor's bound when majesty falls to folly. reserve thy state,
his folly, helena, is no fault of mine.
all hail, macbeth! hail to thee, thane of glamis!
and in thy best consideration check this hideous rashness. answer my life my judgment, nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound reverbs no hollowness.
none, but your beauty. would that fault were mine!
all hail, macbeth! hail to thee, thane of cawdor!
kent, on thy life, no more.
take comfort. he no more shall see my face. lysander and myself will fly this place. before the time i did lysander see oh, then, what graces in my love do dwell, that he hath turned a heaven unto a hell!
all hail, macbeth, that shalt be king hereafter!
my life i never held but as a pawn to wage against thy enemies, nor fear to lose it,
helen, to you our minds we will unfold. tomorrow night when phoebe doth behold decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass (a time that lovers' flights doth still conceal), through athens' gates have we devised to steal.
good sir, why do you start and seem to fear things that do sound so fair? (to the witches) i' th' name of truth, are ye fantastical, or that indeed you greet with present grace and great prediction of noble having and of royal hope, that he seems rapt withal. to me you speak not. if you can look into the seeds of time speak, then, to me, who neither beg nor fear your favors nor your hate.
out of my sight!
(to helena) and in the wood where often you and i emptying our bosoms of their counsel sweet,
hail!
see better, lear, and let me still remain the true blank of thine eye.
there my lysander and myself shall meet. and thence from athens turn away our eyes to seek new friends and stranger companies. and good luck grant thee thy demetrius!, keep word, lysander. we must starve our sight from lovers' food till morrow deep midnight.
hail!
now, by apollo, 
i will, my hermia.
hail!
now, by apollo, king, thou swear'st thy gods in vain.
helena, adieu.
lesser than macbeth and greater.
o vassal! miscreant!
how happy some o'er other some can be! through athens i am thought as fair as she. but what of that? demetrius thinks not so. he will not know what all but he do know. so i, admiring of his qualities. things base and vile, holding no quantity, love can transpose to form and dignity. love looks not with the eyes but with the mind. nor hath love's mind of any judgment taste, wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste. and therefore is love said to be a child, because in choice he is so oft beguiled. so the boy love is perjured everywhere. for ere demetrius looked on hermia's eyne, he hailed down oaths that he was only mine.
not so happy, yet much happier.
dear sir, forbear!
and when this hail some heat from hermia felt, i will go tell him of fair hermia's flight. then to the wood will he tomorrow night pursue her. and for this intelligence if i have thanks, it is a dear expense. to have his sight thither and back again.
thou shalt get kings, though thou be none. so all hail, macbeth and banquo!
do, kill thy physician, and the fee bestow upon thy foul disease. revoke thy gift, or whilst i can vent clamor from my throat, i'll tell thee thou dost evil.
is all our company here?
banquo and macbeth, all hail!
that thou hast sought to make us break our vows, which we durst never yet, and with strained pride to come betwixt our sentence and our power, which nor our nature nor our place can bear,
you were best to call them generally, man by man, according to the scrip.
stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more. by sinel's death i know i am thane of glamis. but how of cawdor? the thane of cawdor lives, a prosperous gentleman, and to be king no more than to be cawdor. say from whence you owe this strange intelligence, or why upon this blasted heath you stop our way with such prophetic greeting. speak, i charge you.
five days we do allot thee for provision to shield thee from diseases of the world. and on the sixth to turn thy hated back upon our kingdom. if on the next day following the moment is thy death. away! by jupiter, this shall not be revoked.
here is the scroll of every man's name which is thought fit, through all athens, to play in our interlude before the duke and the duchess, on his wedding day at night.
and these are of them. whither are they vanished?
why, fare thee well, king. sith thus thou wilt appear, freedom lives hence, and banishment is here. the gods to their dear shelter take thee, maid, that justly think'st and hast most rightly said! (to regan and goneril) and your large speeches may your deeds approve, thus kent, o princes, bids you all adieu. he'll shape his old course in a country new.
first, good peter quince, say what the play treats on, then read the names of the actors, and so grow to a point.
into the air, and what seemed corporal melted, as breath into the wind. would they had stayed.
here's france and burgundy, my noble lord.
marry, our play is the most lamentable comedy and most cruel death of pyramus and thisbe.
were such things here as we do speak about? that takes the reason prisoner?
my lord of burgundy. hath rivaled for our daughter. what in the least will you require in present dower with her or cease your quest of love?
a very good piece of work, i assure you, and a merry., now, good peter quince, call forth your actors by the scroll., masters, spread yourselves.
your children shall be kings.
most royal majesty, i crave no more than hath your highness offered.
answer as i call you., nick bottom, the weaver?
you shall be king.
right noble burgundy, when she was dear to us we did hold her so, but now her price is fallen. sir, there she stands. if aught within that little seeming substance, or all of it, with our displeasure pieced she's there, and she is yours.
ready. name what part i am for and proceed.
and thane of cawdor too: went it not so?
i know no answer.
you, nick bottom, are set down for pyramus.
to the selfsame tune and words. who's here?
sir, will you, with those infirmities she owes, unfriended, new adopted to our hate, dowered with our curse and strangered with our oath, 
what is pyramus? a lover or a tyrant? medieval and renaissance plays often featured tyrant characters, kings who gave long, ranting speeches. tyrant?
the news of thy success, and when he reads thy personal venture in the rebels' fight, his wonders and his praises do contend which should be thine or his. silenced with that, he finds thee in the stout norweyan ranks, nothing afeard of what thyself didst make, strange images of death. as thick as tale can post with post, and every one did bear and poured them down before him.
pardon me, royal sir. election makes not up in such conditions.
a lover that kills himself, most gallant, for love.
we are sent to give thee from our royal master thanks, only to herald thee into his sight, not pay thee.
then leave her, sir, for by the power that made me, i tell you all her wealth. (to france) for you, great king, to match you where i hate. therefore beseech you t' avert your liking a more worthier way than on a wretch whom nature is ashamed almost t' acknowledge hers.
that will ask some tears in the true performing of it. if i do it, let the audience look to their eyes. i will move storms. i will condole in some measure., to the rest., yet my chief humor is for a tyrant. i could play ercles rarely, or a part to tear a cat in to make all split. the raging rocks and shivering shocks shall break the locks of prison gates. and phoebus' car shall shine from far and make and mar the foolish fates. this was lofty!, now name the rest of the players., this is ercles' vein, a tyrant's vein. a lover is more condoling.
he bade me, from him, call thee thane of cawdor: in which addition, hail, most worthy thane, for it is thine.
this is most strange, the argument of your praise, balm of your age, most best, most dearest, should in this trice of time
francis flute, the bellows-mender?
what, can the devil speak true?
commit a thing so monstrous to dismantle so many folds of favor. sure, her offense that monsters it (or your fore-vouched affection fall into taint), which to believe of her must be a faith that reason without miracle could never plant in me.
here, peter quince.
the thane of cawdor lives. why do you dress me
if for i want that glib and oily art to speak and purpose not, since what i well intend, i'll do 't before i speak, that you make known it is no vicious blot, murder, or foulness, that hath deprived me of your grace and favor, but even for want of that for which i am richer: a still-soliciting eye and such a tongue as i am glad i have not, though not to have it
flute, you must take thisbe on you.
who was the thane lives yet, but under heavy judgment bears that life which he deserves to lose. whether he was combined with those of norway, or did line the rebel with hidden help and vantage, or that with both but treasons capital, confessed and proved, have overthrown him.
go to, go to. better thou hadst not been born than not t' have pleased me better.
what is thisbe? a wandering knight?
(aside) glamis, and thane of cawdor! the greatest is behind. (to ross and angus) thanks for your pains. when those that gave the thane of cawdor to me promised no less to them?
is it no more but this, a tardiness in nature which often leaves the history unspoke that it intends to do?, my lord of burgundy, when it is mingled with regards that stands aloof from th' entire point. will you have her? she is herself a dowry.
it is the lady that pyramus must love.
that, trusted home, might yet enkindle you unto the crown, besides the thane of cawdor. but 'tis strange. the instruments of darkness tell us truths, win us with honest trifles, to betray 's in deepest consequence. (to ross and angus) cousins, a word, i pray you.
(to lear) royal king, and here i take cordelia by the hand, duchess of burgundy.
nay, faith, let me not play a woman. i have a beard coming.
as happy prologues to the swelling act of the imperial theme. (to ross and angus) i thank you, gentlemen. (aside) this supernatural soliciting cannot be ill, cannot be good. if ill, commencing in a truth? i am thane of cawdor. if good, why do i yield to that suggestion whose horrid image doth unfix my hair and make my seated heart knock at my ribs, are less than horrible imaginings.
nothing. i have sworn. i am firm.
that's all one. you shall play it in a mask, and you may speak as small as you will.
my thought, whose murder yet is but fantastical, shakes so my single state of man that function is smothered in surmise,
(to cordelia) i am sorry then. you have so lost a father
an i may hide my face, let me play thisbe too! i'll speak in a monstrous little voice: "thisne, thisne!", "ah, pyramus, my lover dear, thy thisbe dear and lady dear!"
look how our partner's rapt.
peace be with burgundy. since that respects and fortunes are his love, i shall not be his wife.
no, no. you must play pyramus., and flute, you thisbe.
(aside) if chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me without my stir.
fairest cordelia, that art most rich being poor, thee and thy virtues here i seize upon, be it lawful i take up what's cast away. gods, gods! 'tis strange that from their cold'st neglect my love should kindle to inflamed respect., is queen of us, of ours, and our fair france. not all the dukes of waterish burgundy can buy this unprized precious maid of me., bid them farewell, cordelia, though unkind.
well, proceed.
new honors come upon him, but with the aid of use.
thou hast her, france. let her be thine, for we have no such daughter, nor shall ever see that face of hers again. (to cordelia) therefore be gone without our grace, our love, our benison., 
robin starveling, the tailor?
(aside) come what come may, time and the hour runs through the roughest day.
bid farewell to your sisters.
here, peter quince.
worthy macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.
the jewels of our father, with washed eyes cordelia leaves you. i know you what you are, and like a sister am most loath to call to your professèd bosoms i commit him. but yet, alas, stood i within his grace, i would prefer him to a better place. so farewell to you both.
robin starveling, you must play thisbe's mother., tom snout, the tinker?
with things forgotten. kind gentlemen, your pains are registered where every day i turn the leaf to read them. let us toward the king. (aside to banquo) think upon what hath chanced, and, at more time, our free hearts each to other.
prescribe not us our duty.
here, peter quince.
very gladly.
let your study be to content your lord, who hath received you at fortune's alms. you have obedience scanted, and well are worth the want that you have wanted.
you, pyramus' father., myself, thisbe's father., snug the joiner, you, the lion's part., and i hope here is a play fitted.
till then, enough. (to ross and angus) come, friends.
time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides, well may you prosper.
have you the lion's part written? pray you, if it be, give it me, for i am slow of study.
is execution done on cawdor? are not those in commission yet returned?
come, my fair cordelia.
you may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.
my liege, they are not yet come back. but i have spoke with one that saw him die, who did report implored your highness' pardon, and set forth a deep repentance. nothing in his life became him like the leaving it. he died as one that had been studied in his death as 'twere a careless trifle.
sister, it is not a little i have to say of what most nearly appertains to us both. i think our father will hence tonight.
let me play the lion too. i will roar, that i will do any man's heart good to hear me. i will roar, that i will make the duke say, "let him roar again. let him roar again."
there's no art to find the mind's construction in the face. he was a gentleman on whom i built an absolute trust.
that's most certain, and with you. next month with us.
an you should do it too terribly, you would fright the duchess and the ladies, that they would shriek. and that were enough to hang us all.
the sin of my ingratitude even now was heavy on me. thou art so far before that swiftest wing of recompense is slow to overtake thee. would thou hadst less deserved, might have been mine! only i have left to say, more is thy due than more than all can pay.
you see how full of changes his age is. the observation we have made of it hath not been little. he always loved our sister most, and with what poor judgment he hath now cast her off appears too grossly.
that would hang us, every mother's son.
the service and the loyalty i owe in doing it pays itself. your highness' part are to your throne and state children and servants, which do but what they should, by doing everything safe toward your love and honor.
'tis the infirmity of his age. yet he hath ever but slenderly known himself.
i grant you, friends, if you should fright the ladies out of their wits, they would have no more discretion but to hang us. but i will aggravate my voice so that i will roar you as gently as any sucking dove. i will roar you an 'twere any nightingale.
welcome hither. i have begun to plant thee, and will labor that hast no less deserved, nor must be known no less to have done so, let me infold thee and hold thee to my heart.
the best and soundest of his time hath been but rash. then must we look from his age to receive not alone the imperfections of long-engrafted condition, but therewithal the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with them.
you can play no part but pyramus. for pyramus is a sweet-faced man, a proper man as one shall see in a summer's day, a most lovely, gentlemanlike man. therefore you must needs play pyramus.
there, if i grow, the harvest is your own.
such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this of kent's banishment.
well, i will undertake it. what beard were i best to play it in?
my plenteous joys, in drops of sorrow. sons, kinsmen, thanes, and you whose places are the nearest, know we will establish our estate upon our eldest, malcolm, whom we name hereafter not unaccompanied invest him only, but signs of nobleness, like stars, shall shine on all deservers. (to macbeth) from hence to inverness, and bind us further to you.
there is further compliment of leave-taking between france and him. pray you, let's sit together. if our father carry authority with such dispositions as he bears, this last surrender of his will but offend us.
why, what you will.
i'll be myself the harbinger and make joyful the hearing of my wife with your approach. so humbly take my leave.
we shall further think on 't.
i will discharge it in either your straw-color beard, your orange-tawny beard, your purple-in-grain beard, or your french crown-color beard, your perfect yellow.
my worthy cawdor!
we must do something, and i' th' heat.
some of your french crowns have no hair at all, and then you will play barefaced., but masters, here are your parts. and i am to entreat you, request you, and desire you to con them by tomorrow night and meet me in the palace wood, a mile without the town, by moonlight. there will we rehearse, for if we meet in the city we shall be dogged with company, and our devices known. in the meantime i will draw a bill of properties such as our play wants. i pray you, fail me not.
on which i must fall down, or else o'erleap, for in my way it lies. stars, hide your fires; let not light see my black and deep desires. the eye wink at the hand, yet let that be
thou, nature, art my goddess. to thy law my services are bound. wherefore should i stand in the plague of custom and permit the curiosity of nations to deprive me lag of a brother? why "bastard"? wherefore "base"? when my dimensions are as well compact, my mind as generous, and my shape as true as honest madam's issue? why brand they us who in the lusty stealth of nature take more composition and fierce quality than doth within a dull, stale, tirèd bed go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops legitimate edgar, i must have your land. our father's love is to the bastard edmund as to the legitimate., fine word, "legitimate"!, well, my legitimate, if this letter speed shall top th' legitimate. i grow, i prosper. now, gods, stand up for bastards!
we will meet, and there we may rehearse most obscenely and courageously. take pains. be perfect. adieu.
true, worthy banquo. he is full so valiant, and in his commendations i am fed; it is a banquet to me., let's after him, whose care is gone before to bid us welcome:
kent banished thus? and france in choler parted? and the king gone tonight, prescribed his power upon the gad?, edmund, how now? what news?
at the duke's oak we meet.
(reading) "they met me in the day of success, and i have learned by the perfectest report they have more in them than mortal knowledge. when i burned in desire to question them further, they made themselves air, into which they vanished. whiles i stood rapt in the wonder of it came missives from the king, who all-hailed me 'thane of cawdor,' by which title, before, these weird sisters saluted me, and referred me to the coming on of time with 'hail, king that shalt be!' this have i thought good to deliver thee, my dearest partner of greatness, that thou might'st not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is promised thee. lay it to thy heart, and farewell."
(pocketing the letter) so please your lordship, none.
enough. hold, or cut bowstrings.
glamis thou art, and cawdor; and shalt be what thou art promised. yet do i fear thy nature; it is too full o' th' milk of human kindness art not without ambition, but without the illness should attend it. what thou wouldst highly, that wouldst thou holily; wouldst not play false, and yet wouldst wrongly win. thou'ld'st have, great glamis, and that which rather thou dost fear to do, than wishest should be undone. hie thee hither, that i may pour my spirits in thine ear and chastise with the valor of my tongue which fate and metaphysical aid doth seem to have thee crowned withal.
why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?
how now, spirit? whither wander you?
what is your tidings?
i know no news, my lord.
over hill, over dale, thorough bush, thorough brier, over park, over pale, thorough flood, thorough fire. i do wander everywhere swifter than the moon's sphere. and i serve the fairy queen to dew her orbs upon the green. the cowslips tall her pensioners be. in their gold coats spots you see. those be rubies, fairy favors. in those freckles live their savors. i must go seek some dewdrops here and hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear. farewell, thou lob of spirits. i'll be gone. our queen and all our elves come here anon.
the king comes here tonight.
what paper were you reading?
the king doth keep his revels here tonight. for oberon is passing fell and wrath because that she, as her attendant hath a lovely boy stolen from an indian king. she never had so sweet a changeling. knight of his train, to trace the forests wild. but she perforce withholds the lovèd boy, crowns him with flowers, and makes him all her joy.
thou 'rt mad to say it. would have informed for preparation?
nothing, my lord.
and now they never meet in grove or green, but they do square, that all their elves for fear creep into acorn cups and hide them there.
so please you, it is true: our thane is coming. one of my fellows had the speed of him, who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
no? what needed, then, that terrible dispatch of it into your pocket? the quality of nothing hath not such need to hide itself. let's see., come, if it be nothing, i shall not need spectacles.
either i mistake your shape and making quite, or else you are that shrewd and knavish sprite that frights the maidens of the villagery, skim milk, and sometimes labor in the quern and bootless make the breathless housewife churn, and sometime make the drink to bear no barm, those that "hobgoblin" call you, and "sweet puck," you do their work, and they shall have good luck. are not you he?
give him tending. he brings great news.
i beseech you, sir, pardon me. it is a letter from my brother that i have not all o'er-read. and for so much as i have perused, i find it not fit for your o'erlooking.
thou speak'st aright. i am that merry wanderer of the night. when i a fat and bean-fed horse beguile, neighing in likeness of a filly foal. and sometime lurk i in a gossip's bowl in very likeness of a roasted crab, and on her withered dewlap pour the ale. the wisest aunt telling the saddest tale sometime for three-foot stool mistaketh me. then slip i from her bum, down topples she, and then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh, and waxen in their mirth, and neeze, and swear a merrier hour was never wasted there. but, room, fairy! here comes oberon.
the raven himself is hoarse that croaks the fatal entrance of duncan that tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here, and fill me from the crown to the toe top-full of direst cruelty. make thick my blood. stop up the access and passage to remorse, shake my fell purpose, nor keep peace between the effect and it! come to my woman's breasts, and take my milk for gall, you murd'ring ministers, wherever in your sightless substances and pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell, that my keen knife see not the wound it makes, nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark to cry "hold, hold!"
give me the letter, sir.
and here my mistress. would that he were gone!
greater than both, by the all-hail hereafter, thy letters have transported me beyond this ignorant present, and i feel now the future in the instant.
i shall offend, either to detain or give it. the contents, as in part i understand them, are to blame.
ill met by moonlight, proud titania.
my dearest love,
(taking the letter) let's see, let's see.
what, jealous oberon?, fairies, skip hence. i have forsworn his bed and company.
and when goes hence?
i hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote this but as an essay or taste of my virtue.
tarry, rash wanton. am not i thy lord?
tomorrow, as he purposes.
(reads) "this policy and reverence of age makes the world bitter to the best of our times, keeps our fortunes from us till our oldness cannot relish them. i begin to find an idle and fond bondage in the oppression of aged tyranny, who sways not as it hath power but as it is suffered.
when thou hast stolen away from fairyland, and in the shape of corin sat all day, playing on pipes of corn and versing love to amorous phillida. why art thou here, but that, forsooth, the bouncing amazon, your buskined mistress and your warrior love, to theseus must be wedded, and you come to give their bed joy and prosperity.
o, never shall sun that morrow see! your face, my thane, is as a book where men may read strange matters. to beguile the time, your hand, your tongue. look like th' innocent flower, but be the serpent under 't. he that's coming must be provided for; and you shall put this night's great business into my dispatch, give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.
come to me, that of this i may speak more. if our father would sleep till i waked him, you should enjoy half his revenue forever, and live the beloved of your brother, edgar." hum, conspiracy? "'sleep till i wake him, you should enjoy half his revenue", my son edgar? had he a hand to write this, a heart and brain to breed it in? when came this to you? who brought it?
knowing i know thy love to theseus? glance at my credit with hippolyta, didst thou not lead him through the glimmering night from perigouna, whom he ravishèd? and make him with fair ægles break his faith,
we will speak further.
it was not brought me, my lord. there's the cunning of it.
these are the forgeries of jealousy. and never, since the middle summer's spring, met we on hill, in dale, forest, or mead, by pavèd fountain, or by rushy brook, to dance our ringlets to the whistling wind, but with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our sport. therefore the winds, piping to us in vain, as in revenge, have sucked up from the sea have every pelting river made so proud that they have overborne their continents. the ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain, the ploughman lost his sweat, and the green corn the fold stands empty in the drownèd field, and crows are fatted with the murrain flock. the nine-men's-morris is filled up with mud, and the quaint mazes in the wanton green the human mortals want their winter here. no night is now with hymn or carol blessed. therefore the moon, the governess of floods, pale in her anger, washes all the air, and thorough this distemperature we see the seasons alter: hoary-headed frosts fall in the fresh lap of the crimson rose, and on old hiems' thin and icy crown is, as in mockery, set. the spring, the summer, the childing autumn, angry winter change their wonted liveries, and the mazèd world, by their increase, now knows not which is which. from our debate, from our dissension. we are their parents and original.
only look up clear. to alter favor ever is to fear.
you know the character to be your brother's?
do you amend it then. it lies in you. why should titania cross her oberon? to be my henchman.
this castle hath a pleasant seat. the air nimbly and sweetly recommends itself unto our gentle senses.
if the matter were good, my lord, i durst swear it were his. but in respect of that, i would fain think it were not.
set your heart at rest. the fairyland buys not the child of me. his mother was a votaress of my order, and in the spicèd indian air by night and sat with me on neptune's yellow sands, marking th' embarkèd traders on the flood, when we have laughed to see the sails conceive and grow big-bellied with the wanton wind; following, her womb then rich with my young squire, would imitate, and sail upon the land to fetch me trifles and return again as from a voyage, rich with merchandise. and for her sake do i rear up her boy, and for her sake i will not part with him.
this guest of summer, the temple-haunting martlet, does approve, smells wooingly here. no jutty, frieze, buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle. where they most breed and haunt, i have observed,
it is his.
how long within this wood intend you stay?
see, see, our honored hostess! the love that follows us sometime is our trouble, which still we thank as love. herein i teach you how you shall bid god 'ild us for your pains, and thank us for your trouble.
it is his hand, my lord, but i hope his heart is not in the contents.
perchance till after theseus' wedding day. and see our moonlight revels, go with us. if not, shun me, and i will spare your haunts.
all our service, were poor and single business to contend against those honors deep and broad wherewith your majesty loads our house. for those of old, and the late dignities heaped up to them,
has he never before sounded you in this business?
give me that boy and i will go with thee.
where's the thane of cawdor? we coursed him at the heels and had a purpose to be his purveyor; but he rides well, and his great love, sharp as his spur, hath holp him to his home before us. fair and noble hostess,
never, my lord. but i have heard him oft maintain it to be fit that, sons at perfect age and fathers declined, the father should be as ward to the son, and the son manage his revenue.
not for thy fairy kingdom., fairies, away!
your servants ever have theirs, themselves, and what is theirs in compt, to make their audit at your highness' pleasure, still to return your own.
o villain, villain! his very opinion in the letter! abhorred villain! unnatural, detested, brutish villain, worse than
well, go thy way. thou shalt not from this grove till i torment thee for this injury., (to robin goodfellow) my gentle puck, come hither. thou rememberest since once i sat upon a promontory uttering such dulcet and harmonious breath that the rude sea grew civil at her song and certain stars shot madly from their spheres to hear the seamaid's music?
give me your hand. conduct me to mine host. we love him highly by your leave, hostess.
brutish! go, sirrah, seek him. i'll apprehend him. abominable villain! where is he?
i remember.
if it were done when 'tis done, then 'twere well it were done quickly. if the assassination could trammel up the consequence, and catch with his surcease success; that but this blow but here, upon this bank and shoal of time, we'd jump the life to come. but in these cases we still have judgment here, that we but teach bloody instructions, which, being taught, return commends the ingredients of our poisoned chalice to our own lips. he's here in double trust: first, as i am his kinsman and his subject, strong both against the deed; then, as his host, not bear the knife myself. besides, this duncan hath borne his faculties so meek, hath been so clear in his great office, that his virtues will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against and pity, like a naked newborn babe, striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed upon the sightless couriers of the air, shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, to prick the sides of my intent, but only vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself and falls on th' other.
i do not well know, my lord. if it shall please you to suspend your indignation against my brother till you can derive from him better testimony of his intent, you shall run a certain course, where if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his purpose, it would make a great gap in your own honor and shake in pieces the heart of his obedience. i dare pawn down my life for him that he hath wrote this to feel my affection to your honor and to no other pretense of danger.
flying between the cold moon and the earth, cupid all armed. a certain aim he took at a fair vestal thronèd by the west, and loosed his love shaft smartly from his bow but i might see young cupid's fiery shaft quenched in the chaste beams of the watery moon, and the imperial votaress passèd on, in maiden meditation, fancy-free. it fell upon a little western flower, before milk-white, now purple with love's wound. and maidens call it "love-in-idleness." fetch me that flower. the herb i showed thee once. will make or man or woman madly dote upon the next live creature that it sees. fetch me this herb, and be thou here again ere the leviathan can swim a league.
how now! what news?
think you so?
in forty minutes.
he has almost supped. why have you left the chamber?
if your honor judge it meet, i will place you where you shall hear us confer of this and by an auricular assurance have your satisfaction, and that without any further delay than this very evening.
having once this juice, i'll watch titania when she is asleep and drop the liquor of it in her eyes. the next thing then she waking looks upon, on meddling monkey or on busy ape, she shall pursue it with the soul of love. and ere i take this charm from of her sight, as i can take it with another herb, but who comes here? i am invisible. and i will overhear their conference.
hath he asked for me?
he cannot be such a monster, 
i love thee not, therefore pursue me not. where is lysander and fair hermia? thou told'st me they were stol'n unto this wood. and here am i, and wood within this wood, because i cannot meet my hermia. hence, get thee gone, and follow me no more.
know you not he has?
nor is not, sure.
but yet you draw not iron, for my heart is true as steel. leave you your power to draw, and i shall have no power to follow you.
we will proceed no further in this business. he hath honored me of late, and i have bought golden opinions from all sorts of people, which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
to his father, that so tenderly and entirely loves him. heaven and earth! edmund, seek him out, wind me into him, i pray you. frame the business after your own wisdom. i would unstate myself to be in a due resolution.
do i entice you? do i speak you fair? tell you i do not, nor i cannot, love you?
was the hope drunk wherein you dressed yourself? hath it slept since? and wakes it now, to look so green and pale at what it did so freely? from this time such i account thy love. art thou afeard as thou art in desire? wouldst thou have that which thou esteem'st the ornament of life, and live a coward in thine own esteem, letting "i dare not" wait upon "i would, "
i will seek him, sir, presently, convey the business as i shall find means, and acquaint you withal.
and even for that do i love you the more. i am your spaniel. and, demetrius, the more you beat me, i will fawn on you. neglect me, lose me. only give me leave, unworthy as i am, to follow you. what worser place can i beg in your love, and yet a place of high respect with me, 
prithee, peace: i dare do all that may become a man; who dares do more is none.
these late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to us. though the wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus, yet nature finds itself scourged by the sequent effects. love cools, friendship falls off, brothers divide, in cities
tempt not too much the hatred of my spirit. for i am sick when i do look on thee.
what beast was 't, then, that made you break this enterprise to me? when you durst do it, then you were a man; be so much more the man. nor time nor place did then adhere, and yet you would make both. they have made themselves, and that their fitness now does unmake you. i have given suck, and know i would, while it was smiling in my face, have plucked my nipple from his boneless gums and dashed the brains out, had i so sworn as you have done to this.
mutinies, in countries discord, in palaces treason, and the bond cracked 'twixt son and father. this villain of mine comes under the prediction, there's son against father. the king falls from bias of nature, there's father against child. we have seen the best of our time. machinations, hollowness, treachery, and all ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves. find out this villain, edmund. it shall lose thee nothing. do it carefully., and the noble and true-hearted kent banished, his offense honesty! 'tis strange, strange.
and i am sick when i look not on you.
if we should fail?
this is the excellent foppery of the world that when we are sick in fortune, often the surfeit of our own behavior, we make guilty of our disasters the sun, the moon, and the stars, as if we were villains by necessity, fools by heavenly compulsion, knaves, thieves, and treachers by spherical predominance, drunkards, liars, and adulterers by an enforced obedience of planetary influence, and all that we are evil in by a divine thrusting-on. an admirable evasion of whoremaster man, to lay his goatish disposition to the charge of a star! my father compounded with my mother under the dragon's tail and my nativity was under ursa major, so that it follows i am rough and lecherous. fut, i should have been that i am, had the maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastardizing. edgar, 
you do impeach your modesty too much, into the hands of one that loves you not, to trust the opportunity of night and the ill counsel of a desert place with the rich worth of your virginity.
we fail? and we'll not fail. when duncan is asleep, whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey soundly invite him, his two chamberlains will i with wine and wassail so convince shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason a limbeck only: when in swinish sleep their drenchèd natures lie as in a death, what cannot you and i perform upon his spongy officers, who shall bear the guilt of our great quell?
and pat on 's cue he comes like the catastrophe of the old comedy. my cue is villainous melancholy, with a sigh like tom o' bedlam. oh, these eclipses do portend these divisions! fa, sol, la, mi.
it is not night when i do see your face. therefore i think i am not in the night. nor doth this wood lack worlds of company, for you in my respect are all the world. when all the world is here to look on me?
bring forth men-children only, for thy undaunted mettle should compose nothing but males. will it not be received, of his own chamber and used their very daggers, that they have done 't?
how now, brother edmund? what serious contemplation are you in?
i'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes, and leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts.
who dares receive it other, as we shall make our griefs and clamor roar upon his death?
i am thinking, brother, of a prediction i read this other day, what should follow these eclipses.
the wildest hath not such a heart as you.
i am settled, and bend up away, and mock the time with fairest show. false face must hide what the false heart doth know.
do you busy yourself about that?
apollo flies and daphne holds the chase. the dove pursues the griffin. the mild hind makes speed to catch the tiger, bootless speed, when cowardice pursues and valor flies.
how goes the night, boy?
i promise you, the effects he writes of succeed unhappily , as of unnaturalness between the child and the parent, death, dearth, dissolutions of ancient amities, divisions in state, menaces and maledictions against king and nobles, needless diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation of cohorts, nuptial breaches, and i know not what.
or if thou follow me, do not believe but i shall do thee mischief in the wood.
the moon is down. i have not heard the clock.
how long have you been a sectary astronomical?
ay, in the temple, in the town, the field you do me mischief. fie, demetrius! we cannot fight for love as men may do. we should be wooed and were not made to woo.
and she goes down at twelve.
come, come. when saw you my father last?
i'll follow thee and make a heaven of hell, to die upon the hand i love so well.
i take 't 'tis later, sir.
why, the night gone by.
thou shalt fly him and he shall seek thy love.
hold, take my sword. there's husbandry in heaven; a heavy summons lies like lead upon me, and yet i would not sleep. merciful powers, restrain in me the cursèd thoughts that nature gives way to in repose.
spake you with him?
hast thou the flower there? welcome, wanderer.
give me my sword. who's there?
ay, two hours together.
ay, there it is.
a friend.
parted you in good terms? found you no displeasure in him by word or countenance?
i pray thee, give it me. (takes flower from robin) where oxlips and the nodding violet grows, quite overcanopied with luscious woodbine, with sweet musk roses and with eglantine.
what, sir, not yet at rest? the king's a-bed. he hath been in unusual pleasure, and sent forth great largess to your offices. this diamond he greets your wife withal, in measureless content.
none at all.
there sleeps titania sometime of the night, and there the snake throws her enameled skin, weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in. and with the juice of this i'll streak her eyes and make her full of hateful fantasies. take thou some of it and seek through this grove: a sweet athenian lady is in love with a disdainful youth. anoint his eyes. but do it when the next thing he espies by the athenian garments he hath on. effect it with some care, that he may prove more fond on her than she upon her love. and look thou meet me ere the first cock crow.
being unprepared, our will became the servant to defect, which else should free have wrought.
bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him. and at my entreaty forbear his presence till some little time hath qualified the heat of his displeasure, which at this instant so rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it would scarcely allay.
fear not, my lord. your servant shall do so.
all's well. i dreamt last night of the three weird sisters:
some villain hath done me wrong.
come now, a roundel and a fairy song. then for the third part of a minute, hence, some to kill cankers in the musk-rose buds, some war with reremice for their leathern wings the clamorous owl that nightly hoots and wonders at our quaint spirits. sing me now asleep. then to your offices and let me rest.
i think not of them. yet, when we can entreat an hour to serve, we would spend it in some words upon that business, if you would grant the time.
that's my fear. i pray you, have a continent forbearance till the speed of his rage goes slower. and as i say, retire with me to my lodging, from whence i will fitly bring you to hear my lord speak. pray ye, go. there's my key. if you do stir abroad, go armed.
(sings) you spotted snakes with double tongue, thorny hedgehogs, be not seen. newts and blindworms, do no wrong. come not near our fairy queen.
at your kind'st leisure.
armed, brother?
philomel, with melody sing in our sweet lullaby. lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby. never harm nor spell nor charm come our lovely lady nigh. so good night, with lullaby.
if you shall cleave to my consent, when 'tis,
brother, i advise you to the best. go armed. i am no honest man if there be any good meaning towards you. i have told you what i have seen and heard, but faintly, nothing like the image and horror of it. pray you, away.
(sings) weaving spiders, come not here. hence, you long-legged spinners, hence!
so i lose none in seeking to augment it, but still keep my bosom franchised and allegiance clear, i shall be counselled.
shall i hear from you anon?
beetles black, approach not near. worm nor snail, do no offense.
good repose the while!
i do serve you in this business.
(sing) philomel, with melody sing in our sweet lullaby. lulla, lulla, lullaby, lulla, lulla, lullaby. never harm nor spell nor charm come our lovely lady nigh. so good night, with lullaby.
thanks, sir: the like to you!
a credulous father, and a brother noble, whose nature is so far from doing harms that he suspects none, on whose foolish honesty let me, if not by birth, have lands by wit. all with me's meet that i can fashion fit.
hence, away! now all is well. one aloof stand sentinel.
(to the servant) go bid thy mistress, when my drink is ready, she strike upon the bell. get thee to bed.
did my father strike my gentleman for chiding of his fool?
what thou seest when thou dost wake, do it for thy true love take. love and languish for his sake. be it ounce or cat or bear, in thy eye that shall appear, when thou wakest, it is thy dear. wake when some vile thing is near.
is this a dagger which i see before me, the handle toward my hand? come, let me clutch thee. art thou not, fatal vision, sensible to feeling as to sight? or art thou but a dagger of the mind, a false creation, proceeding from the heat-oppressèd brain? as this which now i draw. thou marshall'st me the way that i was going, and such an instrument i was to use. mine eyes are made the fools o' th' other senses, and on thy blade and dudgeon gouts of blood, which was not so before. there's no such thing. it is the bloody business which informs thus to mine eyes. now o'er the one half-world the curtained sleep. witchcraft celebrates pale hecate's offerings, and withered murder, alarumed by his sentinel, the wolf, whose howl's his watch, thus with his stealthy pace, moves like a ghost. thou sure and firm-set earth, hear not my steps, which way they walk, for fear thy very stones prate of my whereabout, and take the present horror from the time, words to the heat of deeds too cold breath gives.
ay, madam.
fair love, you faint with wandering in the wood.
i go, and it is done. the bell invites me. hear it not, duncan, for it is a knell that summons thee to heaven or to hell.
by day and night he wrongs me. every hour he flashes into one gross crime or other his knights grow riotous, and himself upbraids us on every trifle. when he returns from hunting, i will not speak with him. say i am sick. if you come slack of former services,
we'll rest us, hermia, if you think it good. and tarry for the comfort of the day.
that which hath made them drunk hath made me bold. what hath quenched them hath given me fire. hark! peace! it was the owl that shrieked, the fatal bellman, which gives the stern'st good-night. he is about it. do mock their charge with snores. i have drugged their possets, that death and nature do contend about them, whether they live or die.
he's coming, madam. i hear him.
be it so, lysander. find you out a bed, for i upon this bank will rest my head.
(within) who's there? what, ho!
put on what weary negligence you please, you and your fellow servants. i'll have it come to question. if he distaste it, let him to our sister, not to be overruled. idle old man that still would manage those authorities that he hath given away! now by my life, old fools are babes again and must be used remember what i have said.
one heart, one bed, two bosoms, and one troth.
alack, i am afraid they have awaked, confounds us. hark! i laid their daggers ready; he could not miss 'em. had he not resembled my father as he slept, i had done 't.
very well, madam.
nay, good lysander. for my sake, my dear, lie further off yet. do not lie so near.
my husband!
and let his knights have colder looks among you. what grows of it, no matter. advise your fellows so. i would breed from hence occasions, and i shall, to hold my very course. go, prepare for dinner.
o, take the sense, sweet, of my innocence. i mean that my heart unto yours is knit so that but one heart we can make of it. two bosoms interchainèd with an oath, so then two bosoms and a single troth. for, lying so, hermia, i do not lie.
i have done the deed. didst thou not hear a noise?
if but as well i other accents borrow, that can my speech diffuse, my good intent may carry through itself to that full issue for which i razed my likeness. now, banished kent, so may it come thy master, whom thou lovest, shall find thee full of labors.
lysander riddles very prettily. now much beshrew my manners and my pride if hermia meant to say lysander lied. lie further off in human modesty. such separation as may well be said becomes a virtuous bachelor and a maid. so far be distant. and, good night, sweet friend.
did not you speak?
let me not stay a jot for dinner. go get it ready.
amen, amen to that fair prayer, say i. and then end life when i end loyalty! here is my bed. sleep give thee all his rest!
when?
(to kent) how now, what art thou?
with half that wish the wisher's eyes be pressed!
now.
a man, sir.
through the forest have i gone. but athenian found i none, on whose eyes i might approve this flower's force in stirring love. night and silence! who is here? weeds of athens he doth wear. this is he, my master said, despisèd the athenian maid. and here the maiden, sleeping sound on the dank and dirty ground. pretty soul! she durst not lie near this lack-love, this kill-courtesy. (squeezes flower juice on lysander's eyelids) churl, upon thy eyes i throw all the power this charm doth owe. when thou wakest, let love forbid sleep his seat on thy eyelid. so awake when i am gone, for i must now to oberon.
as i descended?
what dost thou profess? what wouldst thou with us?
stay, though thou kill me, sweet demetrius.
ay.
i do profess to be no less than i seem, to serve him truly that will put me in trust, to love him that is honest, to converse with him that is wise and says little, to fear judgment, to fight when i cannot choose, and to eat no fish.
i charge thee, hence, and do not haunt me thus.
hark! who lies i' th' second chamber?
what art thou?
o, wilt thou darkling leave me? do not so.
donalbain.
a very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the king.
stay, on thy peril. i alone will go.
(looking at his hands) this is a sorry sight.
if thou beest as poor for a subject as he's for a king, thou'rt poor enough. what wouldst thou?
oh, i am out of breath in this fond chase. the more my prayer, the lesser is my grace. happy is hermia, wheresoe'er she lies, for she hath blessèd and attractive eyes. if so, my eyes are oftener washed than hers. no, no, i am as ugly as a bear, for beasts that meet me run away for fear. therefore no marvel though demetrius what wicked and dissembling glass of mine made me compare with hermia's sphery eyne? (sees lysander)but who is here? lysander, on the ground? dead or asleep? i see no blood, no wound., 
a foolish thought, to say a sorry sight.
service.
(waking) and run through fire i will for thy sweet sake. transparent helena! nature shows art that through thy bosom makes me see thy heart. where is demetrius? oh, how fit a word
there's one did laugh in 's sleep, and one cried. "murder!" that they did wake each other. i stood and heard them. but they did say their prayers, and addressed them
who wouldst thou serve?
do not say so, lysander. say not so. what though he love your hermia? lord, what though? yet hermia still loves you. then be content.
there are two lodged together.
you.
content with hermia? no. i do repent not hermia but helena i love. who will not change a raven for a dove? the will of man is by his reason swayed, and reason says you are the worthier maid.
one cried, "god bless us!" and "amen" the other, as they had seen me with these hangman's hands. list'ning their fear i could not say "amen," when they did say "god bless us!"
dost thou know me, fellow?
so i, being young, till now ripe not to reason. and touching now the point of human skill, reason becomes the marshal to my will and leads me to your eyes, where i o'erlook
consider it not so deeply.
no, sir. but you have that in your countenance which i would fain call master.
wherefore was i to this keen mockery born? when at your hands did i deserve this scorn? is 't not enough, is 't not enough, young man, that i did never, no, nor never can, but you must flout my insufficiency? good troth, you do me wrong, good sooth, you do, in such disdainful manner me to woo. but fare you well. perforce i must confess oh, that a lady of one man refused should of another therefore be abused!
but wherefore could not i pronounce "amen"? i had most need of blessing, and "amen" stuck in my throat.
what's that?
she sees not hermia., hermia, sleep thou there. and never mayst thou come lysander near! the deepest loathing to the stomach brings, or as the heresies that men do leave are hated most of those they did deceive, so thou, my surfeit and my heresy, and all my powers, address your love and might to honor helen and to be her knight.
these deeds must not be thought after these ways. so, it will make us mad.
authority.
(waking) help me, lysander, help me! do thy best to pluck this crawling serpent from my breast. lysander, look how i do quake with fear. methought a serpent eat my heart away, and you sat smiling at his cruel pray. lysander!, what, removed?, lysander, lord!, alack, where are you? speak, an if you hear. speak, of all loves! i swoon almost with fear. no? then i well perceive you all not nigh. either death or you i'll find immediately.
macbeth does murder sleep", the innocent sleep, sleep that knits up the raveled sleave of care, the death of each day's life, sore labor's bath, balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course,
what services canst thou do?
are we all met?
what do you mean?
i can keep honest counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in telling it, and deliver a plain message bluntly. that which ordinary men are fit for, i am qualified in. and the best of me is diligence.
pat, pat. and here's a marvelous convenient place for our rehearsal. this green plot shall be our stage, this hawthorn-brake our tiring-house, and we will do it in action as we will do it before the duke.
still it cried, "sleep no more!" to all the house. "glamis hath murdered sleep, and therefore cawdor shall sleep no more. macbeth shall sleep no more."
how old art thou?
peter quince, 
who was it that thus cried? why, worthy thane, so brainsickly of things. go get some water, and wash this filthy witness from your hand. why did you bring these daggers from the place? they must lie there. go carry them and smear
not so young, sir, to love a woman for singing, nor so old to dote on her for anything. i have years on my back forty- eight.
what sayest thou, bully bottom?
i'll go no more: i am afraid to think what i have done; look on 't again i dare not.
follow me. thou shalt serve me. if i like thee no worse after dinner, i will not part from thee yet., dinner, ho, dinner! where's my knave, my fool?, go you, and call my fool hither.
there are things in this comedy of pyramus and thisbe that will never please. first, pyramus must draw a sword to kill himself, which the ladies cannot abide. how answer you that?
infirm of purpose! give me the daggers. the sleeping and the dead are but as pictures. 'tis the eye of childhood i'll gild the faces of the grooms withal, for it must seem their guilt.
you, you, sirrah, where's my daughter?
by 'r lakin, a parlous fear.
whence is that knocking? how is 't with me when every noise appals me? what hands are here? ha! they pluck out mine eyes. clean from my hand? no, this my hand will rather the multitudinous seas incarnadine, making the green one red.
so please you, 
i believe we must leave the killing out, when all is done.
my hands are of your color, but i shame
what says the fellow there? call the clotpoll back.
not a whit. i have a device to make all well. write me a prologue, and let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm with our swords, and that pyramus is not killed indeed. and for the more better assurance, tell them that i, pyramus, am not pyramus, but bottom the weaver. this will put them out of fear.
i hear a knocking at the south entry. retire we to our chamber. a little water clears us of this deed. how easy is it, then! your constancy hath left you unattended.
where's my fool, ho? i think the world's asleep.
well. we will have such a prologue, and it shall be written in eight and six.
get on your nightgown, lest occasion call us and show us to be watchers. be not lost so poorly in your thoughts.
how now? where's that mongrel?
no, make it two more. let it be written in eight and eight.
to know my deed, 'twere best not know myself.
he says, my lord, your daughter is not well.
will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?
wake duncan with thy knocking. i would thou couldst.
why came not the slave back to me when i called him.
i fear it, i promise you.
here's a knocking indeed! if a man were porter of hell-gate, he should have old turning the key.
sir, he answered me in the roundest manner he would not.
masters, you ought to consider with yourselves. to bring in, god shield us!, a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing. for there is not a more fearful wildfowl than your lion living. and we ought to look to 't.
knock, knock, knock! who's there, i' th' name of beelzebub? here's a farmer that hanged himself on the expectation of plenty. come in time, have napkins enough about you, here you'll sweat for 't.
he would not?
therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion.
knock, knock! who's there, in th' other devil's name? faith, here's an equivocator that could swear in both the scales against either scale, who committed treason enough for god's sake, yet could not equivocate to heaven. o, come in, equivocator.
my lord, i know not what the matter is, but to my judgment your highness is not entertained with that ceremonious affection as you were wont. there's a great abatement of kindness appears as well in the general dependants as in the duke himself also, and your daughter.
nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be seen through the lion's neck. and he himself must speak through, saying thus, or to the same defect, "ladies," or "fair ladies," "i would wish you" or "i would request you" or "i would entreat you" "not to fear, not to tremble, my life for yours. if you think i come hither as a lion, it were pity of my life. no, i am no such thing. i am a man as other men are." and there indeed let him name his name, and tell them plainly he is snug the joiner.
knock, knock, knock! who's there? faith, here's an english tailor come hither for stealing out of a french hose. come in, tailor. here you may roast your goose.
ha! sayest thou so?
well, it shall be so. but there is two hard things: that is, to bring the moonlight into a chamber. for, you know, pyramus and thisbe meet by moonlight.
knock, knock! never at quiet. what are you? but this place is too cold for hell. i'll devil-porter it no further. i had thought to have let in some of all professions that go the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire.
i beseech you pardon me, my lord, if i be mistaken, for my duty cannot be silent when i think your highness wronged.
doth the moon shine that night we play our play?
anon, anon! i pray you, remember the porter.
thou but rememberest me of mine own conception. i have perceived a most faint neglect of late, which i have rather blamed as mine own jealous curiosity than as a very pretense and purpose of unkindness. i will look further into 't. but where's my fool? i have not seen him this two days.
a calendar, a calendar! look in the almanac. find out moonshine, find out moonshine!
was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed, that you do lie so late?
since my young lady's going into france, sir, the fool hath much pined away.
(takes out a book) yes, it doth shine that night.
'faith sir, we were carousing till the second cock. and drink, sir, is a great provoker of three things.
no more of that. i have noted it well. go you and tell my daughter i would speak with her.
why then, may you leave a casement of the great chamber window where we play open, and the moon may shine in at the casement.
what three things does drink especially provoke?
go you, call hither my fool.
ay. or else one must come in with a bush of thorns and a lantern, and say he comes to disfigure, or to present, the person of moonshine. then, there is another thing: we must have a wall in the great chamber. for pyramus and thisbe, says the story, did talk through the chink of a wall.
marry, sir, nose-painting, sleep, and urine. lechery, sir, it provokes and unprovokes. it provokes the desire, but it takes away the performance. therefore, much drink may be said to be an equivocator with lechery. it makes him, and it mars him; it sets him on, and it takes him off; it persuades him, and disheartens him; makes him stand to and not stand to; in conclusion, equivocates him in a sleep, and, giving him the lie, leaves him.
o you sir, you, come you hither, sir. who am i, sir?
you can never bring in a wall. what say you, bottom?
i believe drink gave thee the lie last night.
my lady's father.
some man or other must present wall. and let him have some plaster, or some loam, or some roughcast about him to signify wall. and let him hold his fingers thus, and through that cranny shall pyramus and thisbe whisper.
that it did, sir, i' th' very throat on me; but i requited him for his lie, and, i think, being too strong for him, though he took up my legs sometime, yet i made a shift to cast him.
"my lady's father"? my lord's knave, your whoreson dog!
if that may be then all is well. come, sit down, every mother's son, and rehearse your parts., pyramus, you begin. when you have spoken your speech, enter into that brake., and so everyone according to his cue.
is thy master stirring?
i am none of these, my lord. i beseech your pardon.
so near the cradle of the fairy queen? what, a play toward? i'll be an auditor. an actor too, perhaps, if i see cause.
our knocking has awaked him. here he comes.
do you bandy looks with me, you rascal? (he strikes oswald)
speak, pyramus., thisbe, stand forth.
good morrow, noble sir.
i'll not be strucken, my lord.
(as pyramus) thisbe, the flowers of odious savors sweet, 
good morrow, both.
nor tripped neither, you base football player.
"odors," "odors."
is the king stirring, worthy thane?
(to kent) i thank thee, fellow. thou servest me, and i'll love thee.
(as pyramus) , odors savors sweet, so hath thy breath, my dearest thisbe dear. and by and by i will to thee appear. stay thou but here awhile,
not yet.
(to oswald) come, sir, arise, away! i'll teach you differences. away, away. if you will measure your lubber's length again, tarry. but away, go to. have you wisdom? so.
(aside) a stranger pyramus than e'er played here.
he did command me to call timely on him.
now, my friendly knave, i thank thee.
must i speak now?
i'll bring you to him.
(gives kent money) there's earnest of thy service.
ay, marry, must you. for you must understand he goes but to see a noise that he heard, and is to come again.
i know this is a joyful trouble to you, but yet 'tis one.
let me hire him too., here's my coxcomb. (offers kent his cap)
(as thisbe ) most radiant pyramus, most lily-white of hue, most brisky juvenal and eke most lovely jew, as true as truest horse that yet would never tire. i'll meet thee, pyramus, at ninny's tomb.
the labor we delight in physics pain. this is the door.
how now, my pretty knave? how dost thou?
"ninus' tomb," man. why, you must not speak that yet. that you answer to pyramus. you speak all your part at once, cues and all., pyramus, enter. your cue is past. it is "never tire."
for 'tis my limited service.
(to kent) sirrah, you were best take my coxcomb.
oh. (as thisbe) as true as truest horse that yet would never tire.
goes the king hence today?
why, fool?
(as pyramus) if i were fair, thisbe, i were only thine.
he does. he did appoint so.
why? for taking one's part that's out of favor. nay, an thou canst not smile as the wind sits, thou'lt catch cold shortly. there, take my coxcomb. why, this fellow has banished two on 's daughters, and did the third a blessing against his will. if thou follow him, thou must needs wear my coxcomb., how now, nuncle? would i had two coxcombs and two daughters.
oh, monstrous! oh, strange! we are haunted. pray, masters! fly, masters! help!
the night has been unruly. where we lay, our chimneys were blown down and, as they say, and prophesying with accents terrible of dire combustion and confused events new hatched to the woeful time. the obscure bird clamored the livelong night. some say the earth
why, my boy?
i'll follow you. i'll lead you about a round through bog, through bush, through brake, through brier. a hog, a headless bear, sometime a fire. and neigh, and bark, and grunt, and roar, and burn, like horse, hound, hog, bear, fire, at every turn.
'twas a rough night.
if i gave them all my living, i'd keep my coxcombs myself. there's mine. beg another of thy daughters.
why do they run away? this is a knavery of them to make me afeard.
my young remembrance cannot parallel a fellow to it.
take heed, sirrah, the whip.
o bottom, thou art changed! what do i see on thee?
o horror, horror, horror! tongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name thee!
truth's a dog that must to kennel. he must be whipped out, when lady brach may stand by th' fire and stink.
what do you see? you see an ass head of your own, do you?
what's the matter?
a pestilent gall to me!
bless thee, bottom, bless thee. thou art translated.
most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope the lord's anointed temple, and stole thence the life o' th' building!
sirrah, i'll teach thee a speech.
i see their knavery: this is to make an ass of me, to fright me if they could. but i will not stir from this place, do what they can. i will walk up and down here and i will sing, that they shall hear i am not afraid. (sings) the ouzel cock, so black of hue with orange-tawny bill, the throstle with his note so true, the wren with little quill, 
what is 't you say? "the life"?
do.
(waking) what angel wakes me from my flowery bed?
mean you his majesty?
mark it, nuncle. speak less than thou knowest, lend less than thou owest, ride more than thou goest, learn more than thou trowest, leave thy drink and thy whore and keep in-a-door, and thou shalt have more than two tens to a score.
(sings) the finch, the sparrow, and the lark, the plainsong cuckoo gray, whose note full many a man doth mark and dares not answer "nay", 
with a new gorgon. do not bid me speak. see, and then speak yourselves.
this is nothing, fool.
for indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a bird? who would give a bird the lie, though he cry "cuckoo" never so?
awake, awake! ring the alarum bell. murder and treason! shake off this downy sleep, death's counterfeit, and look on death itself! up, up, and see the great doom's image! malcolm! banquo! as from your graves rise up, and walk like sprites,
then 'tis like the breath of an unfee'd lawyer. you gave me nothing for 't., can you make no use of nothing, nuncle?
i pray thee, gentle mortal, sing again. so is mine eye enthrallèd to thy shape. and thy fair virtue's force perforce doth move me on the first view to say, to swear, i love thee.
what's the business, that such a hideous trumpet calls to parley the sleepers of the house? speak, speak!
why no, boy. nothing can be made out of nothing.
methinks, mistress, you should have little reason for that.
o gentle lady, 'tis not for you to hear what i can speak: would murder as it fell.
(to kent) prithee, tell him so much the rent of his land comes to. he will not believe a fool.
thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.
o banquo, banquo, our royal master's murdered!
a bitter fool.
not so, neither. but if i had wit enough to get out of this wood, i have enough to serve mine own turn.
woe, alas! what, in our house?
dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitter fool and a sweet fool?
out of this wood do not desire to go. thou shalt remain here whether thou wilt or no. the summer still doth tend upon my state. and i do love thee. therefore go with me. i'll give thee fairies to attend on thee. and they shall fetch thee jewels from the deep, and i will purge thy mortal grossness so that thou shalt like an airy spirit go., peaseblossom, cobweb, moth, and mustardseed!
dear duff, i prithee, contradict thyself, and say it is not so.
no, lad. teach me.
ready.
had i but died an hour before this chance, i had lived a blessèd time, for from this instant all is but toys. renown and grace is dead. the wine of life is drawn, and the mere lees is left this vault to brag of.
to give away thy land, come place him here by me. do thou for him stand. the sweet and bitter fool the one in motley here, the other found out there.
and i.
what is amiss?
dost thou call me fool, boy?
and i.
the spring, the head, the fountain of your blood is stopped; the very source of it is stopped.
all thy other titles thou hast given away that thou wast born with.
and i.
your royal father's murdered.
this is not altogether fool, my lord.
where shall we go?
oh, by whom?
no, faith, lords and great men will not let me. if i had a monopoly out, they would have part on 't. and ladies too, they will not let me have all fool to myself; they'll be snatching. give me an egg, nuncle, and i'll give thee two crowns.
be kind and courteous to this gentleman. hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes. feed him with apricoks and dewberries, with purple grapes, green figs, and mulberries. and for night tapers crop their waxen thighs and light them at the fiery glowworms' eyes to have my love to bed and to arise. and pluck the wings from painted butterflies nod to him, elves, and do him courtesies.
those of his chamber, as it seemed, had done 't. so were their daggers, which unwiped we found upon their pillows. they stared, and were distracted. no man's life was to be trusted with them.
what two crowns shall they be?
hail, mortal.
oh, yet i do repent me of my fury,
why, after i have cut the egg i' th' middle and eat up the meat, the two crowns of the egg. when thou clovest thy crown i' th' middle, and gavest away both parts, thou borest thy ass o' th' back o'er the dirt. thou hadst little wit in thy bald crown when thou gavest thy golden one away. if i speak like myself in this, let him be whipped that first finds it so. (sings) fools had ne'er less wit in a year, for wise men are grown foppish. they know not how their wits to wear, their manners are so apish.
hail.
wherefore did you so?
when were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?
hail.
who can be wise, amazed, temp'rate, and furious, loyal and neutral, in a moment? no man. th' expedition of my violent love his silver skin laced with his golden blood, and his gashed stabs looked like a breach in nature for ruin's wasteful entrance; there, the murderers, steeped in the colors of their trade, their daggers that had a heart to love, and in that heart courage to make 's love known?
i have used it, nuncle, ever since thou madest thy daughters thy mothers. for when thou gavest them the rod, and put'st down thine own breeches, (sings) then they for sudden joy did weep and i for sorrow sung, that such a king should play bo-peep and go the fools among. prithee, nuncle, keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to lie. i would fain learn to lie.
hail.
help me hence, ho!
an you lie, sirrah, we'll have you whipped.
i cry your worships' mercy, heartily., i beseech your worship's name.
look to the lady.
i marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are. they'll have me whipped for speaking true, thou'lt have me whipped for lying, and sometimes i am whipped for holding my peace. i had rather be any kind o' thing than a fool. and yet i would not be thee, nuncle. thou hast pared thy wit o' both sides and left nothing i' th' middle. here comes one o' the parings.
cobweb.
(aside to donalbain ) why do we hold our tongues,
how now, daughter? what makes that frontlet on?
cobweb. if i cut my finger, i shall make bold with you., your name, honest gentleman?
(aside to malcolm) what should be spoken here, where our fate, hid in an auger-hole, may rush and seize us? let's away. our tears are not yet brewed.
(to lear) thou wast a pretty fellow when thou hadst no need to care for her frowning. now thou art an o without a figure. i am better than thou art now. i am a fool. thou art nothing. (to goneril) yes, forsooth, i will hold my tongue. so your face bids me, though you say nothing. mum, mum, he that keeps nor crust nor crumb, weary of all, shall want some. (indicates lear) that's a shelled peascod.
peaseblossom.
(aside to donalbain) nor our strong sorrow
(to lear) not only, sir, this your all-licensed fool, but other of your insolent retinue do hourly carp and quarrel, breaking forth in rank and not-to-be-endurèd riots. sir, to have found a safe redress, but now grow fearful by what yourself too late have spoke and done that you protect this course and put it on by your allowance, which if you should, the fault which in the tender of a wholesome weal might in their working do you that offense,
i pray you, commend me to mistress squash, your mother, and to master peascod, your father. good master peaseblossom, i shall desire you of more acquaintance too., your name, i beseech you, sir?
look to the lady.
which else were shame, that then necessity will call discreet proceeding.
mustardseed.
and when we have our naked frailties hid, that suffer in exposure, let us meet and question this most bloody piece of work, to know it further. fears and scruples shake us. against the undivulged pretense i fight of treasonous malice.
the hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long, that it's had it head bit off by it young. so out went the candle and we were left darkling.
good master mustardseed, i know your patience well. that same cowardly, giantlike ox-beef hath devoured many a gentleman of your house. i promise you your kindred hath made my eyes water ere now. i desire you of more acquaintance, good master mustardseed.
and so do i.
are you our daughter?
come, wait upon him. lead him to my bower. the moon methinks looks with a watery eye. and when she weeps, weeps every little flower, tie up my love's tongue. bring him silently.
so all.
i would you would make use of that good wisdom whereof i know you are fraught, and put away these dispositions that of late transform you from what you rightly are.
i wonder if titania be awaked. then, what it was that next came in her eye, which she must dote on in extremity.
let's briefly put on manly readiness,
whoop, jug! i love thee.
here comes my messenger., how now, mad spirit?
well contented.
does any here know me? why, this is not lear. doth lear walk thus? speak thus? where are his eyes? either his notion weakens, or his discernings sure, 'tis not so. who is it that can tell me who i am?
my mistress with a monster is in love. near to her close and consecrated bower, while she was in her dull and sleeping hour, a crew of patches, rude mechanicals were met together to rehearse a play intended for great theseus' nuptial day. the shallowest thick-skin of that barren sort, who pyramus presented in their sport, when i did him at this advantage take, an ass's nole i fixèd on his head. anon his thisbe must be answerèd, and forth my mimic comes. when they him spy, or russet-pated choughs, many in sort, rising and cawing at the gun's report, sever themselves and madly sweep the sky, so at his sight away his fellows fly;
what will you do? let's not consort with them. to show an unfelt sorrow is an office which the false man does easy. i'll to england.
lear's shadow.
he "murder!" cries and help from athens calls. their sense thus weak, lost with their fears thus strong, made senseless things begin to do them wrong. for briers and thorns at their apparel snatch, i led them on in this distracted fear and left sweet pyramus translated there. when in that moment so it came to pass, titania waked and straightway loved an ass.
to ireland, i. our separated fortune there's daggers in men's smiles. the near in blood, the nearer bloody.
i would learn that. for by the marks i should be false persuaded i had daughters.
but hast thou yet latched the athenian's eyes with the love juice, as i did bid thee do?
this murderous shaft that's shot hath not yet lighted, and our safest way and let us not be dainty of leave-taking, but shift away. there's warrant in that theft which steals itself when there's no mercy left.
which they will make an obedient father.
i took him sleeping, that is finished too, and the athenian woman by his side,
threescore and ten i can remember well, within the volume of which time i have seen hours dreadful and things strange, but this sore night hath trifled former knowings.
(to goneril) your name, fair gentlewoman?
(aside to robin) stand close. this is the same athenian.
ha, good father, threatens his bloody stage. by th' clock 'tis day, and yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp. is 't night's predominance or the day's shame that darkness does the face of earth entomb
this admiration, sir, is much o' th' savor to understand my purposes aright. as you are old and reverend, should be wise. here do you keep a hundred knights and squires, men so disordered, so debauched and bold shows like a riotous inn. epicurism and lust make it more like a tavern or a brothel than a graced palace. the shame itself doth speak for instant remedy. be then desired a little to disquantity your train, and the remainder that shall still depend to be such men as may besort your age, which know themselves and you.
(aside to oberon) this is the woman, but not this the man.
'tis unnatural, even like the deed that's done. on tuesday last, a falcon, tow'ring in her pride of place, was by a mousing owl hawked at and killed.
saddle my horses. call my train together., degenerate bastard, i'll not trouble thee. yet have i left a daughter.
oh, why rebuke you him that loves you so? lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe.
and duncan's horses, a thing most strange and certain, turned wild in nature, broke their stalls, flung out, contending 'gainst obedience, as they would make war with mankind.
you strike my people, and your disordered rabble
for thou, i fear, hast given me cause to curse. if thou hast slain lysander in his sleep, being o'er shoes in blood, plunge in the deep, and kill me too.
'tis said they eat each other.
woe that too late repents!, (to albany) o sir, are you come? is it your will? speak, sir., prepare my horses.
as he to me. would he have stolen away from sleeping hermia? i'll believe as soon this whole earth may be bored, and that the moon may through the center creep and so displease it cannot be but thou hast murdered him. so should a murderer look, so dead, so grim.
they did so, to th' amazement of mine eyes
ingratitude, thou marble-hearted fiend, than the sea monster.
so should the murdered look, and so should i, pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty. as yonder venus in her glimmering sphere.
how goes the world, sir, now?
pray, sir, be patient.
what's this to my lysander? where is he? ah, good demetrius, wilt thou give him me?
why, see you not?
(to goneril) detested kite, thou liest! my train are men of choice and rarest parts and in the most exact regard support the worships of their name. o most small fault, how ugly didst thou in cordelia show, which like an engine wrenched my frame of nature and added to the gall! o lear, lear, lear! (strikes his head) beat at this gate that let thy folly in and thy dear judgment out!, go, go, my people.
i had rather give his carcass to my hounds.
is 't known who did this more than bloody deed?
of what hath moved you.
of maiden's patience. hast thou slain him then? henceforth be never numbered among men! oh, once tell true, tell true even for my sake, durst thou have looked upon him being awake, could not a worm, an adder, do so much? an adder did it, for with doubler tongue than thine, thou serpent, never adder stung.
those that macbeth hath slain.
it may be so, my lord. hear, nature, hear, dear goddess, hear! suspend thy purpose if thou didst intend into her womb convey sterility. dry up in her the organs of increase, and from her derogate body never spring a babe to honor her. if she must teem, and be a thwart disnatured torment to her. let it stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth, with cadent tears fret channels in her cheeks,
you spend your passion on a misprised mood. nor is he dead, for aught that i can tell.
alas, the day! what good could they pretend?
turn all her mother's pains and benefits that she may feel how sharper than a serpent's tooth it is to have a thankless child., away, away!
i pray thee, tell me then that he is well.
they were suborned. are stol'n away and fled, which puts upon them suspicion of the deed.
now gods that we adore, whereof comes this?
an if i could, what should i get therefore?
'gainst nature still! thriftless ambition, that will raven up the sovereignty will fall upon macbeth.
but let his disposition have that scope that dotage gives it.
a privilege never to see me more. see me no more, whether he be dead or no.
he is already named and gone to scone to be invested.
what, fifty of my followers at a clap? within a fortnight?
there is no following her in this fierce vein. here therefore for a while i will remain. so sorrow's heaviness doth heavier grow which now in some slight measure it will pay, if for his tender here i make some stay. (lies down and sleeps)
where is duncan's body?
what's the matter, sir?
(to robin) what hast thou done? thou hast mistaken quite, of thy misprision must perforce ensue some true love turned, and not a false turned true.
the sacred storehouse of his predecessors, and guardian of their bones.
i'll tell thee. (to goneril) life and death! i am ashamed that thou hast power to shake my manhood thus, that these hot tears which break from me perforce th' untented woundings of a father's curse pierce every sense about thee! old fond eyes, beweep this cause again, i'll pluck ye out
then fate o'errules that, one man holding troth, a million fail, confounding oath on oath.
will you to scone?
and cast you, with the waters that you loose, ha? let it be so. i have another daughter, who i am sure is kind and comfortable. when she shall hear this of thee, with her nails she'll flay thy wolvish visage. thou shalt find i have cast off for ever. thou shalt, i warrant thee.
and helena of athens look thou find, all fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer, with sighs of love, that costs the fresh blood dear. by some illusion see thou bring her here.
no, cousin, i'll to fife.
do you mark that, my lord?
i go, i go. look how i go, swifter than arrow from the tartar's bow.
well, i will thither.
i cannot be so partial, goneril, to the great love i bear you, 
(squeezing flower juice into demetrius 's eyes) flower of this purple dye, sink in apple of his eye. when his love he doth espy, let her shine as gloriously as the venus of the sky. beg of her for remedy.
lest our old robes sit easier than our new!
pray you, content. (to fool) you, sir, more knave than fool, after your master.
captain of our fairy band, helena is here at hand, and the youth, mistook by me, shall we their fond pageant see? lord, what fools these mortals be!
farewell, father.
nuncle lear, nuncle lear, tarry and take the fool with thee. a fox when one has caught her and such a daughter if my cap would buy a halter. so the fool follows after.
stand aside. the noise they make will cause demetrius to awake.
god's benison go with you and with those that would make good of bad and friends of foes.
this man hath had good counsel, a hundred knights! 'tis politic and safe to let him keep each buzz, each fancy, each complaint, dislike, he may enguard his dotage with their powers and hold our lives in mercy?, oswald, i say!
that must needs be sport alone. and those things do best please me that befall preposterously.
thou hast it now: king, cawdor, glamis, all, as the weird women promised, and i fear thou played'st most foully for 't. yet it was said it should not stand in thy posterity, of many kings. if there come truth from them, as upon thee, macbeth, their speeches shine, why, by the verities on thee made good, may they not be my oracles as well,
well, you may fear too far.
why should you think that i should woo in scorn?
here's our chief guest.
let me still take away the harms i fear, not fear still to be taken. i know his heart. what he hath uttered i have writ my sister. if she sustain him and his hundred knights
look, when i vow, i weep. and vows so born, in their nativity all truth appears. how can these things in me seem scorn to you, bearing the badge of faith to prove them true?
if he had been forgotten, it had been as a gap in our great feast, and all-thing unbecoming.
here, madam.
when truth kills truth, o devilish holy fray! these vows are hermia's. will you give her o'er? weigh oath with oath, and you will nothing weigh. your vows to her and me, put in two scales,
and i'll request your presence.
how now, oswald? what, have you writ that letter to my sister?
i had no judgment when to her i swore.
let your highness command upon me, to the which my duties are with a most indissoluble tie forever knit.
ay, madam.
nor none, in my mind, now you give her o'er.
ride you this afternoon?
inform her full of my particular fear, and thereto add such reasons of your own as may compact it more. get you gone and hasten your return.
demetrius loves her, and he loves not you.
ay, my good lord.
no, no, my lord, you are much more attasked for want of wisdom than praised for harmful mildness.
(waking) o helena, goddess, nymph, perfect, divine! crystal is muddy. oh, how ripe in show thy lips, those kissing cherries, tempting grow! that pure congealèd white, high taurus' snow, fanned with the eastern wind, turns to a crow this princess of pure white, this seal of bliss!
we should have else desired your good advice, which still hath been both grave and prosperous, in this day's council, but we'll take tomorrow.
how far your eyes may pierce i cannot tell. striving to better, oft we mar what's well.
o spite! o hell! i see you all are bent to set against me for your merriment. if you were civil and knew courtesy, can you not hate me, as i know you do, but you must join in souls to mock me too? if you were men, as men you are in show, you would not use a gentle lady so
as far, my lord, as will fill up the time 'twixt this and supper. go not my horse the better, i must become a borrower of the night for a dark hour or twain.
nay, then, 
when i am sure you hate me with your hearts. you both are rivals, and love hermia, and now both rivals to mock helena, a trim exploit, a manly enterprise, with your derision! none of noble sort would so offend a virgin, and extort a poor soul's patience, all to make you sport.
fail not our feast.
well, well, th' event.
you are unkind, demetrius. be not so. and here, with all good will, with all my heart, in hermia's love i yield you up my part. and yours of helena to me bequeath, whom i do love and will do till my death.
my lord, i will not.
(to kent, giving him letters) go you before to gloucester with these letters. acquaint my daughter no further with anything you know than comes from her demand out of the letter. if your diligence be not speedy, i shall be there afore you.
never did mockers waste more idle breath.
we hear our bloody cousins are bestowed in england and in ireland, not confessing their cruel parricide, filling their hearers with strange invention. but of that tomorrow, craving us jointly. hie you to horse. adieu, till your return at night. goes fleance with you?
i will not sleep, my lord, till i have delivered your letter.
lysander, keep thy hermia. i will none. if e'er i loved her, all that love is gone. my heart to her but as guest-wise sojourned, and now to helen is it home returned,
ay, my good lord. our time does call upon 's.
if a man's brains were in 's heels, were 't not in danger of kibes?
helen, it is not so.
i wish your horses swift and sure of foot, farewell.
ay, boy.
disparage not the faith thou dost not know, lest to thy peril thou aby it dear. look, where thy love comes. yonder is thy dear.
let every man be master of his time till seven at night. to make society the sweeter welcome, we will keep ourself
then, i prithee, be merry. thy wit shall ne'er go slipshod.
the ear more quick of apprehension makes. wherein it doth impair the seeing sense, it pays the hearing double recompense.
sirrah, a word with you. attend those men our pleasure?
ha, ha, ha!
thou art not by mine eye, lysander, found. but why unkindly didst thou leave me so?
they are, my lord, without the palace gate.
shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly. for though she's as like this as a crab's like an apple, yet i can tell what i can tell.
why should he stay, whom love doth press to go?
bring them before us.
why, what canst thou tell, my boy?
what love could press lysander from my side?
but to be safely thus. our fears in banquo stick deep, and in his royalty of nature reigns that which would be feared. 'tis much he dares, and to that dauntless temper of his mind to act in safety. there is none but he whose being i do fear, and under him my genius is rebuked, as it is said mark antony's was by caesar. he chid the sisters and bade them speak to him. then, prophetlike, they hailed him father to a line of kings. upon my head they placed a fruitless crown and put a barren scepter in my grip, no son of mine succeeding. if 't be so, for banquo's issue have i filed my mind; for them the gracious duncan have i murdered; put rancors in the vessel of my peace given to the common enemy of man, to make them kings, the seed of banquo kings! rather than so, come fate into the list, and champion me to th' utterance. who's there?
she will taste as like this as a crab does to a crab. thou canst tell why one's nose stands i' th' middle on 's face?
lysander's love, that would not let him bide, than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light. why seek'st thou me? could not this make thee know the hate i bear thee made me leave thee so?
now go to the door and stay there till we call.
no.
you speak not as you think. it cannot be.
was it not yesterday we spoke together?
why, to keep one's eyes of either side 's nose, that what a man cannot smell out, he may spy into.
now i perceive they have conjoined all three to fashion this false sport, in spite of me., injurious hermia! most ungrateful maid! have you conspired, have you with these contrived is all the counsel that we two have shared, the sisters' vows, the hours that we have spent when we have chid the hasty-footed time for parting us, oh, is it all forgot? we, hermia, like two artificial gods, have with our needles created both one flower, both on one sampler, sitting on one cushion, both warbling of one song, both in one key, had been incorporate. so we grew together, like to a double cherry, seeming parted but yet an union in partition, two lovely berries molded on one stem;
it was, so please your highness.
i did her wrong, 
two of the first, like coats in heraldry, due but to one and crownèd with one crest. and will you rent our ancient love asunder to join with men in scorning your poor friend? our sex, as well as i, may chide you for it, though i alone do feel the injury.
well then, now have you considered of my speeches? know that it was he, in the times past, which held you our innocent self. this i made good to you in our last conference, passed in probation with you, how you were borne in hand, how crossed, the instruments, who wrought with them, and all things else that might say, "thus did banquo."
canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?
i am amazèd at your passionate words. i scorn you not. it seems that you scorn me.
you made it known to us.
no.
to follow me and praise my eyes and face? and made your other love, demetrius, who even but now did spurn me with his foot, to call me goddess, nymph, divine, and rare, to her he hates? and wherefore doth lysander deny your love, so rich within his soul, and tender me, forsooth, affection, but by your setting on, by your consent? so hung upon with love, so fortunate, but miserable most, to love unloved? this you should pity rather than despise.
i did so, and went further, which is now our point of second meeting. do you find your patience so predominant in your nature to pray for this good man and for his issue, whose heavy hand hath bowed you to the grave and beggared yours forever?
nor i neither. but i can tell why a snail has a house.
i understand not what you mean by this.
we are men, my liege.
why?
make mouths upon me when i turn my back, wink each at other, hold the sweet jest up, this sport, well carried, shall be chronicled.
ay, in the catalogue ye go for men, shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves are clept all by the name of dogs. the valued file distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle, the housekeeper, the hunter, every one hath in him closed, whereby he does receive particular addition, from the bill that writes them all alike. and so of men. now, if you have a station in the file, and i will put that business in your bosoms, whose execution takes your enemy off, grapples you to the heart and love of us, who wear our health but sickly in his life,
why, to put 's head in, not to give it away to his daughters and leave his horns without a case.
if you have any pity, grace, or manners, but fare ye well. 'tis partly my own fault, which death or absence soon shall remedy.
i am one, my liege, whom the vile blows and buffets of the world have so incensed that i am reckless what i do to spite the world.
i will forget my nature. so kind a father!, be my horses ready?
stay, gentle helena. hear my excuse. my love, my life, my soul, fair helena!
and i another that i would set my life on any chance, to mend it or be rid on 't.
thy asses are gone about 'em. the reason why the seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason.
oh, excellent!
both of you know banquo was your enemy.
because they are not eight?
(to lysander) sweet, do not scorn her so.
true, my lord.
yes indeed. thou wouldst make a good fool.
if she cannot entreat, i can compel.
so is he mine; and in such bloody distance against my near'st of life. and though i could with barefaced power sweep him from my sight and bid my will avouch it, yet i must not, for certain friends that are both his and mine, who i myself struck down. and thence it is, that i to your assistance do make love, masking the business from the common eye for sundry weighty reasons.
to take 't again perforce, monster ingratitude!
thou canst compel no more than she entreat. thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers., i swear by that which i will lose for thee to prove him false that says i love thee not.
perform what you command us.
if thou wert my fool, nuncle, i'd have thee beaten for being old before thy time.
i say i love thee more than he can do.
though our lives, 
how's that?
if thou say so, withdraw and prove it too.
your spirits shine through you. within this hour at most i will advise you where to plant yourselves, acquaint you with the perfect spy o' th' time, and something from the palace; always thought that i require a clearness. and with him, to leave no rubs nor botches in the work, fleance, his son, that keeps him company, than is his father's, must embrace the fate of that dark hour. resolve yourselves apart. i'll come to you anon.
thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise.
quick, come.
we are resolved, my lord.
o, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven! keep me in temper. i would not be mad.
lysander, whereto tends all this?
i'll call upon you straight. abide within.
how now? are the horses ready?
(to hermia) away, you ethiope!
it is concluded. banquo, thy soul's flight, if it find heaven, must find it out tonight.
ready, my lord.
(to hermia) no, no. he'll seem to break loose.
is banquo gone from court?
come, boy.
(to lysander) take on as you would follow,
ay, madam, but returns again tonight.
shall not be a maid long unless things be cut shorter.
(to hermia) hang off, thou cat, thou burr! vile thing, let loose or i will shake thee from me like a serpent.
say to the king i would attend his leisure for a few words.
save thee, curan.
why are you grown so rude? what change is this, sweet love?
madam, i will.
and you, sir. i have been with your father and given him notice that the duke of cornwall and regan his duchess will be here with him this night.
thy love? out, tawny tartar, out!
naught's had, all's spent, where our desire is got without content. 'tis safer to be that which we destroy than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.
how comes that?
do you not jest?
of sorriest fancies your companions making, using those thoughts which should indeed have died with them they think on? things without all remedy should be without regard. what's done is done.
nay, i know not. you have heard of the news abroad?, i mean the whispered ones, for they are yet but ear-kissing arguments.
yes, sooth, and so do you.
she'll close and be herself whilst our poor malice remains in danger of her former tooth. but let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, ere we will eat our meal in fear, and sleep that shake us nightly. better be with the dead, whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, than on the torture of the mind to lie in restless ecstasy. duncan is in his grave. treason has done his worst; nor steel nor poison, malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing can touch him further.
not i. pray you, what are they?
demetrius, i will keep my word with thee.
come on, gentle my lord, among your guests tonight.
dukes of cornwall and albany?
i would i had your bond, for i perceive a weak bond holds you. i'll not trust your word.
so shall i, love, and so, i pray, be you. let your remembrance apply to banquo; present him eminence, both with eye and tongue: unsafe the while that we and make our faces vizards to our hearts, disguising what they are.
not a word.
although i hate her, i'll not harm her so.
you must leave this.
you may do then in time. fare you well, sir.
(to lysander) what, can you do me greater harm than hate? hate me? wherefore? o me! what news, my love? i am as fair now as i was erewhile. since night you loved me. yet since night you left me. why then, you left me, oh, the gods forbid!, in earnest, shall i say?
oh, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife! thou know'st that banquo, and his fleance, lives.
the duke be here tonight? the better, best! my father hath set guard to take my brother. and i have one thing, of a queasy question, which i must act. briefness and fortune, work!, brother, a word. descend, brother, i say.
ay, by my life, therefore be out of hope, of question, of doubt.
but in them nature's copy's not eterne.
intelligence is given where you are hid. you have now the good advantage of the night. have you not spoken 'gainst the duke of cornwall aught? he's coming hither, now, i' th' night, i' th' haste, upon his party 'gainst the duke of albany? advise yourself.
be certain, nothing truer. 'tis no jest that i do hate thee and love helena.
there's comfort yet; they are assailable. then be thou jocund. ere the bat hath flown his cloistered flight, ere to black hecate's summons the shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums a deed of dreadful note.
i am sure on 't, not a word.
o me! you thief of love! what, have you come by night and stol'n my love's heart from him?
what's to be done?
i hear my father coming. pardon me. in cunning i must draw my sword upon you. (loudly) yield! come before my father. light, ho! here! (aside to edgar) fly, brother, fly. (loudly) torches, torches! (aside to edgar) so, farewell.
fine, i' faith! have you no modesty, no maiden shame, no touch of bashfulness? what, will you tear fie, fie! you counterfeit, you puppet, you!
be innocent of the knowledge, dearest chuck, till thou applaud the deed. come, seeling night, scarf up the tender eye of pitiful day cancel and tear to pieces that great bond which keeps me pale. light thickens, and the crow makes wing to th' rooky wood. good things of day begin to droop and drowse; thou marvel'st at my words: but hold thee still. things bad begun make strong themselves by ill. so, prithee, go with me.
of my more fierce endeavor. (cuts his own arm) i have seen drunkards do more than this in sport., father, father!, stop, stop!, no help?
"puppet"? why so?, ay, that way goes the game. now i perceive that she hath made compare between our statures. she hath urged her height, her height, forsooth, she hath prevailed with him., and are you grown so high in his esteem because i am so dwarfish and so low? how low am i, thou painted maypole? speak. but that my nails can reach unto thine eyes.
but who did bid thee join with us?
now edmund, where's the villain?
(to lysander and demetrius) i pray you, though you mock me, gentlemen, let her not hurt me. i was never cursed. i am a right maid for my cowardice. let her not strike me. you perhaps may think, because she is something lower than myself, that i can match her.
macbeth.
here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out, mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon to stand 's auspicious mistress, 
"lower"? hark, again!
he needs not our mistrust, since he delivers our offices and what we have to do
but where is he?
i evermore did love you, hermia, did ever keep your counsels, never wronged you, save that, in love unto demetrius, i told him of your stealth unto this wood. but he hath chid me hence and threatened me to strike me, spurn me, nay, to kill me too. and now, so you will let me quiet go, to athens will i bear my folly back you see how simple and how fond i am.
then stand with us. the west yet glimmers with some streaks of day. now spurs the lated traveler apace to gain the timely inn, and near approaches
look, sir, i bleed.
why, get you gone! who is 't that hinders you?
hark, i hear horses.
where is the villain, edmund?
a foolish heart, that i leave here behind.
(within) give us a light there, ho!
fled this way, sir, when by no means he could, 
what, with lysander?
then 'tis he: the rest that are within the note of expectation already are i' th' court.
pursue him, ho! go after.
with demetrius.
his horses go about.
"by no means" what?
be not afraid. she shall not harm thee, helena.
almost a mile; but he does usually, make it their walk.
persuade me to the murder of your lordship, but that i told him the revenging gods spoke with how manifold and strong a bond the child was bound to th' father. sir, in fine, seeing how loathly opposite i stood to his unnatural purpose, in fell motion, my unprovided body, latched mine arm. and when he saw my best alarumed spirits, bold in the quarrel's right, roused to the encounter, or whether ghasted by the noise i made,
(to lysander) no, sir, she shall not, though you take her part.
a light, a light!
let him fly far. not in this land shall he remain uncaught. and found, dispatch. the noble duke my master, my worthy arch and patron, comes tonight.
oh, when she's angry, she is keen and shrewd! she was a vixen when she went to school.
'tis he.
by his authority i will proclaim it bringing the murderous coward to the stake. he that conceals him, death.
"little" again? nothing but "low" and "little"!, why will you suffer her to flout me thus? let me come to her.
stand to 't.
when i dissuaded him from his intent, and found him pight to do it, with cursed speech "thou unpossessing bastard! dost thou think if i would stand against thee, would the reposal of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee make thy words faithed? no. what i should deny, my very character, i'd turn it all to thy suggestion, plot, and damnèd practice. and thou must make a dullard of the world, if they not thought the profits of my death to make thee seek it."
(to hermia) get you gone, you dwarf, you bead, you acorn!
it will be rain tonight.
o strange and fastened villain! would he deny his letter, said he? i never got him., hark, the duke's trumpets. i know not why he comes. all ports i'll bar. the villain shall not 'scape. i will send far and near, that all the kingdom may have the due note of him., and of my land, loyal and natural boy, i'll work the means to make thee capable.
you are too officious in her behalf that scorns your services. let her alone. speak not of helena. take not her part. for if thou dost intend thou shalt aby it.
let it come down.
which i can call but now, i have heard strange news.
now she holds me not. now follow, if thou darest, to try whose right, of thine or mine, is most in helena.
o treachery! fly, good fleance, fly, fly, fly!
if it be true, all vengeance comes too short which can pursue th' offender. how dost, my lord?
"follow"? nay, i'll go with thee, cheek by jowl.
who did strike out the light?
o madam, my old heart is cracked, it's cracked.
nay, go not back.
was 't not the way?
he whom my father named, your edgar?
i will not trust you, i, nor longer stay in your curst company. your hands than mine are quicker for a fray. my legs are longer though, to run away.
there's but one down. the son is fled.
o, lady, lady, shame would have it hid.
i am amazed and know not what to say.
we have lost best half of our affair.
was he not companion with the riotous knights that tend upon my father?
(to robin) this is thy negligence. still thou mistakest, or else committ'st thy knaveries willfully.
well, let's away and say how much is done.
i know not, madam. 'tis too bad, too bad.
believe me, king of shadows, i mistook. did not you tell me i should know the man and so far blameless proves my enterprise, that i have 'nointed an athenian's eyes. and so far am i glad it so did sort, as this their jangling i esteem a sport.
you know your own degrees; sit down. at first and last, the hearty welcome.
yes, madam, he was of that consort.
hie therefore, robin, overcast the night. the starry welkin cover thou anon with drooping fog as black as acheron, and lead these testy rivals so astray like to lysander sometime frame thy tongue, then stir demetrius up with bitter wrong. and sometime rail thou like demetrius. and from each other look thou lead them thus, with leaden legs and batty wings doth creep. (gives robin another flower) then crush this herb into lysander's eye, whose liquor hath this virtuous property and make his eyeballs roll with wonted sight. when they next wake, all this derision shall seem a dream and fruitless vision. and back to athens shall the lovers wend, whiles i in this affair do thee employ, i'll to my queen and beg her indian boy. and then i will her charmèd eye release from monster's view, and all things shall be peace.
thanks to your majesty.
no marvel then, though he were ill affected. 'tis they have put him on the old man's death, to have th' expense and spoil of his revenues. been well informed of them, and with such cautions that if they come to sojourn at my house i'll not be there.
for night's swift dragons cut the clouds full fast, and yonder shines aurora's harbinger, at whose approach, ghosts, wandering here and there, troop home to churchyards. damnèd spirits all, already to their wormy beds are gone. for fear lest day should look their shames upon, they willfully themselves exile from light and must for aye consort with black-browed night.
ourself will mingle with society and play the humble host. we will require her welcome.
nor i, assure thee, regan., edmund, i hear that you have shown your father
i with the morning's love have oft made sport, and like a forester the groves may tread even till the eastern gate, all fiery red, opening on neptune with fair blessèd beams, but notwithstanding, haste. make no delay. we may effect this business yet ere day.
pronounce it for me, sir, to all our friends, for my heart speaks they are welcome.
it was my duty, sir.
up and down, up and down, i will lead them up and down. i am feared in field and town. goblin, lead them up and down. here comes one.
see, they encounter thee with their hearts' thanks. be large in mirth. anon we'll drink a measure the table round.
he did bewray his practice, and received this hurt you see striving to apprehend him.
where art thou, proud demetrius? speak thou now.
(aside to first murderer) there's blood upon thy face.
is he pursued?
here, villain. drawn and ready. where art thou?
'tis banquo's then.
ay, my good lord.
i will be with thee straight.
is he dispatched?
if he be taken, he shall never more how in my strength you please., for you, edmund, whose virtue and obedience doth this instant so much commend itself, you shall be ours. natures of such deep trust we shall much need.
(as demetrius) follow me then to plainer ground.
my lord, his throat is cut. that i did for him.
i shall serve you, sir, truly, however else.
lysander, speak again! speak! in some bush? where dost thou hide thy head?
thou art the best o' th' cutthroats: yet he's good that did the like for fleance.
(to cornwall) for him i thank your grace.
(as lysander) thou coward, art thou bragging to the stars, telling the bushes that thou look'st for wars, and wilt not come? come, recreant. come, thou child! that draws a sword on thee.
most royal sir, fleance is 'scaped.
you know not why we came to visit you, 
yea, art thou there?
then comes my fit again. i had else been perfect, whole as the marble, founded as the rock, as broad and general as the casing air. to saucy doubts and fears., but banquo's safe?
thus out of season, threading dark-eyed night. wherein we must have use of your advice: our father he hath writ, so hath our sister, of differences, which i least thought it fit to answer from our home. the several messengers lay comforts to your bosom, and bestow your needful counsel to our business, which craves the instant use.
(as lysander) follow my voice. we'll try no manhood here.
ay, my good lord. safe in a ditch he bides, with twenty trenchèd gashes on his head, the least a death to nature.
i serve you, madam.
he goes before me and still dares me on. the villain is much lighter-heeled than i. i followed fast, but faster he did fly, that fallen am i in dark uneven way,
thanks for that. hath nature that in time will venom breed; no teeth for th' present. get thee gone. tomorrow we'll hear ourselves again.
good dawning to thee, friend. art of this house?
and here will rest me. come, thou gentle day! for if but once thou show me thy grey light, i'll find demetrius and revenge this spite. (sleeps)
my royal lord, you do not give the cheer. the feast is sold 'tis given with welcome. to feed were best at home; from thence, the sauce to meat is ceremony; meeting were bare without it.
ay.
(as lysander to demetrius)
sweet remembrancer! now, good digestion wait on appetite,
where may we set our horses?
abide me, if thou darest! for well i wot thou runn'st before me, shifting every place, and darest not stand nor look me in the face. where art thou now?
may 't please your highness sit.
i' th' mire.
(as lysander) come hither. i am here.
here had we now our country's honor roofed, were the graced person of our banquo present, who may i rather challenge for unkindness
prithee, if thou lovest me, tell me.
nay, then, thou mock'st me. thou shalt buy this dear if ever i thy face by daylight see. now go thy way. faintness constraineth me to measure out my length on this cold bed. (lies down and sleeps)
his absence, sir, lays blame upon his promise. please 't your highness to grace us with your royal company?
i love thee not.
o weary night, o long and tedious night, abate thy hours. shine comforts from the east, that i may back to athens by daylight and sleep, that sometimes shuts up sorrow's eye, steal me awhile from mine own company. (lies down and sleeps)
the table's full.
why, then, i care not for thee.
yet but three? come one more. two of both kinds make up four. here she comes, cursed and sad. cupid is a knavish lad thus to make poor females mad.
here is a place reserved, sir.
if i had thee in lipsbury pinfold, i would make thee care for me.
never so weary, never so in woe, i can no further crawl, no further go. my legs can keep no pace with my desires. here will i rest me till the break of day. heavens shield lysander if they mean a fray!
where?
why dost thou use me thus? i know thee not.
on the ground sleep sound. i'll apply to your eye. gentle lover, remedy. (squeezes flower juice into lysander 's eyes) when thou wakest, thou takest true delight in the sight of thy former lady's eye. and the country proverb known, that every man should take his own, in your waking shall be shown. jack shall have jill. nought shall go ill. the man shall have his mare again, and all shall be well.
here, my good lord. what is 't that moves your highness?
fellow, i know thee.
(to bottom) come, sit thee down upon this flowery bed while i thy amiable cheeks do coy, and stick musk roses in thy sleek, smooth head, and kiss thy fair large ears, my gentle joy.
which of you have done this?
what dost thou know me for?
where's peaseblossom?
what, my good lord?
a knave, a rascal, an eater of broken meats; a base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy, worsted-stocking knave; a lily-livered, action-taking knave; a whoreson, glass-gazing, super-serviceable finical rogue; one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a bawd in way of good service; and art nothing but the composition of a knave, beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch; one whom i will beat into clamorous whining if thou deniest the least syllable of thy addition.
ready.
(to ghost) thou canst not say i did it. never shake thy gory locks at me.
why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail on one that is neither known of thee nor knows thee!
scratch my head, peaseblossom. where's monsieur cobweb?
gentlemen, rise. his highness is not well.
what a brazen-faced varlet art thou to deny thou knowest me! is it two days ago since i tripped up thy heels and beat thee before the king? draw, you rogue, for though it be night yet the moon shines. i'll make a sop o' th' moonshine of you. (draws his sword) draw, you whoreson cullionly barber-monger, draw!
ready.
sit, worthy friends. my lord is often thus and hath been from his youth. pray you, keep seat. the fit is momentary; upon a thought he will again be well. if much you note him, feed and regard him not. (aside to macbeth) are you a man?
away! i have nothing to do with thee.
monsieur cobweb, good monsieur, get you your weapons in your hand and kill me a red-hipped humble-bee on the top of a thistle. and, good monsieur, bring me the honey bag. do not fret yourself too much in the action, monsieur. and good monsieur, have a care the honey bag break not. i would be loath to have you overflown with a honey bag, signor.
ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that which might appall the devil.
draw, you rascal. you come with letters against the king and take vanity the puppet's part against the royalty of her father. draw, you rogue, or i'll so carbonado your shanks. draw, you rascal! come your ways.
where's monsieur mustardseed?
o proper stuff! this is the very painting of your fear. led you to duncan. oh, these flaws and starts, impostors to true fear, would well become a woman's story at a winter's fire, authorized by her grandam. shame itself! you look but on a stool.
help, ho! murder! help!
ready.
prithee, see there! behold! look! lo! how say you? why, what care i? if thou canst nod, speak too. if charnel houses and our graves must send shall be the maws of kites.
strike, you slave. stand, rogue. stand, you neat slave, strike! (strikes oswald)
give me your neaf, monsieur mustardseed. pray you, leave your courtesy, good monsieur.
what, quite unmanned in folly?
help, ho! murder, murder!
what's your will?
if i stand here, i saw him.
how now? what's the matter? part.
nothing, good monsieur, but to help cavalery cobweb to scratch. i must to the barber's, monsieur, for methinks i am marvelous hairy about the face. and i am such a tender ass, if my hair do but tickle me, i must scratch.
fie, for shame!
i'll flesh ye. come on, young master.
what, wilt thou hear some music, my sweet love?
blood hath been shed ere now, i' th' olden time, ere humane statute purged the gentle weal; too terrible for the ear. the time has been that, when the brains were out, the man would die, and there an end. but now they rise again with twenty mortal murders on their crowns than such a murder is.
weapons, arms? what's the matter here?
i have a reasonable good ear in music. let's have the tongs and the bones.
my worthy lord, your noble friends do lack you.
keep peace, upon your lives. he dies that strikes again. what is the matter?
or say, sweet love, what thou desirest to eat.
i do forget. do not muse at me, my most worthy friends. to those that know me. come, love and health to all. then i'll sit down. give me some wine. fill full.
the messengers from our sister and the king.
truly, a peck of provender. i could munch your good dry oats. methinks i have a great desire to a bottle of hay. good hay, sweet hay, hath no fellow.
i drink to the general joy o' th' whole table, and to our dear friend banquo, whom we miss; and all to all.
what is your difference? speak.
the squirrel's hoard and fetch thee new nuts.
our duties, and the pledge.
i am scarce in breath, my lord.
i had rather have a handful or two of dried peas. but, i pray you, let none of your people stir me. i have an exposition of sleep come upon me.
(seeing the ghost) avaunt, and quit my sight! let the earth hide thee. thy bones are marrowless, thy blood is cold. thou hast no speculation in those eyes
no marvel, you have so bestirred your valor. you cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee. a tailor made thee.
sleep thou, and i will wind thee in my arms. fairies, be gone, and be all ways away.
think of this, good peers, but as a thing of custom. 'tis no other; only it spoils the pleasure of the time.
thou art a strange fellow. a tailor make a man?
gently entwist. the female ivy so enrings the barky fingers of the elm. oh, how i love thee! how i dote on thee!
what man dare, i dare. approach thou like the rugged russian bear, take any shape but that, and my firm nerves shall never tremble. or be alive again, and dare me to the desert with thy sword. if trembling i inhabit then, protest me unreal mockery, hence!
ay, a tailor, sir. a stone-cutter or painter could not have made him so ill though they had been but two years o' th' trade.
welcome, good robin. seest thou this sweet sight? for, meeting her of late behind the wood, seeking sweet favors from this hateful fool, i did upbraid her and fall out with her. for she his hairy temples then had rounded and that same dew, which sometime on the buds was wont to swell like round and orient pearls, stood now within the pretty flowerets' eyes like tears that did their own disgrace bewail. and she in mild terms begged my patience, i then did ask of her her changeling child, which straight she gave me and her fairy sent to bear him to my bower in fairyland. this hateful imperfection of her eyes. and, gentle puck, take this transformèd scalp from off the head of this athenian swain, that, he awaking when the other do, and think no more of this night's accidents but as the fierce vexation of a dream. but first i will release the fairy queen.
why so, being gone,
speak yet. how grew your quarrel?
be as thou wast wont to be. dian's bud o'er cupid's flower hath such force and blessèd power. now, my titania, wake you, my sweet queen.
why so, being gone, i am a man again. pray you sit still.
this ancient ruffian, sir, whose life i have spared at suit of his gray beard, 
(waking) my oberon, what visions have i seen!
you have displaced the mirth, broke the good meeting, with most admired disorder.
thou whoreson zed, thou unnecessary letter!, my lord, if you will give me leave, i will tread this unbolted villain into mortar and daub the wall of a jakes with him., spare my gray beard, you wagtail?
there lies your love.
can such things be, without our special wonder? you make me strange even to the disposition that i owe, when now i think you can behold such sights, and keep the natural ruby of your cheeks,
peace, sirrah! you beastly knave, know you no reverence?
how came these things to pass? oh, how mine eyes do loathe his visage now!
what sights, my lord?
yes, sir, but anger hath a privilege.
silence awhile., robin, take off this head., titania, music call, and strike more dead
i pray you, speak not. he grows worse and worse. question enrages him. at once, good night. stand not upon the order of your going, but go at once.
why art thou angry?
music, ho! music such as charmeth sleep!
attend his majesty!
who wears no honesty. such smiling rogues as these, like rats, oft bite the holy cords atwain which are too intrinse t' unloose, smooth every passion that in the natures of their lords rebel, renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks with every gale and vary of their masters, knowing naught, like dogs, but following., a plague upon your epileptic visage! goose, an i had you upon sarum plain, i'd drive ye cackling home to camelot.
(taking the ass's head off bottom) now when thou wakest, with thine own fool's eyes peep.
a kind good night to all!
why, art thou mad, old fellow?
sound, music!, come, my queen, take hands with me, (dances with titania) now thou and i are new in amity, and will tomorrow midnight solemnly dance in duke theseus' house triumphantly, there shall the pairs of faithful lovers be wedded, with theseus, all in jollity.
it will have blood, they say. blood will have blood. stones have been known to move, and trees to speak. by magot pies and choughs and rooks brought forth the secret'st man of blood., what is the night?
(to kent) how fell you out?
fairy king, attend, and mark. i do hear the morning lark.
almost at odds with morning, which is which.
no contraries hold more antipathy than i and such a knave.
trip we after the night's shade. we the globe can compass soon swifter than the wandering moon.
how say'st thou that macduff denies his person
why dost thou call him "knave"? what's his offense?
come, my lord, and in our flight that i sleeping here was found with these mortals on the ground.
did you send to him, sir?
his countenance likes me not.
go, one of you, find out the forester. for now our observation is performed. my love shall hear the music of my hounds. uncouple in the western valley. let them go. dispatch, i say, and find the forester.
i hear it by the way; but i will send. there's not a one of them but in his house i keep a servant fee'd. i will tomorrow, and betimes i will, to the weird sisters. by the worst means, the worst. for mine own good, all causes shall give way. i am in blood stepped in so far that, should i wade no more, returning were as tedious as go o'er. which must be acted ere they may be scanned.
no more perchance does mine, nor his, nor hers.
we will, fair queen, up to the mountain's top, of hounds and echo in conjunction.
you lack the season of all natures, sleep.
sir, 'tis my occupation to be plain. i have seen better faces in my time than stands on any shoulder that i see before me at this instant.
i was with hercules and cadmus once, when in a wood of crete they bayed the bear with hounds of sparta. never did i hear
come, we'll to sleep. my strange and self-abuse is the initiate fear that wants hard use.
this is some fellow, a saucy roughness and constrains the garb quite from his nature. he cannot flatter, he. an honest mind and plain, he must speak truth. an they will take it, so. if not, he's plain. harbor more craft and more corrupter ends than twenty silly-ducking observants that stretch their duties nicely.
the skies, the fountains, every region near seemed all one mutual cry. i never heard so musical a discord, such sweet thunder.
why, how now, hecate! you look angerly.
sir, in good faith, or in sincere verity, whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire on flickering phoebus' front, 
my hounds are bred out of the spartan kind, with ears that sweep away the morning dew, crook-kneed, and dew-lapped like thessalian bulls, slow in pursuit, but matched in mouth like bells, each under each. a cry more tunable in crete, in sparta, nor in thessaly. judge when you hear. (sees the four sleeping lovers) but, soft! what nymphs are these?
have i not reason, beldams as you are? saucy and overbold, how did you dare to trade and traffic with macbeth and i, the mistress of your charms, the close contriver of all harms, was never called to bear my part, or show the glory of our art? hath been but for a wayward son, spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do, loves for his own ends, not for you. but make amends now. get you gone, meet me i' th' morning. thither he will come to know his destiny. your vessels and your spells provide, your charms and everything beside. unto a dismal and a fatal end. great business must be wrought ere noon. upon the corner of the moon there hangs a vap'rous drop profound. and that distilled by magic sleights shall raise such artificial sprites as by the strength of their illusion shall draw him on to his confusion.
what mean'st by this?
my lord, this is my daughter here asleep. this helena, old nedar's helena. i wonder of their being here together.
his hopes 'bove wisdom, grace, and fear. and you all know, security is mortals' chiefest enemy.
to go out of my dialect, which you discommend so much. i know, sir, i am no flatterer. he that beguiled you in a plain accent was a plain knave, which for my part i will not be, though i should win your displeasure to entreat me to 't.
no doubt they rose up early to observe the rite of may, and hearing our intent but speak, egeus. is not this the day that hermia should give answer of her choice?
hark! i am called. my little spirit, see,
(to oswald) what was th' offense you gave him?
it is, my lord.
come, let's make haste; she'll soon be back again.
i never gave him any. it pleased the king his master very late to strike at me upon his misconstruction tripped me behind; being down, insulted, railed, and put upon him such a deal of man that worthied him, got praises of the king for him attempting who was self-subdued. drew on me here again.
go, bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns.
my former speeches have but hit your thoughts, which can interpret farther. only i say things have been strangely borne. the gracious duncan was pitied of macbeth. marry, he was dead. whom, you may say, if 't please you, fleance killed, for fleance fled. men must not walk too late. who cannot want the thought how monstrous it was for malcolm and for donalbain how it did grieve macbeth! did he not straight in pious rage the two delinquents tear that were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep? was not that nobly done? ay, and wisely too, to hear the men deny 't. so that, i say, he has borne all things well. and i do think that had he duncan's sons under his key, as, an't please heaven, he shall not, they should find but, peace! for from broad words, and 'cause he failed his presence at the tyrant's feast, i hear macduff lives in disgrace. sir, can you tell where he bestows himself?
none of these rogues and cowards but ajax is their fool.
good morrow, friends. saint valentine is past.
the son of duncan, lives in the english court and is received of the most pious edward with such grace that the malevolence of fortune nothing takes from his high respect. thither macduff to wake northumberland and warlike siward, that by the help of these, with him above to ratify the work, we may again give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, do faithful homage and receive free honors. all which we pine for now. and this report hath so exasperated the king that he prepares for some attempt of war.
fetch forth the stocks, ho!, you stubborn ancient knave, you reverend braggart, we'll teach you.
begin these woodbirds but to couple now?
sent he to macduff?
sir, i am too old to learn. on whose employment i was sent to you. you shall do small respect, show too bold malice against the grace and person of my master, stocking his messenger.
pardon, my lord.
he did, and with an absolute "sir, not i," the cloudy messenger turns me his back, and hums, as who should say "you'll rue the time that clogs me with this answer."
fetch forth the stocks!
i pray you all, stand up.
and that well might his wisdom can provide. some holy angel fly to the court of england and unfold his message ere he come, that a swift blessing may soon return to this our suffering country
till noon? till night, my lord, and all night too.
(to lysander and demetrius) i know you two are rival enemies. that hatred is so far from jealousy to sleep by hate and fear no enmity?
i'll send my prayers with him.
why, madam, if i were your father's dog, you should not use me so.
my lord, i shall reply amazèdly, half sleep, half waking. but as yet, i swear, but as i think, for truly would i speak, and now do i bethink me, so it is, i came with hermia hither. our intent was to be gone from athens, where we might,
thrice the brinded cat hath mewed.
sir, being his knave, i will.
(to theseus) enough, enough, my lord. you have enough! i beg the law, the law, upon his head., they would have stol'n away, they would, demetrius, thereby to have defeated you and me, of my consent that she should be your wife.
thrice, and once the hedge-pig whined.
this is a fellow of the selfsame color
(to theseus) my lord, fair helen told me of their stealth, of this their purpose hither to this wood. and i in fury hither followed them,
harpier cries, "'tis time, 'tis time."
let me beseech your grace not to do so. his fault is much, and the good king his master will check him for 't. your purposed low correction is such as basest and contemned'st wretches are punished with.
but, my good lord, i wot not by what power, but by some power it is, my love to hermia, melted as the snow, seems to me now as the remembrance of an idle gaud and all the faith, the virtue of my heart, the object and the pleasure of mine eye, is only helena. to her, my lord, was i betrothed ere i saw hermia. but as in health, come to my natural taste, now i do wish it, love it, long for it, and will for evermore be true to it.
round about the cauldron go, toad, that under cold stone days and nights has thirty-one sweltered venom sleeping got, boil thou first i' th' charmèd pot.
the king his master needs must take it ill, that he, so slightly valued in his messenger, should have him thus restrained.
fair lovers, you are fortunately met. egeus, i will overbear your will. for in the temple by and by with us these couples shall eternally be knit., and, for the morning now is something worn, away with us to athens. three and three, we'll hold a feast in great solemnity. come, hippolyta.
fire burn, and cauldron bubble.
i'll answer that.
these things seem small and undistinguishable,
fillet of a fenny snake, in the cauldron boil and bake. eye of newt and toe of frog, adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, lizard's leg and owlet's wing, for a charm of powerful trouble, like a hell-broth boil and bubble.
to have her gentleman abused, assaulted for following her affairs., put in his legs.
when everything seems double. methinks i see these things with parted eye,
fire burn and cauldron bubble.
(to gloucester) come, my good lord, away.
so methinks.
scale of dragon, tooth of wolf, witches' mummy, maw and gulf of the ravined salt-sea shark, liver of blaspheming jew, gall of goat and slips of yew slivered in the moon's eclipse, nose of turk and tartar's lips, ditch-delivered by a drab, make the gruel thick and slab. add thereto a tiger's chaudron, for the ingredients of our cauldron.
i am sorry for thee, friend. 'tis the duke's pleasure, will not be rubbed nor stopped. i'll entreat for thee.
and i have found demetrius like a jewel, mine own, and not mine own.
fire burn and cauldron bubble.
pray you do not, sir. i have watched and traveled hard. some time i shall sleep out. the rest i'll whistle. a good man's fortune may grow out at heels.
are you sure that we are awake? it seems to me the duke was here, and bid us follow him?
cool it with a baboon's blood, then the charm is firm and good.
the duke's to blame in this. 'twill be ill taken.
yea, and my father.
oh well done! i commend your pains, and now about the cauldron sing, like elves and fairies in a ring, enchanting all that you put in.
good king, that must approve the common saw, thou out of heaven's benediction comest to the warm sun. approach, thou beacon to this underglobe, that by thy comfortable beams i may peruse this letter. nothing almost sees miracles but misery. i know 'tis from cordelia, of my obscurèd course and (reads the letter) "shall find time from this enormous state, seeking to give losses their remedies." all weary and o'erwatched, take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold fortune, good night. smile once more. turn thy wheel. (sleeps)
and hippolyta.
by the pricking of my thumbs, open, locks, whoever knocks.
i heard myself proclaimed, and by the happy hollow of a tree escaped the hunt. no port is free, no place that guard and most unusual vigilance i will preserve myself, and am bethought to take the basest and most poorest shape that ever penury in contempt of man brought near to beast. my face i'll grime with filth, and with presented nakedness outface the winds and persecutions of the sky. the country gives me proof and precedent of bedlam beggars, who with roaring voices pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary, and with this horrible object from low farms, poor pelting villages, sheepcotes, and mills, sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers, that's something yet. edgar i nothing am.
and he did bid us follow to the temple.
how now, you secret, black, and midnight hags? what is 't you do?
'tis strange that they should so depart from home, and not send back my messenger.
why then, we are awake. let's follow him
a deed without a name.
as i learned, the night before there was no purpose in them of this remove.
(waking) when my cue comes, call me, and i will answer. my next is "most fair pyramus." heigh-ho! peter quince? flute the bellows-mender? snout the tinker? starveling? god's my life, stol'n hence, and left me asleep? i have had a most rare vision. i have had a dream, past the wit of man to say what dream it was. man is but an ass if he go about to expound this dream. methought i was, there is no man can tell what. methought i was, and methought i had, but man is but a patched fool if he will offer to say what methought i had. the eye of man hath not heard, the ear of man hath not seen, man's hand is not able to taste, his tongue to conceive, nor his heart to report what my dream was. i will get peter quince to write a ballad of this dream.
howe'er you come to know it, answer me. though you untie the winds and let them fight against the churches, though the yeasty waves confound and swallow navigation up, though castles topple on their warders' heads, though palaces and pyramids do slope their heads to their foundations, though the treasure of nature's germens tumble all together, to what i ask you.
(to lear) hail to thee, noble master!
it shall be called "bottom's dream" because it hath no bottom. and i will sing it in the latter end of a play before the duke. peradventure, to make it the more gracious, i shall sing it at her death.
speak.
ha! makest thou this shame thy pastime?
have you sent to bottom's house? is he come home yet?
demand.
no, my lord.
he cannot be heard of. out of doubt he is transported.
we'll answer.
ha, ha! look, he wears cruel garters. horses are tied by the heads, dogs and bears by the neck, monkeys by the loins, and men by the legs. when a man's overlusty at legs, then he wears wooden nether-stocks.
if he come not, then the play is marred. it goes not forward. doth it?
say, if th' hadst rather hear it from our mouths, or from our masters'.
(to kent) what's he that hath so much thy place mistook to set thee here?
it is not possible. you have not a man in all athens able to discharge pyramus but he.
call 'em. let me see 'em.
it is both he and she: your son and daughter.
no, he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in athens.
her nine farrow; grease that's sweaten from the murderer's gibbet throw into the flame.
no.
yea, and the best person too. and he is a very paramour for a sweet voice.
come, high or low;
yes.
you must say "paragon." a "paramour" is, god bless us, a thing of naught.
tell me, thou unknown power, 
no, i say.
masters, the duke is coming from the temple, and there is two or three lords and ladies more married. if our sport had gone forward, we had all been made men.
he knows thy thought. hear his speech but say thou nought.
i say "yea."
o sweet bully bottom! thus hath he lost sixpence a day during his life. he could not have 'scaped sixpence a day. an the duke had not given him sixpence a day for playing pyramus, i'll be hanged.
macbeth! macbeth! macbeth! beware macduff. beware the thane of fife. dismiss me. enough.
no, no, they would not.
he would have deserved it. sixpence a day in pyramus, or nothing.
thou hast harped my fear aright. but one word more, 
yes, they have.
where are these lads? where are these hearts?
he will not be commanded. here's another more potent than the first.
by jupiter, i swear "no."
bottom! o most courageous day! o most happy hour!
macbeth! macbeth! macbeth!, 
by juno, i swear "ay."
masters, i am to discourse wonders, but ask me not what, for if i tell you i am no true athenian. i will tell you everything, right as it fell out.
had i three ears, i'd hear thee.
they durst not do 't. they could not, would not do 't. 'tis worse than murder to do upon respect such violent outrage. resolve me with all modest haste which way coming from us.
let us hear, sweet bottom.
be bloody, bold, and resolute. laugh to scorn the power of man, for none of woman born shall harm macbeth.
my lord, when at their home i did commend your highness' letters to them. ere i was risen from the place that showed my duty kneeling, came there a reeking post, from goneril his mistress salutations, delivered letters spite of intermission, which presently they read, on whose contents they summoned up their meiny, straight took horse, the leisure of their answer, gave me cold looks. and meeting here the other messenger, whose welcome i perceived had poisoned mine, being the very fellow which of late having more man than wit about me, drew. he raised the house with loud and coward cries. your son and daughter found this trespass worth the shame which here it suffers.
not a word of me. all that i will tell you is that the duke hath dined. get your apparel together, good strings to your beards, new ribbons to your pumps. meet presently at the palace. every man look o'er his part. for the short and the long is, our play is preferred. in any case, let thisbe have clean linen. and let not him that plays the lion pair his nails, for they shall hang out for the lion's claws. and most dear actors, eat no onions nor garlic, for we are to utter sweet breath. and i do not doubt but to hear them say, "it is a sweet comedy." no more words. away, go away!
descends
fathers that wear rags do make their children blind. but fathers that bear bags shall see their children kind. fortune, that arrant whore, ne'er turns the key to th' poor. but for all this thou shalt have as many dolors for thy daughters as thou canst tell in a year.
'tis strange, my theseus, that these lovers speak of.
but yet i'll make assurance double sure, and take a bond of fate. thou shalt not live, that i may tell pale-hearted fear it lies, and sleep in spite of thunder.
o, how this mother swells up toward my heart! thy element's below., where is this daughter?
more strange than true. i never may believe these antique fables nor these fairy toys. lovers and madmen have such seething brains, more than cool reason ever comprehends. the lunatic, the lover, and the poet are of imagination all compact. one sees more devils than vast hell can hold, sees helen's beauty in a brow of egypt. the poet's eye, in fine frenzy rolling, doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth to heaven. and as imagination bodies forth turns them to shapes and gives to airy nothing a local habitation and a name. such tricks hath strong imagination, that if it would but apprehend some joy, or in the night, imagining some fear, how easy is a bush supposed a bear!
that rises like the issue of a king, and wears upon his baby-brow the round and top of sovereignty?
with the earl, sir, here within.
but all the story of the night told over, and all their minds transfigured so together, and grows to something of great constancy, but, howsoever, strange and admirable.
listen but speak not to 't.
follow me not. stay here.
here come the lovers, full of joy and mirth., joy, gentle friends! joy and fresh days of love
be lion-mettled, proud, and take no care macbeth shall never vanquished be until great birnam wood to high dunsinane hill shall come against him.
made you no more offense but what you speak of?
more than to us wait in your royal walks, your board, your bed!
that will never be. who can impress the forest, bid the tree rebellious dead, rise never till the wood of birnam rise, and our high-placed macbeth shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath to time and mortal custom. yet my heart can tell so much: shall banquo's issue ever reign in this kingdom?
how chance the king comes with so small a train?
come now, what masques, what dances shall we have to wear away this long age of three hours between our after-supper and bedtime? what revels are in hand? is there no play, to ease the anguish of a torturing hour? call philostrate.
seek to know no more.
an thou hadst been set i' th' stocks for that question, thou'dst well deserved it.
here, mighty theseus.
i will be satisfied. deny me this, why sinks that cauldron? and what noise is this?
why, fool?
say, what abridgement have you for this evening? the lazy time if not with some delight?
show.
we'll set thee to school to an ant to teach thee there's no laboring i' th' winter. all that follow their noses are led by their eyes but blind men, and there's not a nose among twenty but can smell him that's stinking. let go thy hold when a great wheel runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with following it.
(giving theseus a document) there is a brief, how many sports are ripe. make choice of which your highness will see first.
show.
that sir which serves and seeks for gain, and follows but for form, will pack when it begins to rain and leave thee in the storm. but i will tarry. the fool will stay. and let the wise man fly. the knave turns fool that runs away; the fool, no knave, perdie.
"the battle with the centaurs, to be sung by an athenian eunuch to the harp." we'll none of that. that have i told my love, in glory of my kinsman hercules. "the riot of the tipsy bacchanals, tearing the thracian singer in their rage." that is an old device, and it was played when i from thebes came last a conqueror.
show.
where learned you this, fool?
"the thrice three muses mourning for the death of learning, late deceased in beggary." not sorting with a nuptial ceremony. "a tedious brief scene of young pyramus and his love thisbe. very tragical mirth." "merry" and "tragical"? "tedious" and "brief"? that is hot ice and wondrous strange snow. how shall we find the concord of this discord?
come like shadows; so depart!
not i' th' stocks, fool.
which is as brief as i have known a play. but by ten words, my lord, it is too long, which makes it tedious. for in all the play there is not one word apt, one player fitted. for pyramus therein doth kill himself. which, when i saw rehearsed, i must confess, made mine eyes water, but more merry tears the passion of loud laughter never shed.
thou art too like the spirit of banquo. down! thy crown does sear mine eyeballs. and thy hair, thou other gold-bound brow, is like the first. why do you show me this? a fourth? start, eyes! what, will the line stretch out to th' crack of doom? another yet? a seventh? i'll see no more. and yet the eighth appears, who bears a glass that twofold balls and treble scepters carry. horrible sight! now i see 'tis true; for the blood-boltered banquo smiles upon me and points at them for his.
deny to speak with me? they are sick? they are weary? the images of revolt and flying off. fetch me a better answer.
what are they that do play it?
what, is this so?
my dear lord, you know the fiery quality of the duke, how unremoveable and fixed he is
hard-handed men that work in athens here, which never labored in their minds till now, and now have toiled their unbreathed memories with this same play against your nuptial.
stands macbeth thus amazedly? come, sisters, cheer we up his sprites, and show the best of our delights. i'll charm th' air to give a sound, that this great king may kindly say, our duties did his welcome pay.
vengeance, plague, death, confusion! "fiery"? what "quality"? why, gloucester, gloucester, i'd speak with the duke of cornwall and his wife.
and we will hear it.
where are they? gone? let this pernicious hour stand aye accursèd in the calendar!
well, my good lord, i have informed them so.
no, my noble lord. it is not for you. i have heard it over, and it is nothing, nothing in the world, unless you can find sport in their intents, extremely stretched and conned with cru 'l pain
what's your grace's will?
"informed them"? dost thou understand me, man?
i will hear that play. for never anything can be amiss when simpleness and duty tender it. go, bring them in., and take your places, ladies.
saw you the weird sisters?
ay, my good lord.
i love not to see wretchedness o'er charged
no, my lord.
the king would speak with cornwall. the dear father would with his daughter speak, commands, tends service. are they "informed" of this? my breath and blood! "fiery"? the "fiery" duke? tell the hot duke that lear, infirmity doth still neglect all office whereto our health is bound. we are not ourselves when nature, being oppressed, commands the mind to suffer with the body. i'll forbear, to take the indisposed and sickly fit for the sound man. (notices kent again) death on my state! wherefore should he sit here? this act persuades me is practice only. give me my servant forth. go tell the duke and 's wife i'd speak with them, now, presently. bid them come forth and hear me, or at their chamber door i'll beat the drum
why, gentle sweet, you shall see no such thing.
came they not by you?
i would have all well betwixt you.
he says they can do nothing in this kind.
no, indeed, my lord.
o me, my heart, my rising heart! but down.
the kinder we, to give them thanks for nothing. our sport shall be to take what they mistake. takes it in might, not merit. where i have come, great clerks have purposèd to greet me with premeditated welcomes, where i have seen them shiver and look pale, throttle their practiced accent in their fears, and in conclusion dumbly have broke off, not paying me a welcome. trust me, sweet, out of this silence yet i picked a welcome, i read as much as from the rattling tongue of saucy and audacious eloquence. love, therefore, and tongue-tied simplicity in least speak most, to my capacity.
infected be the air whereon they ride, and damned all those that trust them! i did hear
cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels when she put 'em i' th' paste alive. she knapped 'em o' th' coxcombs with a stick and cried, "down, wantons, down!" 'twas her brother that, in pure kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.
so please your grace, the prologue is addressed.
'tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word macduff is fled to england.
good morrow to you both.
let him approach.
fled to england?
hail to your grace.
(delivered by quince) if we offend, it is with our good will. that you should think we come not to offend, that is the true beginning of our end. consider then we come but in despite. we do not come as minding to contest you, our true intent is. all for your delight the actors are at hand, and by their show you shall know all that you are like to know.
ay, my good lord.
i am glad to see your highness.
this fellow doth not stand upon points.
the flighty purpose never is o'ertook unless the deed go with it. from this moment the very firstlings of my heart shall be the firstlings of my hand. and even now, the castle of macduff i will surprise, seize upon fife, give to th' edge o' th' sword his wife, his babes, and all unfortunate souls that trace him in his line. no boasting like a fool. but no more sights!, where are these gentlemen? come, bring me where they are.
regan, i think you are. i know what reason i would divorce me from thy mother's tomb, sepulchring an adultress. (to kent) oh, are you free? some other time for that.
he hath rid his prologue like a rough colt. he knows not the stop. a good moral, my lord: it is not enough to speak, but to speak true.
what had he done to make him fly the land?
belovèd regan, sharp-toothed unkindness, like a vulture, here. (indicates his heart) i can scarce speak to thee. thou'lt not believe with how depraved a quality, o regan!
indeed he hath played on his prologue like a child on a recorder, a sound, but not in government.
you must have patience, madam.
you less know how to value her desert than she to scant her duty.
his speech was like a tangled chain. nothing impaired, but all disordered. who is next?
he had none. his flight was madness. when our actions do not, our fears do make us traitors.
say, how is that?
(delivered by quince) gentles, perchance you wonder at this show. but wonder on, till truth make all things plain. this man is pyramus, if you would know. this man, with lime and roughcast, doth present wall, that vile wall which did these lovers sunder. and through wall's chink, poor souls, they are content to whisper. at the which let no man wonder. presenteth moonshine. for, if you will know, by moonshine did these lovers think no scorn to meet at ninus' tomb, there, there to woo. this grisly beast, which "lion" hight by name, did scare away, or rather did affright. and, as she fled, her mantle she did fall, which lion vile with bloody mouth did stain. anon comes pyramus, sweet youth and tall, whereat, with blade, with bloody blameful blade, he bravely broached his boiling bloody breast. and thisbe, tarrying in mulberry shade, his dagger drew, and died. for all the rest, at large discourse, while here they do remain.
you know not
i cannot think my sister in the least would fail her obligation. if, sir, perchance 'tis on such ground and to such wholesome end as clears her from all blame.
i wonder if the lion be to speak.
wisdom! to leave his wife, to leave his babes, his mansion and his titles in a place from whence himself does fly? he loves us not; he wants the natural touch. for the poor wren, her young ones in her nest, against the owl. all is the fear and nothing is the love, as little is the wisdom, where the flight so runs against all reason.
my curses on her!
no wonder, my lord. one lion may when many asses do.
my dearest coz, he is noble, wise, judicious, and best knows the fits o' th' season. i dare not speak much further; but cruel are the times when we are traitors and do not know ourselves; when we hold rumor but float upon a wild and violent sea each way and none. i take my leave of you. shall not be long but i'll be here again. things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward blessing upon you.
o sir, you are old. of his confine. you should be ruled and led by some discretion that discerns your state better than you yourself. therefore i pray you that to our sister you do make return.
(played by snout) in this same interlude it doth befall and such a wall, as i would have you think, that had in it a crannied hole, or chink, through which the lovers, pyramus and thisbe, did whisper often very secretly. that i am that same wall. the truth is so. and this the cranny is, right and sinister, through which the fearful lovers are to whisper.
fathered he is, and yet he's fatherless.
ask her forgiveness? do you but mark how this becomes the house?, (kneels) "dear daughter, i confess that i am old. age is unnecessary. on my knees i beg that you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food."
would you desire lime and hair to speak better?
i am so much a fool, should i stay longer it would be my disgrace and your discomfort.
return you to my sister.
it is the wittiest partition that ever i heard discourse, my lord.
sirrah, your father's dead. and what will you do now? how will you live?
(rising) never, regan. she hath abated me of half my train, looked black upon me, struck me with her tongue, all the stored vengeances of heaven fall on her ingrateful top! strike her young bones, you taking airs, with lameness!
pyramus draws near the wall. silence!
as birds do, mother.
fie, sir, fie!
(played by bottom) o grim-looked night! o night with hue so black! o night, o night! alack, alack, alack,
what, with worms and flies?
you nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames you fen-sucked fogs drawn by the powerful sun, to fall and blister!
i fear my thisbe's promise is forgot!, and thou, o wall, o sweet, o lovely wall, that stand'st between her father's ground and mine. show me thy chink to blink through with mine eyne!
with what i get, i mean, and so do they.
o the blessed gods! so will you wish on me when the rash mood is on.
thanks, courteous wall. jove shield thee well for this! but what see i? no thisbe do i see. o wicked wall through whom i see no bliss!
the pitfall nor the gin.
no, regan, thou shalt never have my curse. thee o'er to harshness. her eyes are fierce, but thine do comfort and not burn. 'tis not in thee to grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train, to bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes, against my coming in. thou better know'st the offices of nature, bond of childhood, effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude. thy half o' th' kingdom hast thou not forgot,
the wall, methinks, being sensible, should curse again.
why should i, mother? poor birds they are not set for. my father is not dead, for all your saying.
good sir, to the purpose.
(out of character) no, in truth, sir, he should not. "deceiving me" is thisbe's cue. she is to enter now and i am to spy her through the wall. you shall see, it will fall pat as i told you. yonder she comes.
yes, he is dead. how wilt thou do for a father?
who put my man i' th' stocks?
(played by flute) o wall, full often hast thou heard my moans, for parting my fair pyramus and me! my cherry lips have often kissed thy stones,
nay, how will you do for a husband?
what trumpet's that?
i see a voice. now will i to the chink, to spy an i can hear my thisbe's face. thisbe?
why, i can buy me twenty at any market.
i know 't, my sister's. this approves her letter that she would soon be here. (to oswald) is your lady come?
my love thou art, my love, i think.
then you'll buy 'em to sell again.
dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows., out, varlet, from my sight!
think what thou wilt, i am thy lover's grace.
thou speak'st with all thy wit; and yet, i' faith, with wit enough for thee.
what means your grace?
and i like helen, till the fates me kill.
was my father a traitor, mother?
who stocked my servant? regan, i have good hope thou didst not know on 't., who comes here? o heavens, allow obedience, if yourselves are old, make it your cause. send down, and take my part! (to goneril) art not ashamed to look upon this beard?, o regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?
not shafalus to procrus was so true.
ay, that he was.
all's not offense that indiscretion finds and dotage terms so.
as shafalus to procrus, i to you.
what is a traitor?
o sides, you are too tough. will you yet hold?, how came my man i' th' stocks?
oh, kiss me through the hole of this vile wall!
why, one that swears and lies.
i set him there, sir, but his own disorders
i kiss the wall's hole, not your lips at all.
and be all traitors that do so?
you! did you?
wilt thou at ninny's tomb meet me straightway?
every one that does so is a traitor and must be hanged.
i pray you, father, being weak, seem so. if till the expiration of your month, you will return and sojourn with my sister, dismissing half your train, come then to me. which shall be needful for your entertainment.
tide life, tide death, i come without delay.
and must they all be hanged that swear and lie?
return to her, and fifty men dismissed? no, rather i abjure all roofs, and choose to be a comrade with the wolf and owl, necessity's sharp pinch! return with her? why, the hot-blooded france that dowerless took our youngest born, i could as well be brought to knee his throne, and, squirelike, pension beg persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter to this detested groom. (indicates oswald)
thus have i, wall, my part dischargèd so. and, being done, thus wall away doth go.
every one.
at your choice, sir.
now is the mural down between the two neighbors.
who must hang them?
now, i prithee, daughter, do not make me mad. i will not trouble thee, my child. farewell. but yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter, or rather a disease that's in my flesh, which i must needs call mine. thou art a boil, a plague-sore or embossèd carbuncle let shame come when it will. i do not call it.
no remedy, my lord, when walls are so willful to hear without warning.
why, the honest men.
i do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot, nor tell tales of thee to high-judging jove. mend when thou canst. be better at thy leisure. i and my hundred knights.
this is the silliest stuff that ever i heard.
then the liars and swearers are fools, for there are liars and swearers enough to beat the honest men and hang up them.
not altogether so, sir. i looked not for you yet, nor am provided for your fit welcome. give ear, sir, to my sister. for those that mingle reason with your passion but she knows what she does.
the best in this kind are but shadows, and the worst are no worse if imagination amend them.
now, god help thee, poor monkey! but how wilt thou do for a father?
is this well spoken now?
it must be your imagination then, and not theirs.
if he were dead, you'd weep for him. if you would not, it were a good sign that i should quickly have a new father.
i dare avouch it, sir. what, fifty followers? is it not well? what should you need of more, yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger should many people under two commands hold amity? 'tis hard; almost impossible.
if we imagine no worse of them than they of themselves, they may pass for excellent men. here come two noble beasts in, a man and a lion.
poor prattler, how thou talk'st!
why might not you, my lord, receive attendance from those that she calls servants, or from mine?
(played by snug) you, ladies, you whose gentle hearts do fear may now perchance both quake and tremble here, when lion rough in wildest rage doth roar. then know that i, as snug the joiner, am a lion fell, nor else no lion's dam. into this place, 'twere pity on my life.
bless you, fair dame! i am not to you known, i doubt some danger does approach you nearly. if you will take a homely man's advice, be not found here. hence with your little ones. to fright you thus methinks i am too savage; which is too nigh your person. heaven preserve you! i dare abide no longer.
we could control them. if you will come to me, for now i spy a danger, i entreat you to bring but five and twenty. to no more will i give place or notice.
a very gentle beast, of a good conscience.
whither should i fly? i have done no harm. but i remember now is often laudable, to do good sometime accounted dangerous folly. why then, alas, do i put up that womanly defense, to say i have done no harm?
i gave you all, 
a very best at a beast, my lord, that e'er i saw.
what are these faces?
and in good time you gave it.
this lion is a very fox, for his valor.
where is your husband?
made you my guardians, my depositaries, but kept a reservation to be followed with such a number. what, must i come to you
true. and a goose for his discretion.
i hope, in no place so unsanctified where such as thou mayst find him.
and speak 't again, my lord. no more with me.
not so, my lord. for his valor cannot carry his discretion, and the fox carries the goose.
he's a traitor.
those wicked creatures yet do look well favored when others are more wicked. not being the worst stands in some rank of praise. thy fifty yet doth double five and twenty, and thou art twice her love.
his discretion, i am sure, cannot carry his valor, for the goose carries not the fox. it is well. leave it to his discretion, and let us listen to the moon.
thou liest, thou shag-haired villain!
hear me, my lord. what need you five and twenty, ten, or five to follow in a house where twice so many
(played by starveling) this lanthorn doth the hornèd moon present, 
(stabbing him) what, you egg? young fry of treachery!
what need one?
he should have worn the horns on his head.
run away, i pray you!
o, reason not the need! our basest beggars are in the poorest thing superfluous. allow not nature more than nature needs, man's life's as cheap as beast's. thou art a lady. why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'st, which scarcely keeps thee warm. but, for true need, you heavens, give me that patience, patience i need. you see me here, you gods, a poor old man, if it be you that stir these daughters' hearts against their father, fool me not so much to bear it tamely. touch me with noble anger. and let not women's weapons, water drops,
he is no crescent, and his horns are invisible within the circumference.
let us seek out some desolate shade and there weep our sad bosoms empty.
i will have such revenges on you both that all the world shall, i will do such things, what they are yet i know not, but they shall be the terrors of the earth. you think i'll weep?
this lanthorn doth the hornèd moon present. myself the man i' th' moon do seem to be, 
let us rather hold fast the mortal sword and, like good men, bestride our downfall'n birthdom. each new morn strike heaven on the face, that it resounds as if it felt with scotland and yelled out like syllable of dolor.
i have full cause of weeping, but this heart shall break into a hundred thousand flaws, or ere i'll weep., o fool, i shall go mad!
this is the greatest error of all the rest. the man should be put into the lanthorn. how is it else the "man i' th' moon"?
what i believe i'll wail; what know believe, and what i can redress, what you have spoke, it may be so perchance. this tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues, was once thought honest. you have loved him well. he hath not touched you yet. i am young, but something to offer up a weak, poor, innocent lamb t' appease an angry god.
let us withdraw. 'twill be a storm.
he dares not come there for the candle. for you see, it is already in snuff.
i am not treacherous.
cannot be well bestowed.
i am aweary of this moon. would he would change!
but macbeth is. in an imperial charge. but i shall crave your pardon. that which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose. angels are bright still, though the brightest fell. though all things foul would wear the brows of grace,
'tis his own blame. hath put himself from rest, and must needs taste his folly.
it appears by his small light of discretion, that he is in the wane. but yet, in courtesy, in all reason, we must stay the time.
i have lost my hopes.
for his particular i'll receive him gladly,
proceed, moon.
perchance even there where i did find my doubts. why in that rawness left you wife and child, those precious motives, those strong knots of love, without leave-taking? i pray you, but mine own safeties. you may be rightly just, whatever i shall think.
so am i purposed. where is my lord of gloucester?
all that i have to say is to tell you that the lanthorn is the moon; i, the man in the moon; this thornbush, my thornbush; and this dog, my dog.
bleed, bleed, poor country! great tyranny, lay thou thy basis sure, for goodness dare not check thee. wear thou thy wrongs; i would not be the villain that thou think'st for the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp, and the rich east to boot.
followed the old man forth. he is returned.
why, all these should be in the lanthorn, for all these are in the moon., but silence! here comes thisbe.
be not offended. i speak not as in absolute fear of you. it weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash is added to her wounds. i think withal there would be hands uplifted in my right; and here from gracious england have i offer when i shall tread upon the tyrant's head, or wear it on my sword, yet my poor country shall have more vices than it had before, more suffer, and more sundry ways than ever,
the king is in high rage.
this is old ninny's tomb. where is my love?
what should he be?
whither is he going?
(roaring) oh!
it is myself i mean, in whom i know all the particulars of vice so grafted that, when they shall be opened, black macbeth will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state with my confineless harms.
he calls to horse, but will i know not whither.
well roared, lion!
not in the legions of horrid hell can come a devil more damned in evils to top macbeth.
'tis best to give him way. he leads himself.
well run, thisbe!
i grant him bloody, luxurious, avaricious, false, deceitful, that has a name. but there's no bottom, none, in my voluptuousness. your wives, your daughters, your matrons, and your maids could not fill up the cistern of my lust, and my desire that did oppose my will. better macbeth than such an one to reign.
(to gloucester) my lord, entreat him by no means to stay.
well shone, moon!, truly, the moon shines with a good grace.
boundless intemperance in nature is a tyranny. it hath been the untimely emptying of the happy throne to take upon you what is yours. you may convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty and yet seem cold; the time you may so hoodwink. we have willing dames enough. there cannot be as will to greatness dedicate themselves, finding it so inclined.
alack, the night comes on, and the high winds do sorely ruffle. for many miles about there's scarce a bush.
well moused, lion!
with this there grows in my most ill-composed affection such i should cut off the nobles for their lands, desire his jewels and this other's house. and my more-having would be as a sauce to make me hunger more, that i should forge destroying them for wealth.
o sir, to wilful men, must be their schoolmasters. shut up your doors. he is attended with a desperate train. and what they may incense him to, being apt to have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.
and then came pyramus.
this avarice sticks deeper, grows with more pernicious root than summer-seeming lust, and it hath been the sword of our slain kings. yet do not fear; of your mere own. all these are portable, with other graces weighed.
my regan counsels well. come out o' th' storm.
and so the lion vanished.
but i have none. the king-becoming graces, as justice, verity, temperance, stableness, devotion, patience, courage, fortitude, i have no relish of them but abound in the division of each several crime, acting it many ways. nay, had i power, i should uproar the universal peace, confound all unity on earth.
who's there, besides foul weather?
i thank thee, moon, for shining now so bright. for by thy gracious, golden, glittering gleams, i trust to take of truest thisbe sight., but stay, o spite! what dreadful dole is here! eyes, do you see? how can it be? o dainty duck! o dear! what, stained with blood? approach, ye furies fell! o fates, come, come, cut thread and thrum.
o scotland, scotland!
one minded like the weather, most unquietly.
this passion and the death of a dear friend would go near to make a man look sad.
if such a one be fit to govern, speak. i am as i have spoken.
i know you. where's the king?
beshrew my heart, but i pity the man.
fit to govern? with an untitled tyrant bloody-sceptered, when shalt thou see thy wholesome days again, since that the truest issue of thy throne by his own interdiction stands accursed, was a most sainted king. the queen that bore thee, oftener upon her knees than on her feet, died every day she lived. fare thee well! these evils thou repeat'st upon thyself thy hope ends here!
contending with the fretful elements. or swell the curlèd water 'bove the main, that things might change or cease. tears his white hair, which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage, catch in their fury and make nothing of. the to-and-fro, conflicting wind and rain. this night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch, the lion and the belly-pinchèd wolf keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,
o wherefore, nature, didst thou lions frame? which is, no, no, which was the fairest dame that lived, that loved, that liked, that looked with cheer. come, tears, confound! out, sword, and wound!
macduff, this noble passion, child of integrity, hath from my soul wiped the black scruples, reconciled my thoughts to thy good truth and honor. devilish macbeth into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me from overcredulous haste. but god above deal between thee and me, for even now i put myself to thy direction and the taints and blames i laid upon myself, for strangers to my nature. i am yet unknown to woman, never was forsworn, scarcely have coveted what was mine own, the devil to his fellow, and delight no less in truth than life. my first false speaking was this upon myself. what i am truly, is thine and my poor country's to command.
but who is with him?
ay, that left pap where heart doth hop. (stabs himself) thus die i, thus, thus, thus. now am i fled. my soul is in the sky. tongue, lose thy light. moon, take thy flight.
old siward, with ten thousand warlike men, already at a point, was setting forth. now we'll together, and the chance of goodness be like our warranted quarrel! why are you silent?
none but the fool, who labors to outjest his heart-struck injuries.
(dies)
'tis hard to reconcile.
sir, i do know you, and dare upon the warrant of my note commend a dear thing to you. there is division, with mutual cunning, 'twixt albany and cornwall, who have, as who have not that their great stars throned and set high?, servants, who seem no less, which are to france the spies and speculations either in snuffs and packings of the dukes, or the hard rein which both of them hath borne against the old kind king, or something deeper, whereof perchance these are but furnishings, into this scattered kingdom, who already, wise in our negligence, have secret feet in some of our best ports and are at point to show their open banner. now to you. to make your speed to dover, you shall find some that will thank you, making just report of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow the king hath cause to plain. and from some knowledge and assurance offer this office to you.
no die, but an ace for him, for he is but one.
well, more anon., comes the king forth, i pray you?
i will talk further with you.
less than an ace, man. for he is dead. he is nothing.
ay, sir; there are a crew of wretched souls that stay his cure. their malady convinces such sanctity hath heaven given his hand, they presently amend.
(giving gentleman a purse and a ring) no, do not. than my outwall, open this purse and take what it contains. if you shall see cordelia, as fear not but you shall, show her this ring. and she will tell you who that fellow is i will go seek the king.
with the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and prove an ass.
i thank you, doctor.
give me your hand. have you no more to say?
how chance moonshine is gone before thisbe comes back and finds her lover?
what's the disease he means?
few words, but to effect more than all yet: that when we have found the king, in which your pain holla the other.
she will find him by starlight. here she comes, and her passion ends the play.
'tis called the evil. a most miraculous work in this good king, i have seen him do. how he solicits heaven, himself best knows, but strangely visited people, all swoll'n and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, the mere despair of surgery, he cures, put on with holy prayers. and, 'tis spoken,
blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! rage, blow! you cataracts and hurricanoes, spout till you have drenched our steeples, drowned the cocks! you sulfurous and thought-executing fires, singe my white head! and thou, all-shaking thunder, smite flat the thick rotundity o' th' world, crack nature's molds, all germens spill at once that make ingrateful man!
i hope she will be brief.
to the succeeding royalty he leaves the healing benediction. with this strange virtue, he hath a heavenly gift of prophecy, that speak him full of grace.
o nuncle, court holy water in a dry house is better than this rainwater out o' door. good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters blessing. here's a night pities neither wise man nor fool.
a mote will turn the balance, which pyramus, which thisbe, is the better. he for a man, god warrant us, she for a woman, god bless us.
see, who comes here?
rumble thy bellyful! spit, fire! spout, rain! i tax not you, you elements, with unkindness. i never gave you kingdom, called you children. you owe me no subscription. why then, let fall your horrible pleasure. here i stand, your slave, but yet i call you servile ministers, that will with two pernicious daughters joined your high engendered battles 'gainst a head so old and white as this. oh, ho! 'tis foul.
she hath spied him already with those sweet eyes.
my countryman, but yet i know him not.
the codpiece that will house
and thus she means, videlicet, 
my ever-gentle cousin, welcome hither.
before the head has any, the head and he shall louse. so beggars marry many. what he his heart should make shall of a corn cry woe, and turn his sleep to wake. for there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a glass.
asleep, my love? what, dead, my dove? o pyramus, arise! dead, dead? a tomb must cover thy sweet eyes. these lily lips, this cherry nose, are gone, are gone. lovers, make moan. his eyes were green as leeks. o sisters three, with hands as pale as milk. lay them in gore, since you have shore with shears his thread of silk. come, trusty sword. come, blade, my breast imbrue.(stabs herself) and, farewell, friends. thus thisbe ends. (dies)
i know him now., good god, betimes remove
i will say nothing.
moonshine and lion are left to bury the dead.
sir, amen.
who's there?
ay, and wall too.
stands scotland where it did?
marry, here's grace and a codpiece, that's a wise man and a fool.
(out of character) no, assure you. the wall is down that parted their fathers. will it please you to see the epilogue, or to hear a bergomask dance between two of our company?
alas, poor country! almost afraid to know itself. it cannot be called our mother, but our grave, where nothing, but who knows nothing, is once seen to smile; are made, not marked; where violent sorrow seems a modern ecstasy. the dead man's knell is there scarce asked for who, and good men's lives expire before the flowers in their caps,
love not such nights as these. the wrathful skies gallow the very wanderers of the dark and make them keep their caves. snce i was man, such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder, remember to have heard. man's nature cannot carry th' affliction nor the fear.
no epilogue, i pray you, for your play needs no excuse. never excuse, for when the players are all dead, there needs none to be blamed. marry, if he that writ it had played pyramus and hanged himself in thisbe's garter, it would have been a fine tragedy. and so it is, truly, and very notably discharged. but come, your bergomask. let your epilogue alone.
oh, relation too nice and yet too true!
let the great gods that keep this dreadful pudder o'er our heads find out their enemies now. tremble, thou wretch unwhipped of justice. hide thee, thou bloody hand, thou perjured, and thou simular man of virtue
the iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve. lovers, to bed. 'tis almost fairy time. as much as we this night have overwatched. this palpable-gross play hath well beguiled the heavy gait of night. sweet friends, to bed. a fortnight hold we this solemnity,
what's the newest grief?
that art incestuous. caitiff, to pieces shake, that under covert and convenient seeming rive your concealing continents and cry these dreadful summoners grace. i am a man more sinned against than sinning.
now the hungry lion roars and the wolf behowls the moon, whilst the heavy ploughman snores, all with weary task fordone. now the wasted brands do glow, whilst the screech-owl, screeching loud, puts the wretch that lies in woe in remembrance of a shroud. now it is the time of night that the graves all gaping wide, every one lets forth his sprite, in the churchway paths to glide.
that of an hour's age doth hiss the speaker. each minute teems a new one.
alack, bareheaded? gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel. repose you there, while i to this hard house, more harder than the stones whereof 'tis raised, which even but now, demanding after you, denied me to come in, return, and force
and we fairies, that do run by the triple hecate's team from the presence of the sun, following darkness like a dream, now are frolic. not a mouse shall disturb this hallowed house. i am sent with broom before to sweep the dust behind the door.
how does my wife?
my wits begin to turn., (to fool) come on, my boy. how dost, my boy? art cold? i am cold myself. (to kent) where is this straw, my fellow? that can make vile things precious. come, your hovel. poor fool and knave, i have one part in my heart that's sorry yet for thee.
through the house give glimmering light, by the dead and drowsy fire. every elf and fairy sprite hop as light as bird from brier. sing and dance it trippingly.
why, well.
(sings) with heigh-ho, the wind and the rain, must make content with his fortunes fit, for the rain it raineth every day.
first, rehearse your song by rote, to each word a warbling note. hand in hand with fairy grace
and all my children?
true, my good boy., come, bring us to this hovel.
(sings) now until the break of day, through this house each fairy stray. to the best bride bed will we, which by us shall blessèd be. and the issue there create ever shall be fortunate. so shall all the couples three ever true in loving be. and the blots of nature's hand shall not in their issue stand.
well too.
i'll speak a prophecy ere i go. when priests are more in word than matter, when brewers mar their malt with water, when nobles are their tailors' tutors, when every case in law is right, no squire in debt nor no poor knight, when slanders do not live in tongues, nor cutpurses come not to throngs, and bawds and whores do churches build, then shall the realm of albion come to great confusion. then comes the time, who lives to see 't, this prophecy merlin shall make, for i live before his time.
never mole, harelip, nor scar, nor mark prodigious, such as are despisèd in nativity, shall upon their children be. with this field dew consecrate, every fairy take his gait. and each several chamber bless through this palace with sweet peace. and the owner of it blessed ever shall in safety rest. trip away. make no stay. meet me all by break of day.
the tyrant has not battered at their peace?
alack, alack, edmund, i like not this unnatural dealing. when i desire their leave that i might pity him, they took from me the use of mine own house, charged me on pain of their perpetual displeasure neither to speak of him, entreat for him, nor any way sustain him.
if we shadows have offended, think but this, and all is mended, that you have but slumbered here while these visions did appear. and this weak and idle theme, no more yielding but a dream, gentles, do not reprehend. if you pardon, we will mend. and, as i am an honest puck, if we have unearnèd luck now to 'scape the serpent's tongue, we will make amends ere long. else the puck a liar call. so good night unto you all. give me your hands if we be friends, and robin shall restore amends.
no, they were well at peace when i did leave 'em.
most savage and unnatural!
be not a niggard of your speech. how goes 't?
go to, say you nothing. there's a division betwixt the dukes. and a worse matter than that: i have received a letter this night. 'tis dangerous to be spoken. i have locked the letter in my closet. these injuries the king now bears will be revenged home. there's part of a power already footed. we must incline to the king. i will look him and privily relieve him. go you and maintain talk with the duke, that my charity be not of him perceived. if he ask for me, i am ill and gone to bed. though i die for it, as no less is threatened me, the king my old master must be relieved. there is some strange thing toward, edmund. pray you, be careful.
if music be the food of love, play on. give me excess of it that, surfeiting, the appetite may sicken, and so die. that strain again, it had a dying fall. that breathes upon a bank of violets, stealing and giving odor. enough, no more. 'tis not so sweet now as it was before. o spirit of love, how quick and fresh art thou, receiveth as the sea, nought enters there, of what validity and pitch soe'er, but falls into abatement and low price even in a minute. so full of shapes is fancy
when i came hither to transport the tidings, which i have heavily borne, there ran a rumor which was to my belief witnessed the rather for that i saw the tyrant's power afoot. now is the time of help. your eye in scotland would create soldiers, make our women fight,
this courtesy, forbid thee, shall the duke instantly know, and of that letter too. that which my father loses, no less than all. the younger rises when the old doth fall.
will you go hunt, my lord?
be 't their comfort we are coming thither. gracious england hath lent us good siward and ten thousand men; an older and a better soldier none that christendom gives out.
here is the place, my lord. good my lord, enter. the tyranny of the open night's too rough for nature to endure.
what, curio?
would i could answer that would be howled out in the desert air, where hearing should not latch them.
let me alone.
the hart.
what concern they? the general cause, or is it a fee-grief due to some single breast?
good my lord, enter here.
why, so i do, the noblest that i have. oh, when mine eyes did see olivia first, methought she purged the air of pestilence. and my desires, like fell and cruel hounds, e'er since pursue me.
no mind that's honest pertains to you alone.
wilt break my heart?
how now! what news from her?
if it be mine, keep it not from me. quickly let me have it.
i had rather break mine own. good my lord, enter.
so please my lord, i might not be admitted, but from her handmaid do return this answer: shall not behold her face at ample view, but like a cloistress, she will veiled walk and water once a day her chamber round with eye-offending brine, all this to season and lasting in her sad remembrance.
let not your ears despise my tongue forever, that ever yet they heard.
thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm invades us to the skin. so 'tis to thee. but where the greater malady is fixed the lesser is scarce felt. thou'dst shun a bear, thou'dst meet the bear i' th' mouth. when the mind's free, the body's delicate. the tempest in my mind doth from my senses take all feeling else save what beats there, filial ingratitude. for lifting food to 't? but i will punish home. no, i will weep no more. in such a night to shut me out! pour on, i will endure. in such a night as this! o regan, goneril, oh, that way madness lies. let me shun that. no more of that.
o, she that hath a heart of that fine frame to pay this debt of love but to a brother, how will she love, when the rich golden shaft that live in her, when liver, brain, and heart, these sovereign thrones, are all supplied, and filled her sweet perfections with one self king! away before me to sweet beds of flowers.
hum! i guess at it.
good my lord, enter here.
what country, friends, is this?
your castle is surprised, your wife and babes savagely slaughtered. to relate the manner, were, on the quarry of these murdered deer
prithee, go in thyself. seek thine own ease. this tempest will not give me leave to ponder (to fool) in, boy. go first. you houseless poverty, nay, get thee in. i'll pray, and then i'll sleep.
this is illyria, lady.
merciful heaven! what, man! ne'er pull your hat upon your brows. give sorrow words. the grief that does not speak whispers the o'erfraught heart and bids it break.
poor naked wretches, whereso'er you are, that bide the pelting of this pitiless storm, your looped and windowed raggedness, defend you from seasons such as these? oh, i have ta'en too little care of this! take physic, pomp. expose thyself to feel what wretches feel, and show the heavens more just.
and what should i do in illyria? my brother he is in elysium. perchance he is not drown'd., what think you, sailors?
my children too?
(within) fathom and half, fathom and half! poor tom!
it is perchance that you yourself were saved.
wife, children, servants, all that could be found.
come not in here, nuncle. here's a spirit. help me, help me!
o, my poor brother! and so perchance may he be.
and i must be from thence! my wife killed too?
give me thy hand. who's there?
true, madam. and, to comfort you with chance, assure yourself, after our ship did split, when you and those poor number saved with you most provident in peril, bind himself, courage and hope both teaching him the practice, to a strong mast that lived upon the sea, where, like arion on the dolphin's back, so long as i could see.
i have said.
a spirit, a spirit. he says his name's poor tom.
(giving him money) for saying so, there's gold. mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope, whereto thy speech serves for authority,
be comforted. to cure this deadly grief.
what art thou that dost grumble there i' th' straw? come forth.
ay, madam, well, for i was bred and born not three hours' travel from this very place.
he has no children. all my pretty ones? did you say all? o hell-kite! all? what, all my pretty chickens and their dam
away! the foul fiend follows me! through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind. hum! go to thy cold bed and warm thee.
who governs here?
dispute it like a man.
didst thou give all to thy two daughters, and art thou come to this?
a noble duke, in nature as in name.
i shall do so, but i must also feel it as a man. i cannot but remember such things were and would not take their part? sinful macduff, they were all struck for thee! naught that i am, not for their own demerits, but for mine, fell slaughter on their souls. heaven rest them now.
who gives any thing to poor tom, whom the foul fiend hath led through fire and through flame, through ford and whirlipool, o'er bog and quagmire; that hath laid knives under his pillow and halters in his pew, set ratsbane by his porridge, made him proud of heart to ride on a bay trotting- horse over four-inched bridges to course his own shadow for a traitor? bless thy five wits. tom's a-cold. oh, do-de, do-de, do-de. bless thee from whirlwinds, star-blasting, and taking! do poor tom some charity, whom the foul fiend vexes. there could i have him now, and there, and there again, and there.
what is his name?
convert to anger. blunt not the heart, enrage it.
what, has his daughters brought him to this pass?, 
orsino.
oh, i could play the woman with mine eyes and braggart with my tongue! but, gentle heavens, cut short all intermission. front to front within my sword's length set him; if he 'scape, heaven forgive him too.
nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all shamed.
he was a bachelor then.
this tune goes manly. come, go we to the king. our power is ready; our lack is nothing but our leave. macbeth put on their instruments. receive what cheer you may. the night is long that never finds the day.
now all the plagues that in the pendulous air hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters!
and so is now, or was so very late. for but a month ago i went from hence, and then 'twas fresh in murmur, as, you know, that he did seek the love of fair olivia.
i have two nights watched with you but can perceive no truth in your report. when was it she last walked?
he hath no daughters, sir.
what's she?
since his majesty went into the field, i have seen her rise from her bed, throw her nightgown upon her, unlock her closet, take forth paper, fold it, write upon 't, read it, afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleep.
to such a lowness but his unkind daughters. is it the fashion that discarded fathers should have thus little mercy on their flesh? judicious punishment! 'twas this flesh begot
a virtuous maid, the daughter of a count that died some twelvemonth since, then leaving her who shortly also died, for whose dear love, they say, she hath abjured the company and sight of men.
a great perturbation in nature, to receive at once the benefit of sleep, and do the line>effects of watching. in this slumbery agitation, besides her walking and other actual performances, what, at any time, have you heard her say?
pillicock sat on pillicock hill. alow, alow, loo, loo!
oh, that i served that lady and might not be delivered to the world, what my estate is.
that, sir, which i will not report after her.
this cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.
that were hard to compass, because she will admit no kind of suit, no, not the duke's.
you may to me, and 'tis most meet you should.
take heed o' th' foul fiend. obey thy parents, keep thy word's justice, swear not, commit not with man's sworn spouse, set not thy sweet heart on proud array. tom's a- cold.
there is a fair behavior in thee, captain, doth oft close in pollution, yet of thee i will believe thou hast a mind that suits with this thy fair and outward character. i prithee, and i'll pay thee bounteously, for such disguise as haply shall become the form of my intent. i'll serve this duke. thou shall present me as an eunuch to him. it may be worth thy pains, for i can sing that will allow me very worth his service. what else may hap to time i will commit. only shape thou thy silence to my wit.
neither to you nor any one, having no witness to confirm my speech.
what hast thou been?
be you his eunuch, and your mute i'll be.
lo you, here she comes. this is her very guise; and, upon my life, fast asleep. observe her, stand close.
a servingman, proud in heart and mind, that curled my hair, wore gloves in my cap, served the lust of my mistress' heart and did the act of darkness with her, swore as many oaths as i spake words and broke them in the sweet face of heaven, one that slept in the contriving of lust and waked to do it. wine loved i deeply, dice dearly, and in woman outparamoured the turk. false of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand, hog in sloth, fox in stealth, wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in prey. let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks betray thy poor heart to woman. keep thy foot out of brothels, thy hand out of plackets, thy pen from lenders' books, and defy the foul fiend. still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind, says, "suum, mun, nonny." dauphin my boy, my boy, cessez. let him trot by.
i thank thee. lead me on.
how came she by that light?
why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies., is man no more than this? consider him well., thou owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep no wool, the cat no perfume. ha! here's three on 's are sophisticated. thou art the thing itself. unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor, bare, forked animal as thou art., off, off, you lendings! come. unbutton here. (tears at his clothes)
what a plague means my niece, to take the death of her brother thus? i am sure care's an enemy to life.
why, it stood by her. she has light by her continually. 'tis her command.
prithee, nuncle, be contented. 'tis a naughty night to swim in. now a little fire in a wild field were like an old lecher's heart, a small spark, all the rest on 's body cold. look, here comes a walking fire.
by my troth, sir toby, you must come in earlier o' nights. your cousin, my lady, takes great exceptions to your ill hours.
you see her eyes are open.
this is the foul fiend flibbertigibbet. he begins at curfew and walks till the first cock. he gives the web and the pin, squints the eye and makes the harelip, mildews the white wheat and hurts the poor creature of earth. swithold footed thrice the 'old. he met the nightmare and her ninefold, bid her alight, and her troth plight. and aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!
why, let her except, before excepted.
ay, but their sense is shut.
how fares your grace?
ay, but you must confine yourself within the modest limits of order.
what is it she does now? look, how she rubs her hands.
(indicating gloucester) what's he?
confine? i'll confine myself no finer than i am. these clothes are good enough to drink in, and so be these boots too. an they be not, let them hang themselves in their own straps.
it is an accustomed action with her to seem thus washing her hands. i have known her continue in this a quarter of an hour.
who's there? what is 't you seek?
that quaffing and drinking will undo you: i heard my lady talk of it yesterday, and of a foolish knight that you brought in one night here to be her wooer.
yet here's a spot.
what are you there? your names?
who, sir andrew aguecheek?
hark! she speaks. i will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.
poor tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the tadpole, the wall newt, and the water; that in the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages, eats cow dung for salads, swallows the old rat and the ditch-dog, drinks the green mantle of the standing pool; who is whipped from tithing to tithing and stocked, punished and imprisoned; who hath had three suits to his back, six shirts to his body, horse to ride and weapon to wear. but mice and rats and such small deer have been tom's food for seven long year. beware my follower. peace, smulkin. peace, thou fiend!
ay, he.
out, damned spot! out, i say!, one, two. why, then, 'tis time to do 't. hell is murky!, fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard? what need we fear who knows it, when none can call our power to account?, yet who would have thought the old man to have had so much blood in him.
(to lear) what, hath your grace no better company?
he's as tall a man as any 's in illyria.
do you mark that?
the prince of darkness is a gentleman. modo he's called, and mahu.
what's that to the purpose?
the thane of fife had a wife. where is she now?, what, will these hands ne'er be clean?, no more o' that, my lord, no more o' that. you mar all with this starting.
(to lear) our flesh and blood, my lord, is grown so vile
why, he has three thousand ducats a year.
go to, go to. you have known what you should not.
poor tom's a-cold.
ay, but he'll have but a year in all these ducats. he's a very fool and a prodigal.
she has spoke what she should not, i am sure of that. heaven knows what she has known.
go in with me. my duty cannot suffer to obey in all your daughters' hard commands. though their injunction be to bar my doors yet have i ventured to come seek you out and bring you where both fire and food is ready.
fie, that you'll say so! he plays o' the viol-de-gamboys, and speaks three or four languages word for word without book, and hath all the good gifts of nature.
here's the smell of the blood still. all the perfumes of arabia will not sweeten this little hand. oh, oh, oh!
first let me talk with this philosopher., (to edgar) what is the cause of thunder?
he hath indeed, almost natural, for besides that he's a fool, he's a great quarreler, and but that he hath the gift of a coward to allay the gust he hath in quarreling, 'tis thought among the prudent he would quickly have the gift of a grave.
what a sigh is there! the heart is sorely charged.
(to lear) good my lord, take his offer. go into the house.
by this hand, they are scoundrels and substractors that say so of him. who are they?
i would not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole body.
i'll talk a word with this same learnèd theban., what is your study?
they that add, moreover, he's drunk nightly in your company.
well, well, well.
how to prevent the fiend and to kill vermin.
with drinking healths to my niece. i'll drink to her as long as there is a passage in my throat and drink in illyria. he's a coward and a coistrel that will not drink to my niece till his brains turn o' th' toe like a parish top. what, wench! castiliano vulgo, for here comes sir andrew agueface.
pray god it be, sir.
let me ask you one word in private.
sir toby belch! how now, sir toby belch!
this disease is beyond my practice. yet i have known those which have walked in their sleep who have died holily in their beds.
his wits begin t' unsettle.
sweet sir andrew!
wash your hands. put on your nightgown. look not so pale., i tell you yet again, banquo's buried; he cannot come out on 's grave.
canst thou blame him?
(to maria) bless you, fair shrew.
even so?
his daughters seek his death. ah, that good kent, he said it would be thus, poor banished man. thou say'st the king grows mad. i'll tell thee, friend, now outlawed from my blood. he sought my life, but lately, very late. i loved him, friend, no father his son dearer. truth to tell thee,
and you too, sir.
to bed, to bed. there's knocking at the gate. come, come, come, come. give me your hand. what's done cannot be undone., to bed, to bed, to bed!
the grief hath crazed my wits. what a night's this!
accost, sir andrew, accost.
will she go now to bed?
o, cry your mercy, sir., (to edgar) noble philosopher, your company.
what's that?
directly.
tom's a-cold.
my niece's chambermaid.
foul whisp'rings are abroad. unnatural deeds to their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets. more needs she the divine than the physician. god, god forgive us all! look after her, remove from her the means of all annoyance, my mind she has mated, and amazed my sight. i think, but dare not speak.
in, fellow. there, into th' hovel. keep thee warm.
good mistress accost, i desire better acquaintance.
good night, good doctor.
come let's in all.
my name is mary, sir.
the english power is near, led on by malcolm, his uncle siward and the good macduff. revenges burn in them, for their dear causes would to the bleeding and the grim alarm
this way, my lord.
good mistress mary accost, 
near birnam wood shall we well meet them; that way are they coming.
(indicating edgar) with him!
you mistake, knight. "accost" is front her, board her, woo her, assail her.
who knows if donalbain be with his brother?
(to gloucester) good my lord, soothe him. let him take the fellow.
by my troth, i would not undertake her in this company. is that the meaning of "accost"?
for certain, sir, he is not. i have a file of all the gentry. there is siward's son, protest their first of manhood.
take him you on.
fare you well, gentlemen. (she starts to exit)
what does the tyrant?
(to edgar) sirrah, come on. go along with us.
an thou let part so, sir andrew, would thou mightst never draw sword again.
great dunsinane he strongly fortifies. some say he's mad, others that lesser hate him do call it valiant fury. but, for certain, within the belt of rule.
come, good athenian.
an you part so, mistress, i would i might never draw sword again. fair lady, do you think you have fools in hand?
now does he feel his secret murders sticking on his hands. now minutely revolts upbraid his faith-breach. those he commands move only in command, hang loose about him, like a giant's robe upon a dwarfish thief.
no words, no words. hush.
sir, i have not you by the hand.
who then shall blame his pestered senses to recoil and start, when all that is within him does condemn
child roland to the dark tower came, his word was still "fie, foh, and fum, i smell the blood of a british man."
marry, but you shall have, and here's my hand.
well, march we on, to give obedience where 'tis truly owed. meet we the medicine of the sickly weal, and with him pour we in our country's purge each drop of us.
i will have my revenge ere i depart his house.
(taking his hand) now, sir, thought is free. i pray you, bring your hand to the buttery-bar and let it drink.
or so much as it needs, make we our march towards birnam.
how, my lord, i may be censured, that nature thus gives way to loyalty, something fears me to think of.
wherefore, sweetheart? what's your metaphor?
bring me no more reports. let them fly all. till birnam wood remove to dunsinane i cannot taint with fear. what's the boy malcolm? was he not born of woman? the spirits that know "fear not, macbeth. no man that's born of woman shall e'er have power upon thee." then fly, false thanes, and mingle with the english epicures. the mind i sway by and the heart i bear
i now perceive it was not altogether your brother's evil disposition made him seek his death, but a provoking merit set awork by a reprovable badness in himself.
it's dry, sir.
the devil damn thee black, thou cream-faced loon! where got'st thou that goose look?
how malicious is my fortune, that i must repent to be just! (giving cornwall a letter) this is the letter which he spoke of, which approves him an intelligent party to the advantages of france. o heavens, that this treason were not, or not i the detector!
why, i think so. i am not such an ass, but i can keep my hand dry. but what's your jest?
there is ten thousand, 
go with me to the duchess.
a dry jest, sir.
geese, villain?
if the matter of this paper be certain, you have mighty business in hand.
are you full of them?
soldiers, sir.
true or false, it hath made thee earl of gloucester. seek out where thy father is, that he may be ready for our apprehension.
ay, sir, i have them at my fingers' ends. marry, now i let go your hand, i am barren.
go, prick thy face and over-red thy fear, thou lily-livered boy. what soldiers, patch? death of thy soul! those linen cheeks of thine are counselors to fear. what soldiers, whey-face?
(aside) if i find him comforting the king, it will stuff his suspicion more fully.(to cornwall) i will persevere in my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore between that and my blood.
o knight, thou lackest a cup of canary. when did i see thee so put down?
the english force, so please you.
i will lay trust upon thee, and thou shalt find a dearer father in my love.
never in your life, i think, unless you see canary put me down. methinks sometimes i have no more wit than a christian or an ordinary man has. but i am a great eater of beef, and i believe that does harm to my wit.
take thy face hence.
here is better than the open air. take it thankfully. i will piece out the comfort with what addition i can. i will not be long from you.
no question.
seyton!, i am sick at heart, when i behold, seyton, i say!, this push will cheer me ever, or disseat me now. i have lived long enough. my way of life and that which should accompany old age, as honor, love, obedience, troops of friends, i must not look to have, but, in their stead, curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honor, breath seyton!
all the power of his wits have given way to his impatience.
an i thought that, i'd forswear it. i'll ride home tomorrow, sir toby.
what's your gracious pleasure?
frateretto calls me and tells me nero is an angler in the lake of darkness. pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.
pourquoi, my dear knight?
what news more?
prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a gentleman or a yeoman?
what is "pourquoi"? do, or not do? i would i had bestowed that time in the tongues that i have in fencing, dancing, and bear-baiting. o, had i but followed the arts!
all is confirmed, my lord, which was reported.
a king, a king!
then hadst thou had an excellent head of hair.
i'll fight till from my bones my flesh be hacked. give me my armor.
no, he's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son, for he's a mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman before him.
why, would that have mended my hair?
'tis not needed yet.
to have a thousand with red burning spits come hissing in upon 'em!
past question, for thou seest it will not curl by nature.
i'll put it on. send out more horses. skirr the country round. hang those that talk of fear. give me mine armor. how does your patient, doctor?
the foul fiend bites my back.
but it becomes me well enough, does 't not?
not so sick, my lord, that keep her from her rest.
he's mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a horse's health, a boy's love, or a whore's oath.
excellent. it hangs like flax on a distaff. and i hope to see a housewife take thee between her legs and spin it off.
cure her of that. canst thou not minister to a mind diseased, pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, raze out the written troubles of the brain cleanse the stuffed bosom of that perilous stuff which weighs upon the heart?
it shall be done. i will arraign them straight. (to edgar) come, sit thou here, most learnèd justicer. thou, sapient sir, sit here., now, you she-foxes, 
faith, i'll home tomorrow, sir toby. your niece will not be seen. or if she be, it's four to one she'll none of me. the count himself here hard by woos her.
therein the patient must minister to himself.
look, where he stands and glares!, want'st thou eyes at trial, madam? (sings) come o'er the bourn, bessy, to me, 
she'll none o' the count. she'll not match above her degree, neither in estate, years, nor wit. i have heard her swear 't. tut, there's life in 't, man.
throw physic to the dogs; i'll none of it. seyton, send out., doctor, the thanes fly from me. come, sir, dispatch., if thou couldst, doctor, cast the water of my land, find her disease, and purge it to a sound and pristine health, that should applaud again., pull 't off, i say., what rhubarb, senna, or what purgative drug, would scour these english hence? hear'st thou of them?
(sings) her boat hath a leak, and she must not speak why she dares not come over to thee.
i'll stay a month longer. i am a fellow o' th' strangest mind i' th' world. i delight in masques and revels sometimes altogether.
ay, my good lord. your royal preparation
the foul fiend haunts poor tom in the voice of a nightingale. hoppedance cries in tom's belly for two white herring. croak not, black angel. i have no food for thee.
art thou good at these kickshawses, knight?
bring it after me. i will not be afraid of death and bane, till birnam forest come to dunsinane.
(to lear) how do you, sir? stand you not so amazed. will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
as any man in illyria, whatsoever he be, under the degree of my betters. and yet i will not compare with an old man.
(aside) were i from dunsinane away and clear, profit again should hardly draw me here.
(to edgar) thou robèd man of justice, take thy place. (to fool) and thou, his yoke-fellow of equity, bench by his side. (to kent) you are o' th' commission.
what is thy excellence in a galliard, knight?
cousins, i hope the days are near at hand that chambers will be safe.
let us deal justly.
faith, i can cut a caper.
we doubt it nothing.
(sings) sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd? thy sheep be in the corn. thy sheep shall take no harm. purr! the cat is gray.
and i can cut the mutton to 't.
what wood is this before us?
arraign her first. 'tis goneril. i here take my oath before this honorable assembly, she kicked the poor king her father.
and i think i have the back-trick simply as strong as any man in illyria.
the wood of birnam.
come hither, mistress. is your name goneril?
wherefore are these things hid? wherefore have these gifts a curtain before 'em? are they like to take dust, like mistress mall's picture? why dost thou not go to church in a galliard and come home in a coranto? my very walk should be a jig. i would not so much as make water but in a sink-a-pace. what dost thou mean? is it a world to hide virtues in? i did think, by the excellent constitution of thy leg, it was formed under the star of a galliard.
let every soldier hew him down a bough the numbers of our host and make discovery err in report of us.
she cannot deny it.
ay, 'tis strong, and it does indifferent well in a dun-colored stock. shall we set about some revels?
it shall be done.
cry you mercy, i took you for a joint-stool.
what shall we do else? were we not born under taurus?
we learn no other but the confident tyrant keeps still in dunsinane and will endure
and here's another, whose warped looks proclaim arms, arms, sword, fire, corruption in the place! false justicer, why hast thou let her 'scape?
taurus! that's sides and heart.
'tis his main hope: for, where there is advantage to be given, both more and less have given him the revolt, and none serve with him but constrainèd things whose hearts are absent too.
bless thy five wits.
no, sir, it is legs and thighs. let me see the caper. (sir
let our just censures industrious soldiership.
(to lear) o pity! sir, where is the patience now,
if the duke continue these favors towards you, cesario, you are like to be much advanced. he hath known you but three days, and already you are no stranger.
the time approaches that will with due decision make us know what we shall say we have and what we owe. thoughts speculative their unsure hopes relate, towards which, advance the war.
(aside) my tears begin to take his part so much, they'll mar my counterfeiting.
you either fear his humor or my negligence, that you call in question the continuance of his love. is he inconstant, sir, in his favors?
hang out our banners on the outward walls. the cry is still "they come!" our castle's strength will laugh a siege to scorn. here let them lie till famine and the ague eat them up. we might have met them dareful, beard to beard, and beat them backward home.
the little dogs and all, tray, blanch, and sweetheart, see, they bark at me.
no, believe me.
what is that noise?
tom will throw his head at them., avaunt, you curs! mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim,
i thank you. here comes the count.
it is the cry of women, my good lord.
hound or spaniel, brach or him, bobtail tyke or trundle-tail, tom will make them weep and wail. for with throwing thus my head, dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled. be thy mouth or black or white, do-de, de-de. cessez! come, march to wakes and fairs and market towns. poor tom, thy horn is dry.
who saw cesario, ho?
i have almost forgot the taste of fears. to hear a night-shriek, and my fell of hair would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir as life were in 't. i have supped full with horrors. direness, familiar to my slaughterous thoughts
then let them anatomize regan. see what breeds about her heart. is there any cause in nature that makes these hard hearts? (to edgar) you, sir, i entertain you for one of my hundred. only i do not like the fashion of your garments. you will say they are persian attire, but let them be changed.
on your attendance, my lord, here.
wherefore was that cry?
now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
(to viola and attendants) stand you a while aloof. (to viola) cesario, thou know'st no less but all. i have unclasped to thee the book even of my secret soul. be not denied access, stand at her doors, and tell them there thy fixed foot shall grow till thou have audience.
the queen, my lord, is dead.
make no noise, make no noise. draw the curtains, so, so, so. we'll go to supper i' th' morning. so, so, so. (sleeps)
sure, my noble lord, if she be so abandoned to her sorrow
she should have died hereafter. there would have been a time for such a word. tomorrow, and tomorrow, and tomorrow, to the last syllable of recorded time, and all our yesterdays have lighted fools the way to dusty death. out, out, brief candle! life's but a walking shadow, a poor player and then is heard no more. it is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.
and i'll go to bed at noon.
be clamorous, and leap all civil bounds, rather than make unprofited return.
thou comest to use thy tongue; thy story quickly.
(to kent) come hither, friend. where is the king my master?
say i do speak with her, my lord, what then?
gracious my lord, but know not how to do 't.
here, sir, but trouble him not. his wits are gone.
o, then unfold the passion of my love, it shall become thee well to act my woes; she will attend it better in thy youth than in a nuncio's of more grave aspect.
well, say, sir.
good friend, i prithee, take him in thy arms. i have o'erheard a plot of death upon him.
i think not so, my lord.
as i did stand my watch upon the hill, i looked toward birnam, and anon methought the wood began to move.
and drive towards dover, friend, where thou shalt meet both welcome and protection. take up thy master. if thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life, with thine and all that offer to defend him, and follow me, that will to some provision give thee quick conduct.
dear lad, believe it. that say thou art a man. diana's lip is not more smooth and rubious. thy small pipe is as the maiden's organ, shrill and sound, and all is semblative a woman's part. for this affair. (to curio and attendants) some four or five attend him. all, if you will, for i myself am best when least in company. (to viola) prosper well in this, and thou shalt live as freely as thy lord,
liar and slave!
oppressèd nature sleeps., this rest might yet have balmed thy broken sinews, which, if convenience will not allow, (to fool) come, help to bear thy master. thou must not stay behind.
i'll do my best to woo your lady, (aside) yet, a barful strife, whoe'er i woo, myself would be his wife.
within this three mile may you see it coming; i say, a moving grove.
come, come, away.
nay, either tell me where thou hast been, or i will not open my lips so wide as a bristle may enter in way of thy excuse. my lady will hang thee for thy absence.
if thou speak'st false, upon the next tree shall thou hang alive till famine cling thee. if thy speech be sooth, i pull in resolution and begin to doubt th' equivocation of the fiend that lies like truth. "fear not, till birnam wood do come to dunsinane"; and now a wood if this which he avouches does appear, there is nor flying hence nor tarrying here. i 'gin to be aweary of the sun, and wish th' estate o' th' world were now undone., at least we'll die with harness on our back.
when we our betters see bearing our woes, we scarcely think our miseries our foes. leaving free things and happy shows behind. but then the mind much sufferance doth o'erskip when grief hath mates and bearing fellowship. how light and portable my pain seems now he childed as i fathered. tom, away! mark the high noises and thyself bewray when false opinion, whose wrong thought defiles thee, in thy just proof repeals and reconciles thee. lurk, lurk.
let her hang me. he that is well hanged in this world needs to fear no colors.
now near enough. your leafy screens throw down, and show like those you are., you, worthy uncle, shall, with my cousin, your right-noble son, lead our first battle. worthy macduff and we according to our order.
(to goneril) post speedily to my lord your husband. show him this letter. the army of france is landed. , seek out the traitor gloucester.
make that good.
fare you well. do we but find the tyrant's power tonight, let us be beaten if we cannot fight.
hang him instantly.
he shall see none to fear.
those clamorous harbingers of blood and death.
pluck out his eyes.
a good lenten answer. i can tell thee where that saying was born, of "i fear no colors."
they have tied me to a stake. i cannot fly, but, bearlike, i must fight the course. what's he that was not born of woman? such a one am i to fear, or none.
leave him to my displeasure., edmund, keep you our sister company. the revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous father are not fit for your beholding. advise the duke where you are going, to a most festinate preparation. we are bound to the like. our posts shall be swift and intelligent betwixt us., farewell, dear sister. (to edmund) farewell, my lord of gloucester.
where, good mistress mary?
what is thy name?
how now? where's the king?
in the wars. and that may you be bold to say in your foolery.
thou 'lt be afraid to hear it.
my lord of gloucester hath conveyed him hence. some five or six and thirty of his knights, who with some other of the lord's dependants are gone with him towards dover, where they boast to have well-armèd friends.
well, god give them wisdom that have it. and those that are fools, let them use their talents.
no, though thou call'st thyself a hotter name than any is in hell.
get horses for your mistress.
yet you will be hanged for being so long absent. or to be turned away, is not that as good as a hanging to you?
my name's macbeth.
farewell, sweet lord, and sister.
many a good hanging prevents a bad marriage, and, for turning away, let summer bear it out.
more hateful to mine ear.
edmund, farewell.
you are resolute, then?
no, nor more fearful.
go seek the traitor gloucester. pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.
not so, neither, but i am resolved on two points.
thou liest, abhorrèd tyrant. with my sword i'll prove the lie thou speak'st.
though well we may not pass upon his life without the form of justice, yet our power may blame, but not control., who's there? the traitor?
that if one break, the other will hold. or, if both break, your gaskins fall.
thou wast born of woman. but swords i smile at, weapons laugh to scorn,
ingrateful fox, 'tis he.
apt, in good faith, very apt. well, go thy way. if sir toby would leave drinking, thou wert as witty a piece of eve's flesh as any in illyria.
that way the noise is. tyrant, show thy face! if thou beest slain, and with no stroke of mine, my wife and children's ghosts will haunt me still. i cannot strike at wretched kerns, whose arms or else my sword with an unbattered edge i sheathe again undeeded. there thou shouldst be; by this great clatter, one of the greatest note seems bruited. let me find him, fortune,
bind fast his corky arms.
peace, you rogue, no more o' that. here comes my lady. make your excuse wisely, you were best.
this way, my lord. the castle's gently rendered. the tyrant's people on both sides do fight, the noble thanes do bravely in the war, the day almost itself professes yours,
what mean your graces? good my friends, consider you are my guests. do me no foul play, friends.
(aside) wit, an 't be thy will, put me into good fooling! those wits, that think they have thee, do very oft prove fools. and i, that am sure i lack thee, may pass for a wise man. for what says quinapalus? "better a witty fool, than a foolish wit."
we have met with foes that strike beside us.
bind him, i say.
god bless thee, lady!
enter, sir, the castle.
hard, hard., o filthy traitor!
take the fool away.
why should i play the roman fool and die on mine own sword? whiles i see lives, the gashes do better upon them.
unmerciful lady as you are, i'm none.
do you not hear, fellows? take away the lady.
turn, hellhound, turn!
to this chair bind him., villain, thou shalt find, 
go to, you're a dry fool. i'll no more of you. besides, you grow dishonest.
of all men else i have avoided thee. with blood of thine already.
by the kind gods, 'tis most ignobly done to pluck me by the beard.
two faults, madonna, that drink and good counsel will amend. for give the dry fool drink, then is the fool not dry. bid the dishonest man mend himself. if he mend, he is no longer dishonest. if he cannot, let the botcher mend him. anything that's mended is but patched. virtue that transgresses is but patched with sin, and sin that amends is but patched with virtue. if that this simple syllogism will serve, so. if it will not, what remedy? as there is no true cuckold but calamity, so beauty's a flower. the lady bade take away the fool. therefore, i say again, take her away.
i have no words. my voice is in my sword. thou bloodier villain than terms can give thee out!
so white, and such a traitor?
sir, i bade them take away you.
thou losest labor. as easy mayst thou the intrenchant air let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests; i bear a charmèd life, which must not yield to one of woman born.
naughty lady, these hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin will quicken and accuse thee. i am your host. with robbers' hands my hospitable favors
misprision in the highest degree! lady, cucullus non facit monachum, that's as much to say as i wear not motley in my brain. good madonna, give me leave to prove you a fool.
despair thy charm, and let the angel whom thou still hast served untimely ripped.
come, sir, what letters had you late from france?
can you do it?
accursèd be that tongue that tells me so, for it hath cowed my better part of man! and be these juggling fiends no more believed, that keep the word of promise to our ear, and break it to our hope. i'll not fight with thee.
be simple-answered, for we know the truth.
dexterously, good madonna.
then yield thee, coward, and live to be the show and gaze o' th' time. painted on a pole, and underwrit, "here may you see the tyrant."
and what confederacy have you with the traitors late footed in the kingdom?
make your proof.
i will not yield, to kiss the ground before young malcolm's feet, and to be baited with the rabble's curse. and thou opposed, being of no woman born, yet i will try the last. before my body i throw my warlike shield. lay on, macduff, and damned be him that first cries, "hold, enough!"
to whose hands
i must catechise you for it, madonna. good my mouse of virtue, answer me.
i would the friends we miss were safe arrived.
i have a letter guessingly set down, which came from one that's of a neutral heart, and not from one opposed.
well, sir, for want of other idleness, i'll bide your proof.
some must go off. and yet, by these i see, so great a day as this is cheaply bought.
cunning.
good madonna, why mournest thou?
macduff is missing, and your noble son.
and false.
good fool, for my brother's death.
your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt. the which no sooner had his prowess confirmed in the unshrinking station where he fought, but like a man he died.
where hast thou sent the king?
i think his soul is in hell, madonna.
then he is dead?
to dover.
i know his soul is in heaven, fool.
ay, and brought off the field. your cause of sorrow it hath no end.
wherefore to dover? wast thou not charged at peril, 
the more fool, madonna, to mourn for your brother's soul being in heaven. take away the fool, gentlemen.
had he his hurts before?
wherefore to dover?, let him first answer that.
what think you of this fool, malvolio? doth he not mend?
ay, on the front.
i am tied to th' stake, and i must stand the course.
yes, and shall do till the pangs of death shake him. infirmity, that decays the wise, doth ever make the better fool.
why then, god's soldier be he! had i as many sons as i have hairs, i would not wish them to a fairer death.
wherefore to dover, sir?
god send you, sir, a speedy infirmity, for the better increasing your folly! sir toby will be sworn that i am no fox, but he will not pass his word for two pence that you are no fool.
he's worth more sorrow, and that i'll spend for him.
because i would not see thy cruèl nails in his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs. the sea, with such a storm as his bare head in hell-black night endured, would have buoyed up, and quenched the stellèd fires. if wolves had at thy gate howled that stern time, thou shouldst have said, "good porter, turn the key," all cruèls else subscribed. but i shall see the wingèd vengeance overtake such children.
how say you to that, malvolio?
he's worth no more. they say he parted well and paid his score. and so, god be with him! here comes newer comfort.
upon these eyes of thine i'll set my foot.
i saw him put down the other day with an ordinary fool that
hail, king! for so thou art. behold where stands i see thee compassed with thy kingdom's pearl, that speak my salutation in their minds, whose voices i desire aloud with mine. hail, king of scotland!
he that will think to live till he be old, give me some help!
has no more brain than a stone. look you now, he's out of his guard already. unless you laugh and minister occasion to him, he is gagged. i protest i take these wise men that crow so at these set kind of fools no better than the fools' zanies.
hail, king of scotland!
o cruel! o you gods!
oh, you are sick of self-love, malvolio, and taste with a distempered appetite. to be generous, guiltless, and of free disposition is to take those things for bird-bolts that you deem cannon-bullets. there is no slander in an allowed fool, though he do nothing but rail. nor no railing in a known discreet man, though he do nothing but reprove.
we shall not spend a large expense of time before we reckon with your several loves and make us even with you. my thanes and kinsmen, henceforth be earls, the first that ever scotland which would be planted newly with the time, as calling home our exiled friends abroad that fled the snares of watchful tyranny, producing forth the cruel ministers who, as 'tis thought, by self and violent hands took off her life; this, and what needful else that calls upon us, by the grace of grace, we will perform in measure, time, and place. whom we invite to see us crowned at scone.
one side will mock another, th' other too.
now mercury endue thee with leasing, for thou speakest well of fools!
if you see vengeance, 
madam, there is at the gate a young gentleman much desires to speak with you.
open your ears, for which of you will stop the vent of hearing when loud rumor speaks? i, from the orient to the drooping west, making the wind my post-horse, still unfold upon my tongues continual slanders ride, the which in every language i pronounce, stuffing the ears of men with false reports. i speak of peace while covert enmity and who but rumor, who but only i, make fearful musters and prepared defense, whiles the big year, swoll'n with some other grief, is thought with child by the stern tyrant war, blown by surmises, jealousies, conjectures, and of so easy and so plain a stop that the blunt monster with uncounted heads, the still-discordant wav'ring multitude, my well-known body to anatomize among my household? why is rumor here? i run before king harry's victory, who in a bloody field by shrewsbury quenching the flame of bold rebellion even with the rebels' blood. but what mean i to speak so true at first? my office is to noise abroad that harry monmouth fell
hold your hand, my lord! i have served you ever since i was a child. but better service have i never done you
from the count orsino, is it?
and that the king before the douglas' rage stooped his anointed head as low as death. this have i rumored through the peasant towns between that royal field of shrewsbury where hotspur's father, old northumberland, lies crafty-sick. the posts come tiring on, and not a man of them brings other news than they have learnt of me. from rumor's tongues
how now, you dog?
i know not, madam. 'tis a fair young man, and well attended.
who keeps the gate here, ho?
if you did wear a beard upon your chin, i'd shake it on this quarrel. what do you mean?
who of my people hold him in delay?
where is the earl?
my villein!
sir toby, madam, your kinsman.
what shall i say you are?
nay then, come on, and take the chance of anger.
fetch him off, i pray you. he speaks nothing but madman. fie on him!
tell thou the earl that the lord bardolph doth attend him here.
give me thy sword., a peasant stand up thus? (takes a sword, runs at first servant behind, and kills him)
go you, malvolio. if it be a suit from the count, i am sick, or not at home. what you will, to dismiss it.
his lordship is walked forth into the orchard. and he himself will answer.
oh, i am slain!, my lord, you have one eye left to see some mischief on him. oh!
now you see, sir, how your fooling grows old, and people dislike it.
here comes the earl.
lest it see more, prevent it., out, vile jelly!
thou hast spoke for us, madonna, as if thy eldest son should be a fool, whose skull jove cram with brains, for, here he comes, one of thy kin has a most weak pia mater.
what news, lord bardolph? every minute now should be the father of some stratagem. the times are wild. contention, like a horse and bears down all before him.
(plucks out gloucester's other eye) where is thy luster now?
by mine honor, half-drunk. what is he at the gate, cousin?
noble earl, i bring you certain news from shrewsbury.
all dark and comfortless. where's my son edmund? to quit this horrid act.
a gentleman.
good, an god will!
out, treacherous villain! thou call'st on him that hates thee. it was he that made the overture of thy treasons to us, who is too good to pity thee.
a gentleman? what gentleman?
as good as heart can wish. and, in the fortune of my lord your son, prince harry slain outright; and both the blunts killed by the hand of douglas; young prince john and westmoreland and stafford fled the field; is prisoner to your son. o, such a day, so fought, so followed, and so fairly won, came not till now to dignify the times since caesar's fortunes.
kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!
'tis a gentleman here, a plague o' these pickle herring!
how is this derived?
go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell his way to dover.
good sir toby!
i spake with one, my lord, that came from thence, a gentleman well bred and of good name, that freely rendered me these news for true.
(to cornwall) how is 't, my lord? how look you?
cousin, cousin, how have you come so early by this lethargy?
here comes my servant travers, who i sent
turn out that eyeless villain. throw this slave upon the dunghill., regan, i bleed apace. untimely comes this hurt. give me your arm.
lechery! i defy lechery. there's one at the gate.
my lord, i overrode him on the way; and he is furnished with no certainties more than he haply may retail from me.
i'll never care what wickedness i do,
ay, marry, what is he?
now, travers, what good tidings comes with you?
if she live long, and in the end meet the old course of death, women will all turn monsters.
let him be the devil, an he will, i care not. give me faith, say i. well, it's all one.
with joyful tidings and, being better horsed, outrode me. after him came spurring hard a gentleman, almost forspent with speed, that stopp'd by me to breathe his bloodied horse. i did demand what news from shrewsbury. he told me that rebellion had bad luck and that young harry percy's spur was cold. with that he gave his able horse the head against the panting sides of his poor jade up to the rowel-head, and starting so he seemed in running to devour the way, staying no longer question.
let's follow the old earl, and get the bedlam allows itself to any thing.
what's a drunken man like, fool?
ha? again: of hotspur, coldspur? that rebellion had met ill luck?
go thou. i'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs to apply to his bleeding face. now heaven help him!
like a drowned man, a fool and a madman. one draught above heat makes him a fool, the second mads him, and a third drowns him.
my lord, i'll tell you what: if my young lord your son have not the day, upon mine honor, for a silken point
yet better thus, and known to be contemned, than still contemned and flattered. to be worst, the lowest and most dejected thing of fortune stands still in esperance, lives not in fear. the worst returns to laughter. welcome, then, thou unsubstantial air that i embrace! the wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst owes nothing to thy blasts.
go thou and seek the crowner, and let him sit o' my coz. for he's in the third degree of drink, he's drowned. go look after him.
why should that gentleman that rode by travers give then such instances of loss?
my father, poorly led? world, world, o world! but that thy strange mutations make us hate thee, life would not yield to age.
he is but mad yet, madonna, and the fool shall look to the madman.
who, he? he was some hilding fellow that had stolen the horse he rode on and, upon my life,
(to gloucester) o my good lord, i have been your tenant and your father's tenant these fourscore years.
madam, yond young fellow swears he will speak with you. i told him you were sick. he takes on him to understand so much, and therefore comes to speak with you. i told him you were asleep. he seems to have a foreknowledge of that too, and therefore comes to speak with you. what is to be said to him, lady? he's fortified against any denial.
yea, this man's brow, like to a title leaf, foretells the nature of a tragic volume. so looks the strand whereon the imperious flood hath left a witness'd usurpation., 
away, get thee away. good friend, be gone. thy comforts can do me no good at all. thee they may hurt.
tell him he shall not speak with me.
i ran from shrewsbury, my noble lord, where hateful death put on his ugliest mask to fright our party.
alack, sir, you cannot see your way.
has been told so, and he says he'll stand at your door like a sheriff's post, and be the supporter to a bench, but he'll speak with you.
how doth my son and brother? is apter than thy tongue to tell thy errand. even such a man, so faint, so spiritless, so dull, so dead in look, so woebegone, drew priam's curtain in the dead of night, but priam found the fire ere he his tongue, and i my percy's death ere thou report'st it. this thou wouldst say, "your son did thus and thus; your brother thus; so fought the noble douglas", but in the end, to stop my ear indeed, thou hast a sigh to blow away this praise, ending with "brother, son, and all are dead."
i have no way, and therefore want no eyes.
what kind o' man is he?
douglas is living, and your brother yet,
i stumbled when i saw. full oft 'tis seen, our means secure us and our mere defects prove our commodities. o dear son edgar, might i but live to see thee in my touch, i'd say i had eyes again!
why, of mankind.
why, he is dead. see what a ready tongue suspicion hath! he that but fears the thing he would not know hath, by instinct, knowledge from others' eyes that what he feared is chancèd. yet speak, morton.
how now? who's there?
what manner of man?
and i will take it as a sweet disgrace and make thee rich for doing me such wrong.
(aside) o gods! who is 't can say "i am at the worst"? i am worse than e'er i was.
of very ill manner. he'll speak with you, will you or no.
you are too great to be by me gainsaid, your spirit is too true, your fears too certain.
'tis poor mad tom.
of what personage and years is he?
i see a strange confession in thine eye. thou shak'st thy head and hold'st it fear or sin to speak a truth. if he be slain, say so. the tongue offends not that reports his death; not he which says the dead is not alive. yet the first bringer of unwelcome news hath but a losing office, and his tongue sounds ever after as a sullen bell
(aside) and worse i may be yet. the worst is not so long as we can say "this is the worst."
not yet old enough for a man, nor young enough for a boy, as a squash is before 'tis a peascod, or a codling when 'tis almost an apple. 'tis with him in standing water, between boy and man. he is very well-favored, and he speaks very shrewishly. one would think his mother's milk were scarce out of him.
i cannot think, my lord, your son is dead.
(to edgar) fellow, where goest?
let him approach. call in my gentlewoman.
i am sorry i should force you to believe that which i would to god i had not seen, but these mine eyes saw him in bloody state, to harry monmouth; whose swift wrath beat down the never-daunted percy to the earth, from whence with life he never more sprung up. in few, his death, whose spirit lent a fire being bruited once, took fire and heat away from the best tempered courage in his troops; for from his metal was his party steeled, which, once in him abated, all the rest and as the thing that's heavy in itself upon enforcement flies with greatest speed,
is it a beggarman?
gentlewoman, my lady calls.
so did our men, heavy in hotspur's loss, lend to this weight such lightness with their fear than did our soldiers, aiming at their safety, fly from the field. then was the noble worcester too soon ta'en prisoner; and that furious scot, the bloody douglas, whose well-laboring sword gan vail his stomach and did grace the shame of those that turned their backs and in his flight, stumbling in fear, was took. the sum of all is that the king hath won and hath sent out under the conduct of young lancaster and westmoreland. this is the news at full.
madman and beggar too.
give me my veil. come, throw it o'er my face. (olivia puts on a veil) we'll once more hear orsino's embassy.
for this i shall have time enough to mourn. in poison there is physic, and these news, being sick, have in some measure made me well. and as the wretch whose fever-weakened joints, like strengthless hinges, buckle under life, impatient of his fit, breaks like a fire weakened with grief, being now enraged with grief, are thrice themselves. hence therefore, thou nice crutch. a scaly gauntlet now with joints of steel must glove this hand. and hence, thou sickly coif. which princes, fleshed with conquest, aim to hit. now bind my brows with iron, and approach the ragged'st hour that time and spite dare bring to frown upon th'enraged northumberland. keep the wild flood confined. let order die, and let this world no longer be a stage
he has some reason, else he could not beg. i' th' last night's storm i such a fellow saw, which made me think a man a worm. my son came then into my mind, and yet my mind as flies to wanton boys are we to th' gods. they kill us for their sport.
the honorable lady of the house, which is she?
to feed contention in a lingering act; but let one spirit of the firstborn cain on bloody courses, the rude scene may end, and darkness be the burier of the dead.
(aside) how should this be? bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,
speak to me. i shall answer for her. your will?
this strainèd passion doth you wrong, my lord.
is that the naked fellow?
most radiant, exquisite and unmatchable beauty, i pray you, tell me if this be the lady of the house, for i never saw her. i would be loath to cast away my speech, for besides that it is excellently well penned, i have taken great pains to con it. good beauties, let me sustain no scorn. i am very comptible, even to the least sinister usage.
sweet earl, divorce not wisdom from your honor. lean on your health, the which, if you give o'er to stormy passion, must perforce decay. you cast th' event of war, my noble lord, and summed the account of chance before you said that, in the dole of blows your son might drop. you knew he walked o'er perils on an edge, more likely to fall in than to get o'er. you were advised his flesh was capable would lift him where most trade of danger ranged. yet did you say "go forth," and none of this, though strongly apprehended, could restrain the stiff-borne action. what hath then befall'n, more than that being which was like to be?
ay, my lord.
whence came you, sir?
we all that are engagèd to this loss knew that we ventured on such dangerous seas that if we wrought out life, 'twas ten to one; choked the respect of likely peril feared;
then prithee, get thee gone. if for my sake thou wilt o'ertake us hence a mile or twain i' th' way toward dover, do it for ancient love. which i'll entreat to lead me.
i can say little more than i have studied, and that question's out of my part. good gentle one, give me modest assurance if you be the lady of the house, that i may proceed in my speech.
and since we are o'erset, venture again. come, we will all put forth, body and goods.
alack, sir, he is mad.
are you a comedian?
'tis more than time., and, my most noble lord, the gentle archbishop of york is up with well-appointed powers. he is a man who with a double surety binds his followers. my lord your son had only but the corpse, for that same word "rebellion" did divide the action of their bodies from their souls, and they did fight with queasiness, constrained, as men drink potions, that their weapons only this word "rebellion," it had froze them up as fish are in a pond. but now the bishop turns insurrection to religion. supposed sincere and holy in his thoughts, and doth enlarge his rising with the blood of fair king richard, scraped from pomfret stones; derives from heaven his quarrel and his cause; tells them he doth bestride a bleeding land, and more and less do flock to follow him.
'tis the time's plague when madmen lead the blind. do as i bid thee. or rather, do thy pleasure. above the rest, be gone.
no, my profound heart. and yet, by the very fangs of malice i swear, i am not that i play. are you the lady of the house?
i knew of this before, but, to speak truth, this present grief had wiped it from my mind. go in with me and counsel every man get posts and letters, and make friends with speed. never so few, and never yet more need.
come on 't what will.
if i do not usurp myself, i am.
sirrah, you giant, what says the doctor to my water?
sirrah, naked fellow, 
most certain, if you are she, you do usurp yourself, for what is yours to bestow is not yours to reserve. but this is from my commission. i will on with my speech in your praise and then show you the heart of my message.
he said, sir, the water itself was a good healthy water, but, for the party that owed it, he might have more diseases than he knew for.
poor tom's a-cold. (aside) i cannot daub it further.
come to what is important in 't. i forgive you the praise.
foolish-compounded clay, man, is not able to invent anything that tends to laughter more than i invent, or is invented on me. i am not only witty in myself, but the cause that wit is in other men. i do here walk before thee like a sow that hath thee into my service for any other reason than to set me off, why then i have no judgment. thou whoreson mandrake, thou art fitter to be worn in my cap than to wait at my heels. i was never manned with an agate till now, but i will inset you back again to your master for a jewel. the juvenal, the prince your master, whose chin is not yet fledge, i will sooner have a beard grow in the palm of my hand than he shall get one off his cheek, and yet he will not stick to say not a hair amiss yet. he may keep it still at a face royal, for a barber shall never earn sixpence out of it, and yet he'll be crowing as if he had writ man ever since his father was a bachelor. he may keep his own grace, but he's almost out of
come hither, fellow.
alas, i took great pains to study it, and 'tis poetical.
the satin for my short cloak and my slops?
(aside) and yet i must., bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
it is the more like to be feigned. i pray you, keep it in. i heard you were saucy at my gates and allowed your approach rather to wonder at you than to hear you. if you be not mad, be gone. if you have reason, be brief. 'tis not that time of moon with me to make one in so skipping a dialogue.
he said, sir, you should procure him better assurance than bardolph. he would not take his band and yours. he liked not the security.
know'st thou the way to dover?
will you hoist sail, sir? here lies your way.
hotter! a whoreson achitophel, a rascally yea-forsooth knave, to bear a gentleman in hand and then stand upon security! the whoreson smoothy-pates do now wear nothing but high shoes and bunches of keys at their girdles; they must stand upon security. i had as lief they would put ratsbane in my mouth as offer to stop it with "security." i looked he should have sent me two-and-twenty yards of satin, as i am a true knight, and he sends me "security." well, and the lightness of his wife shines through it, and yet cannot he see though he have his own lantern to light him. where's bardolph?
both stile and gate, horseway and footpath. poor tom hath been scared out of his good wits. bless thee, goodman's son, from the foul fiend! five fiends have been in poor tom at once: of lust, as obidicut; hobbididence, prince of dumbness; mahu, of stealing; modo, of murder; flibbertigibbet, of mopping and mowing, who since possesses chambermaids and waiting-women. so bless thee, master.
no, good swabber, i am to hull here a little longer. some mollification for your giant, sweet lady.
he's gone into smithfield to buy your worship a horse.
here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens' plagues have humbled to all strokes. that i am wretched makes thee the happier. heavens, deal so still. let the superfluous and lust-dieted man, because he doth not feel, feel your power quickly. so distribution should undo excess, and each man have enough. dost thou know dover?
tell me your mind.
i bought him in paul's, and he'll buy me a horse in smithfield. an i could get me but a wife in the stews, i were manned, horsed, and wived.
ay, master.
i am a messenger.
sir, here comes the nobleman that committed the prince for striking
looks fearfully in the confinèd deep. bring me but to the very brim of it, and i'll repair the misery thou dost bear with something rich about me. from that place
sure, you have some hideous matter to deliver, when the courtesy of it is so fearful. speak your office.
wait close. i will not see him.
give me thy arm. poor tom shall lead thee.
it alone concerns your ear. i bring no overture of war, no taxation of homage. i hold the olive in my hand. my words are as full of peace as matter.
what's he that goes there?
welcome, my lord. i marvel our mild husband not met us on the way.
yet you began rudely. what are you? what would you?
falstaff, an 't please your lordship.
now, where's your master?
the rudeness that hath appeared in me have i learned from my entertainment. what i am and what i would are as secret as maidenhead. to your ears, divinity. to any other's, profanation.
he that was in question for the robbery?
madam, within, but never man so changed. i told him of the army that was landed. his answer was "the worse." of gloucester's treachery and of the loyal service of his son, when i informed him, then he called me "sot," and told me i had turned the wrong side out. what like, offensive.
give us the place alone. we will hear this divinity.
shrewsbury, and, as i hear, is now going with some charge to the lord john of lancaster.
(to edmund) then shall you go no further. it is the cowish terror of his spirit that dares not undertake. he'll not feel wrongs may prove effects. back, edmund, to my brother. hasten his musters and conduct his powers. i must change names at home, and give the distaff into my husband's hands. this trusty servant if you dare venture in your own behalf, a mistress's command. wear this. spare speech. decline your head. this kiss, if it durst speak, would stretch thy spirits up into the air.
now, sir, what is your text?
what, to york? call him back again.
yours in the ranks of death.
most sweet lady, 
sir john falstaff!
my most dear gloucester!
a comfortable doctrine, and much may be said of it. where lies your text?
boy, tell him i am deaf.
oh, the difference of man and man! to thee a woman's services are due.
in orsino's bosom.
you must speak louder. my master is deaf.
madam, here comes my lord.
in his bosom? in what chapter of his bosom?
i am sure he is, to the hearing of any thing good., go pluck him by the elbow. i must speak with him.
i have been worth the whistle.
to answer by the method, in the first of his heart.
sir john!
o goneril, you are not worth the dust which the rude wind blows in your face. i fear your disposition. that nature, which contemns its origin she that herself will sliver and disbranch from her material sap perforce must wither and come to deadly use.
oh, i have read it. it is heresy. have you no more to say?
what, a young knave and begging? is there not wars? is not the rebels need soldiers? though it be a shame to be on any side but one, it is worse shame to beg than to be on the
no more. the text is foolish.
good madam, let me see your face.
worst side, were it worse than the name of rebellion can tell how to make it.
wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile. tigers, not daughters, what have you performed? a father, and a gracious agèd man, whose reverence even the head-lugged bear would lick, most barbarous, most degenerate, have you madded.
have you any commission from your lord to negotiate with my face? you are now out of your text. but we will draw the curtain and show you the picture. look you, sir, such a one i was this present. is 't not well done?
you mistake me, sir.
a man, a prince by him so benefited? if that the heavens do not their visible spirits send quickly down to tame these vile offenses, it will come: like monsters of the deep.
excellently done, if god did all.
why sir, did i say you were an honest man? setting my knighthood and my soldiership aside, i had lied in my throat if i had said so.
milk-livered man that bear'st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs, who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning thine honor from thy suffering; that not know'st ere they have done their mischief. where's thy drum? france spreads his banners in our noiseless land, with plumèd helm thy state begins to threat, whiles thou, a moral fool, sits still and cries,
'tis in grain, sir. 'twill endure wind and weather.
i pray you, sir, then set your knighthood and our soldiership you say i am any other than an honest man.
see thyself, devil! proper deformity shows not in the fiend so horrid as in woman.
'tis beauty truly blent, whose red and white nature's own sweet and cunning hand laid on. if you will lead these graces to the grave and leave the world no copy.
i give thee leave to tell me so? i lay aside that which grows to me? if thou gett'st any leave of me, hang me; if thou tak'st leave, thou wert better be hanged. you hunt counter. hence!
o vain fool!
o, sir, i will not be so hard-hearted. i will give out divers schedules of my beauty. it shall be inventoried, and every particle and utensil labeled to my will: as, item, two lips indifferent red; item, two grey eyes, with lids to them; item, one neck, one chin, and so forth. were you sent hither to praise me?
sir, my lord would speak with you.
thou changèd and self-covered thing, for shame! bemonster not thy feature. were 't my fitness they are apt enough to dislocate and tear thy flesh and bones. howe'er thou art a fiend, a woman's shape doth shield thee.
i see you what you are, you are too proud. my lord and master loves you. oh, such love could be but recompensed though you were crowned the nonpareil of beauty.
sir john falstaff, a word with you.
marry, your manhood, mew!
how does he love me?
my good lord. god give your lordship good time of the day. i am glad to see your lordship abroad. i heard say your advice. your lordship, though not clean past your youth, have yet some smack of an ague in you, some relish of the saltness of time in you, and i most humbly beseech your lordship to have a reverent care of your health.
what news?
with adorations, fertile tears,
shrewsbury.
o my good lord, the duke of cornwall's dead, slain by his servant, going to put out the other eye of gloucester.
your lord does know my mind. i cannot love him. yet i suppose him virtuous, know him noble, of great estate, of fresh and stainless youth.
an 't please your lordship, i hear his majesty is returned with some discomfort from wales.
gloucester's eyes?
in voices well divulged, free, learned, and valiant; a gracious person. but yet i cannot love him; he might have took his answer long ago.
i talk not of his majesty. you would not come when i sent
a servant that he bred, thrilled with remorse, to his great master; who thereat enraged flew on him and amongst them felled him dead, but not without that harmful stroke, which since hath plucked him after.
if i did love you in my master's flame, with such a suffering, such a deadly life, i would not understand it.
and i hear, moreover, his highness is fallen into this same whoreson apoplexy.
this shows you are above, so speedily can venge! but oh, poor gloucester, lost he his other eye?
why, what would you?
well, god mend him. i pray you let me speak with you.
both, both, my lord., this letter, madam, craves a speedy answer. 'tis from your sister.
make me a willow cabin at your gate and call upon my soul within the house. write loyal cantons of contemned love halloo your name to the reverberate hills and make the babbling gossip of the air cry out "olivia!" oh, you should not rest between the elements of air and earth,
this apoplexy, as i take it, is a kind of lethargy, an 't please tingling.
one way i like this well. but being widow, and my gloucester with her, may all the building in my fancy pluck upon my hateful life. another way the news is not so tart., i'll read and answer.
you might do much. what is your parentage?
what tell you me of it? be it as it is.
where was his son when they did take his eyes?
above my fortunes, yet my state is well. i am a gentleman.
it hath its original from much grief, from study, and perturbation of the brain. i have read the cause of his effects
come with my lady hither.
get you to your lord. i cannot love him. let him send no more, to tell me how he takes it. fare you well. i thank you for your pains. spend this for me.
i think you are fallen into the disease, for you hear not what i say to you.
he is not here.
i am no fee'd post, lady. keep your purse. my master, not myself, lacks recompense. and let your fervor, like my master's, be placed in contempt. farewell, fair cruelty.
very well, my lord, very well. rather, an 't please you, it is the disease of not listening, the malady of not marking, that
no, my good lord. i met him back again.
"what is your parentage?" "above my fortunes, yet my state is well. thy tongue, thy face, thy limbs, actions, and spirit, do give thee fivefold blazon. not too fast! soft, soft! unless the master were the man. how now? even so quickly may one catch the plague? with an invisible and subtle stealth to creep in at mine eyes. well, let it be., what ho, malvolio!
to punish you by the heels would amend the attention of your ears, and i care not if i do become your physician.
knows he the wickedness?
here, madam, at your service.
i am as poor as job, my lord, but not so patient. your lordship may minister the potion of imprisonment to me in your prescriptions, the wise may make some dram of a scruple, or indeed a scruple itself.
ay, my good lord. 'twas he informed against him, might have the freer course.
run after that same peevish messenger, would i or not. tell him i'll none of it. olivia hands him a ring desire him not to flatter with his lord, nor hold him up with hopes. i am not for him. i'll give him reasons for 't. hie thee, malvolio.
i sent for you, when there were matters against you for your life, to come speak with me.
gloucester, i live to thank thee for the love thou showed'st the king, and to revenge thine eyes., come hither, friend. tell me what more thou know'st.
madam, i will.
this land-service, i did not come.
why the king of france is so suddenly gone back know you the reason?
i do i know not what and fear to find mine eye too great a flatterer for my mind. what is decreed must be, and be this so.
well, the truth is, sir john, you live in great infamy.
something he left imperfect in the state which, since his coming forth, is thought of; which imports to the kingdom so much fear and danger that his personal return was most required and necessary.
will you stay no longer, nor will you not that i go with you?
he that buckles him in my belt cannot live in less.
who hath he left behind him general?
by your patience, no. my stars shine darkly over me. the malignancy of my fate might perhaps distemper yours. therefore i shall crave of you your leave that i may bear my evils alone. it were a bad recompense for your love to lay any of them on you.
your means are very slender, and your waste is great.
the marshal of france, monsieur la far.
let me yet know of you whither you are bound.
and my waist slender.
did your letters pierce the queen to any demonstration of grief?
no, sooth, sir. my determinate voyage is mere extravagancy. but i perceive in you so excellent a touch of modesty that you will not extort from me what i am willing to keep in. therefore it charges me in manners the rather to express myself. you must know of me then, antonio, my name is sebastian, which i called roderigo. my father was that sebastian of messaline, whom i know you have heard of. he left behind him myself and a sister, both born in an hour. if the heavens had been pleased, would we had so ended! but you, sir, altered that, for some hour before you took me from the breach of the sea was my sister drowned.
you have misled the youthful prince.
ay, sir. she took them, read them in my presence, and now and then an ample tear trilled down her delicate cheek. it seemed she was a queen over her passion, who, most rebel-like,
alas the day!
the young prince hath misled me. i am the fellow with the great belly, and he my dog.
o, then it moved her?
a lady, sir, though it was said she much resembled me, was yet of many accounted beautiful. but though i could not with such estimable wonder overfar believe that, yet thus far i will boldly publish her: she bore a mind that envy could not but call fair. she is drowned already, sir, with salt water, though i seem to drown her remembrance again with more.
service at shrewsbury hath a little gilded over your night's exploit on gad's hill the robbery at gad's hill occurs in henry iv, part one. gad's hill . you may thank th' unquiet time for your quiet o'erposting that action.
not to a rage. patience and sorrow strove who should express her goodliest. you have seen sunshine and rain at once, her smiles and tears were like a better way. those happy smilets what guests were in her eyes, which parted thence as pearls from diamonds dropped. in brief, sorrow would be a rarity most beloved if all could so become it.
pardon me, sir, your bad entertainment.
my lord.
made she no verbal question?
o good antonio, forgive me your trouble.
but since all is well, keep it so. wake not a sleeping wolf.
pantingly forth as if it pressed her heart, cried, "sisters, sisters! shame of ladies, sisters! kent, father, sisters! what, i' th' storm, i' th' night? let pity not be believed." there she shook and clamor moistened. then away she started to deal with grief alone.
if you will not murder me for my love, let me be your servant.
to wake a wolf is as bad as to smell a fox.
it is the stars, the stars above us, govern our conditions. else one self mate and mate could not beget
if you will not undo what you have done, that is, kill him whom you have recovered, desire it not. fare you well at once. my bosom is full of kindness, and i am yet so near the manners of my mother, that upon the least occasion more mine eyes will tell tales of me. i am bound to the count orsino's court. farewell.
what, you are as a candle, the better part burnt out.
no.
the gentleness of all the gods go with thee! i have many enemies in orsino's court, else would i very shortly see thee there. that danger shall seem sport, and i will go.
a wassail candle, my lord, all tallow. if i did say of wax, my growth would approve the truth.
was this before the king returned?
were not you even now with the countess olivia?
effect of gravity.
no, since.
even now, sir. on a moderate pace i have since arrived but hither.
his effect of gravy, gravy, gravy.
well, sir, the poor distressèd lear's i' th' town, who sometime in his better tune remembers will yield to see his daughter.
she returns this ring to you, sir. you might have saved me my pains to have taken it away yourself. she adds, moreover, that you should put your lord into a desperate assurance she will none of him. and one thing more, that you be never so hardy to come again in his affairs, unless it be to report your lord's taking of this. receive it so.
you follow the young prince up and down like his ill angel.
why, good sir?
she took the ring of me. i'll none of it.
not so, my lord. your ill angel is light, but i hope he that some respects i grant i cannot go. i cannot tell. virtue is of so little regard in these costermongers' times that true valor is turned bear-herd; pregnancy is made a tapster, and hath his quick wit wasted in giving reckonings. all the other gifts are not worth a gooseberry. you that are old consider not the capacities of us that are young. you do measure the heat of our livers with the bitterness of your galls, and we that are in the vaward of our youth, i must confess, are wags too.
a sovereign shame so elbows him. his own unkindness that stripped her from his benediction turned her to foreign casualties, gave her dear rights his mind so venomously that burning shame detains him from cordelia.
come, sir, you peevishly threw it to her, and her will is it should be so returned. (he throws down the ring) if it be worth stooping for, there it lies in your eye. if not, be it his that finds it.
written down old with all the characters of age? have you not a moist eye, a dry hand, a yellow cheek, a white beard,
alack, poor gentleman!
fortune forbid my outside have not charmed her! she made good view of me, indeed so much that sure methought her eyes had lost her tongue, for she did speak in starts distractedly. invites me in this churlish messenger.
a decreasing leg, an increasing belly? is not your voice broken, your wind short, your chin double, your wit single, you yet call yourself young? fie, fie, fie, sir john.
of albany's and cornwall's powers you heard not?
none of my lord's ring? why, he sent her none. i am the man. if it be so, as 'tis, poor lady, she were better love a dream. wherein the pregnant enemy does much. how easy is it for the proper false in women's waxen hearts to set their forms! alas, our frailty is the cause, not we, how will this fadge? my master loves her dearly, and i, poor monster, fond as much on him, and she, mistaken, seems to dote on me. what will become of this? as i am man, as i am woman, now, alas the day, what thriftless sighs shall poor olivia breathe! o time, thou must untangle this, not i. it is too hard a knot for me to untie!
my lord, i was born about three of the clock in the afternoon, with a white head and something a round belly. for my voice, i have lost it with halloing and singing of anthems. to old in judgment and understanding. and he that will caper with me for a thousand marks, let him lend me the money, and have at him! for the box of the ear that the prince gave you, he gave it like a rude prince, and you took it like a repents. marry, not in ashes and sackcloth, but in new silk and old sack.
'tis so. they are afoot.
approach, sir andrew. not to be abed after midnight is to be up betimes, and diluculo surgere, thou know'st,, 
well, god send the prince a better companion.
and leave you to attend him. some dear cause will in concealment wrap me up awhile. when i am known aright you shall not grieve lending me this acquaintance. i pray you, go
nay, my troth, i know not. but i know to be up late is to be up late.
god send the companion a better prince. i cannot rid my hands of him.
alack, 'tis he. why, he was met even now as mad as the vexed sea, singing aloud, crowned with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds, with burdocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers, in our sustaining corn., a century send forth. search every acre in the high-grown field, and bring him to our eye.
a false conclusion. i hate it as an unfilled can. to be up after midnight and to go to bed then, is early, so that to go to bed after midnight is to go to bed betimes. does not our life consist of the four elements?
are going with lord john of lancaster against the archbishop and the earl of northumberland.
what can man's wisdom in the restoring his bereavèd sense?
faith, so they say, but i think it rather consists of eating and drinking.
yea, i thank your pretty sweet wit for it. but look you pray, all you that kiss my lady peace at home, that our armies join me, and i mean not to sweat extraordinarily. if it be a hot day and i brandish anything but a bottle, i would i might never spit white again. there is not a dangerous action can peep out his head but i am thrust upon it. well, i cannot last ever.
there is means, madam. our foster nurse of nature is repose, the which he lacks, that to provoke in him are many simples operative, whose power
thou'rt a scholar. let us therefore eat and drink. marian, i say! a stoup of wine!
have a good thing, to make it too common. if ye will needs say i am an old man, you should give me rest. i would to god my name were not so terrible to the enemy as it is. i were better to be eaten to death with a rust than to be scoured to
all blessed secrets, all you unpublished virtues of the earth, spring with my tears. be aidant and remediate in the good man's distress. seek, seek for him, lest his ungoverned rage dissolve the life
here comes the fool, i' faith.
well, be honest, be honest; and god bless your expedition!
news, madam. the british powers are marching hitherward.
how now, my hearts! did you never see the picture of "we
will your lordship lend me a thousand pound to furnish me forth?
'tis known before. our preparation stands in expectation of them. o dear father, it is thy business that i go about. my mourning and importuned tears hath pitied. no blown ambition doth our arms incite, but love, dear love!, and our aged father's right. soon may i hear and see him.
welcome, ass. now let's have a catch.
not a penny, not a penny. you are too impatient to bear westmoreland.
but are my brother's powers set forth?
by my troth, the fool has an excellent breast. i had rather than forty shillings i had such a leg, and so sweet a breath to sing, as the fool has., (to the fool) in sooth, thou wast in very gracious fooling last night when thou spokest of pigrogromitus, of the vapians passing the equinoctial of queubus. 'twas very good, i' faith. i sent thee sixpence for thy leman. hadst it?
if i do, fillip me with a three-man beetle. a man can no more separate age and covetousness than he can part young limbs and lechery; but the gout galls the one, and the pox pinches
ay, madam.
i did impeticos thy gratillity, for malvolio's nose is no whipstock. my lady has a white hand, and the myrmidons are no bottle-ale houses.
sir.
himself in person there?
excellent! why, this is the best fooling when all is done. now, a song.
what money is in my purse?
madam, with much ado. your sister is the better soldier.
(giving money to the fool)
seven groats and two pence.
lord edmund spake not with your lord at home?
(giving money to the fool) there's a testril of me too. if one knight give a, 
i can get no remedy against this consumption of the purse. incurable. go bear this letter to my lord of lancaster, this to the prince, this to the earl of westmoreland; and this to old mistress ursula, whom i have weekly sworn to marry since i perceived the first white hair on my chin. about it.
no, madam.
would you have a love song or a song of good life?
a pox of this gout! or, a gout of this pox, for the one or the other plays the rogue with my great toe. 'tis no matter if i do halt. i have the wars for my color, and my pension shall seem the more reasonable. a good wit will make use of
what might import my sister's letter to him?
a love song, a love song.
thus have you heard our cause and known our means, and, my most noble friends, i pray you all speak plainly your opinions of our hopes. and first, lord marshal, what say you to it?
i know not, lady.
ay, ay. i care not for good life.
but gladly would be better satisfied how in our means we should advance ourselves to look with forehead bold and big enough upon the power and puissance of the king.
faith, he is posted hence on serious matter. to let him live. where he arrives he moves all hearts against us. edmund i think is gone in pity of his misery to dispatch his nighted life; moreover to descry
(sings) o mistress mine, where are you roaming? o, stay and hear! your true love's coming, that can sing both high and low: journeys end in lovers meeting, every wise man's son doth know.
to five-and-twenty thousand men of choice, and our supplies live largely in the hope of great northumberland, whose bosom burns with an incensèd fire of injuries.
i must needs after him, madam, with my letter.
excellent good, i' faith.
whether our present five-and-twenty thousand may hold up head without northumberland.
our troops set forth tomorrow. stay with us. the ways are dangerous.
good, good.
with him we may.
i may not, madam. my lady charged my duty in this business.
what is love? 'tis not hereafter. present mirth hath present laughter. what's to come is still unsure. in delay there lies no plenty. youth's a stuff will not endure.
yea, marry, there's the point. but if without him we be thought too feeble, till we had his assistance by the hand. for in a theme so bloody-faced as this, conjecture, expectation, and surmise of aids incertain should not be admitted.
transport her purposes by word? belike some things, i know not what. i'll love thee much. let me unseal the letter.
a mellifluous voice, as i am true knight.
it was young hotspur's cause at shrewsbury.
madam, i had rather, 
a contagious breath.
it was, my lord; who lined himself with hope, eating the air on promise of supply, flatt'ring himself in project of a power and so, with great imagination proper to madmen, led his powers to death and, winking, leapt into destruction.
i know your lady does not love her husband. she gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks to noble edmund. i know you are of her bosom.
very sweet and contagious, i' faith.
but, by your leave, it never yet did hurt
i, madam?
to hear by the nose, it is dulcet in contagion. but shall we make the welkin dance indeed? shall we rouse the night owl in a catch that will draw three souls out of one weaver? shall we do that?
yes, if this present quality of war, indeed the instant action, a cause on foot, lives so in hope, as in an early spring we see the appearing buds, which to prove fruit that frosts will bite them. when we mean to build, we first survey the plot, then draw the model, and when we see the figure of the house, then must we rate the cost of the erection, what do we then but draw anew the model in fewer offices, or at last desist to build at all? much more in this great work, which is almost to pluck a kingdom down the plot of situation and the model, consent upon a sure foundation, question surveyors, know our own estate, how able such a work to undergo,
i speak in understanding. y' are. i know 't. my lord is dead. edmund and i have talked, and more convenient is he for my hand than for your lady's. you may gather more. if you do find him, pray you give him this. i pray desire her call her wisdom to her. so fare you well. if you do chance to hear of that blind traitor, preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
an you love me, let's do 't. i am dog at a catch.
we fortify in paper and in figures, using the names of men instead of men, like one that draws the model of a house beyond his power to build it, who, half through, a naked subject to the weeping clouds and waste for churlish winter's tyranny.
what party i do follow.
by 'r lady, sir, and some dogs will catch well.
grant that our hopes, yet likely of fair birth, should be stillborn and that we now possessed i think we are a body strong enough, even as we are, to equal with the king.
fare thee well.
most certain. let our catch be "thou knave."
what, is the king but five-and twenty-thousand?
when shall we come to th' top of that same hill?
"hold thy peace, thou knave," knight? i shall be constrained in 't to call thee knave, knight.
to us no more, nay, not so much, lord bardolph, are in three heads: one power against the french, and one against glendower; perforce a third must take up us. so is the unfirm king in three divided, and his coffers sound
you do climb up it now. look how we labor.
'tis not the first time i have constrained one to call me
that he should draw his several strengths together and come against us in full puissance need not be dreaded.
methinks the ground is even.
i shall never begin if i hold my peace.
if he should do so, he leaves his back unarmed, the french and welsh
horrible steep. hark, do you hear the sea?
good, i' faith. come, begin.
who is it like should lead his forces hither?
no, truly.
what a caterwauling do you keep here! if my lady have not called up her steward malvolio and bid him turn you out of doors, never trust me.
the duke of lancaster and westmoreland; against the welsh, himself and harry monmouth; but who is substituted against the french
by your eyes' anguish.
my lady's a cataian. we are politicians, malvolio's a peg- a-ramsey, and (sings) three merry men be we., am not i consanguineous? am i not of her blood? tillyvally! "lady"! (sings) there dwelt a man in babylon, lady, lady!
let us on, and publish the occasion of our arms. the commonwealth is sick of their own choice. their over-greedy love hath surfeited. an habitation giddy and unsure o thou fond many, with what loud applause didst thou beat heaven with blessing bolingbroke before he was what thou wouldst have him be. and being now trimmed in thine own desires, that thou provok'st thyself to cast him up. so, so, thou common dog, didst thou disgorge thy glutton bosom of the royal richard, and now thou wouldst eat thy dead vomit up they that, when richard lived, would have him die are now become enamored on his grave. thou, that threw'st dust upon his goodly head when through proud london he came sighing on criest now "o earth, yield us that king again, and take thou this!" o thoughts of men accursed! past and to come seems best; things present, worst.
so may it be indeed. methinks thy voice is altered, and thou speak'st in better phrase and matter than thou didst.
beshrew me, the knight's in admirable fooling.
shall we go draw our numbers and set on?
you're much deceived. in nothing am i changed
ay, he does well enough if he be disposed, and so do i too. he does it with a better grace, but i do it more natural.
we are time's subjects, and time bids begone.
methinks you're better spoken.
(sings) o' the twelfth day of december, 
master fang, have you entered the action?
come on, sir. here's the place. stand still. how fearful and dizzy 'tis to cast one's eyes so low! the crows and choughs that wing the midway air show scarce so gross as beetles. halfway down methinks he seems no bigger than his head. the fishermen that walk upon the beach appear like mice. and yon tall anchoring bark,
for the love o' god, peace!
it is entered.
diminished to her cock, her cock a buoy that on th' unnumbered idle pebbles chafes cannot be heard so high. i'll look no more lest my brain turn and the deficient sight topple down headlong.
my masters, are you mad? or what are you? have you no wit, manners, nor honesty but to gabble like tinkers at this time of night? do you make an alehouse of my lady's house, that you squeak out your coziers' catches without any mitigation or remorse of voice? is there no respect of place, persons, nor time in you?
where's your yeoman? is 't a lusty yeoman? will a' stand to 't?
set me where you stand.
we did keep time, sir, in our catches. sneck up!
sirrah! where's snare?
give me your hand. you are now within a foot of th' extreme verge. for all beneath the moon would i not leap upright.
sir toby, i must be round with you. my lady bade me tell you, that, though she harbors you as her kinsman, she's nothing allied to your disorders. if you can separate yourself and your misdemeanors, you are welcome to the house. if not, an it would please you to take leave of her, she is very willing to bid you farewell.
o lord, ay, good master snare.
let go my hand. (gives edgar another purse) well worth a poor man's taking. fairies and gods prosper it with thee! go thou farther off. bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.
(sings) farewell, dear heart, since i must needs be gone.
here, here.
now fare you well, good sir.
nay, good sir toby.
snare, we must arrest sir john falstaff.
with all my heart.
(sings) his eyes do show his days are almost done.
yea, good master snare, i have entered him and all.
is done to cure it.
is 't even so?
it may chance cost some of us our lives, for he will stab.
o you mighty gods, (kneels) this world i do renounce, and in your sights shake patiently my great affliction off. if i could bear it longer and not fall my snuff and loathèd part of nature should burn itself out. if edgar live, o, bless him!, now, fellow, fare thee well. (falls)
(sings) but i will never die.
alas the day, take heed of him. he stabbed me in mine own house, and that most beastly, in good faith. he cares not what mischief he does. if his weapon be out, he will foin like any devil. he will spare neither man, woman, nor child.
gone, sir. farewell. (aside) and yet i know not how conceit may rob yields to the theft. had he been where he thought, by this had thought been past. alive or dead?, ho you, sir, friend! hear you, sir? speak., thus might he pass indeed. yet he revives., 
(sings) sir toby, there you lie.
if i can close with him, i care not for his thrust.
away, and let me die.
this is much credit to you.
no, nor i neither. i'll be at your elbow.
hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air, so many fathom down precipitating, thou'dst shivered like an egg. but thou dost breathe, hast heavy substance, bleed'st not, speak'st, art sound. which thou hast perpendicularly fell. thy life's a miracle. speak yet again.
(sings) shall i bid him go?
an i but fist him once, an he come but within my view, 
but have i fall'n, or no?
(sings) what an if you do?
i am undone by his going. i warrant you, he's an infinitive thing upon my score. good master fang, hold him sure. continuantly to pie corner, saving your manhoods, to buy a saddle, and he is indited to dinner to the lubber's head in lumbert street, to master smooth's the silkman. i pray you, since my exion is entered, and my case so openly known to mark is a long one for a poor lone woman to bear, and i have borne, and borne, and borne, and have been fubbed off, and fubbed off, and fubbed off from this day to that day, that it is a shame to be thought on. there is no honesty in such to bear every knave's wrong. yonder he comes, and that errant malmsey-nose knave, bardolph, with him. do your offices, do your offices, master fang and master snare, do me, do me, do me your offices.
from the dread summit of this chalky bourn. cannot be seen or heard. do but look up.
(sings) shall i bid him go, and spare not?
how now! whose mare's dead? what's the matter?
alack, i have no eyes. is wretchedness deprived that benefit, to end itself by death? 'twas yet some comfort and frustrate his proud will.
(sings) o no, no, no, no, you dare not.
sir john, i arrest you at the suit of mistress quickly.
give me your arm. up so. how is 't? feel you your legs? you stand.
out o' tune, sir. you lie. art any more than a steward? dost thou think, because thou art virtuous, there shall be no more cakes and ale?
away, varlets!, draw, bardolph. cut me off the villain's head. throw the quean in the channel.
too well, too well.
yes, by saint anne, and ginger shall be hot i' the mouth too.
throw me in the channel? i'll throw thee in the channel. wilt ah, thou honeysuckle villain, wilt thou kill god's officers and the king's? ah, thou honeyseed rogue, thou art a honeyseed, a man-queller, and a woman-queller.
this is above all strangeness. upon the crown o' th' cliff, what thing was that
thou'rt i' the right. go, sir, rub your chain with crumbs. a stoup of wine, maria!
keep them off, bardolph.
a poor unfortunate beggar.
mistress mary, if you prized my lady's favor at anything more than contempt, you would not give means for this uncivil rule. she shall know of it, by this hand.
a rescue, a rescue!
as i stood here below, methought his eyes were two full moons. he had a thousand noses, horns whelked and waved like the enragèd sea. it was some fiend. therefore, thou happy father, of men's impossibilities, have preserved thee.
go shake your ears!
good people, bring a rescue or two., (to falstaff) thou wot, wot thou? thou wot, wot ta? do, do, thou rogue. do, thou hempseed.
i do remember now. henceforth i'll bear affliction till it do cry out itself, "enough, enough," and die. that thing you speak of, "the fiend, the fiend!" he led me to that place.
'twere as good a deed as to drink when a man's a-hungry, to challenge him the field and then to break promise with him and make a fool of him.
away, you scullion, you rampallion, you fustilarian! i'll
bear free and patient thoughts.
do 't, knight. i'll write thee a challenge. or i'll deliver thy indignation to him by word of mouth.
what is the matter? keep the peace here, ho!
but who comes here? the safer sense will ne'er accommodate his master thus.
sweet sir toby, be patient for tonight. since the youth of the count's was today with thy lady, she is much out of quiet. for monsieur malvolio, let me alone with him. if i do not gull him into a nayword and make him a common recreation, do not think i have wit enough to lie straight in my bed. i know i can do it.
good my lord, be good to me. i beseech you stand to me.
no, they cannot touch me for coining. i am the king himself.
possess us, possess us, tell us something of him.
how now, sir john? what, are you brawling here? doth this become your place, your time, and business? (to fang) stand from him, fellow: wherefore hang'st thou upon him?
(aside) o thou side-piercing sight!
marry, sir, sometimes he is a kind of puritan.
o my most worshipful lord, an 't please your grace, i am a poor widow of eastcheap, and he is arrested at my suit.
nature's above art in that respect. there's your press- money. that fellow handles his bow like a crowkeeper. draw me a clothier's yard. look, look, a mouse! peace,
o, if i thought that, i'd beat him like a dog!
for what sum?
peace, this piece of toasted cheese will do 't. there's my gauntlet. i'll prove it on a giant. bring up the brown bills. o, well flown, bird. i' th' clout, i' th' clout. hewgh! give the word.
what, for being a puritan? thy exquisite reason, dear knight?
eaten me out of house and home. he hath put all my substance into that fat belly of his. (to falstaff) but i will have some of it out again, or i will ride thee o' nights like the mare.
sweet marjoram.
i have no exquisite reason for 't, but i have reason good enough.
i think i am as like to ride the mare if i have any vantage of
pass.
the devil a puritan that he is, or anything constantly, but a time-pleaser; an affectioned ass that cons state without book and utters it by great swarths; the best persuaded of himself, so crammed, as he thinks, with excellencies, that it is his grounds of faith that all that look on him love him. and on that vice in him will my revenge find notable cause to work.
how comes this, sir john? fie, what man of good temper would endure this tempest of exclamation? are you not ashamed to enforce a poor widow to so rough a course to come by her own?
i know that voice.
what wilt thou do?
(to mistress quickly) what is the gross sum that i owe thee?
ha! goneril with a white beard? ha, regan? they flattered me like a dog and told me i had white hairs in my beard ere the black ones were there. to say "ay" and "no" to everything that i said "ay" and "no" to was no good divinity. when the rain came to wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter, when the thunder would not peace at my bidding, there i found 'em, there i smelt 'em out. go to, they are not men o' their words. they told me i was everything. 'tis a lie, i am not ague-proof.
i will drop in his way some obscure epistles of love, wherein by the color of his beard, the shape of his leg, the manner of his gait, the expressure of his eye, forehead, and complexion,he shall find himself most feelingly personated.
marry, if thou wert an honest man, thyself and the money too. thou didst swear to me upon a parcel-gilt goblet, sitting in my dolphin chamber at the round table by a sea-coal fire, upon wednesday in wheeson week, when the prince broke thou didst swear to me then, as i was washing thy wound, to marry me and make me my lady thy wife. canst thou deny it? did not goodwife keech, the butcher's wife, come in then and call me gossip quickly, coming in to borrow a mess of thou didst desire to eat some, whereby i told thee they were ill for a green wound? and didst thou not, when she was gone downstairs, desire me to be no more so familiarity with
the trick of that voice i do well remember. is 't not the king?
i can write very like my lady your niece: on a forgotten matter we can hardly make distinction of our hands.
such poor people, saying that ere long they should call me thirty shillings? i put thee now to thy book-oath. deny it if thou canst.
ay, every inch a king. when i do stare, see how the subject quakes. i pardon that man's life. what was thy cause? adultery? thou shalt not die. die for adultery? no. the wren goes to 't, and the small gilded fly does lecher in my sight. let copulation thrive, for gloucester's bastard son was kinder to his father than my daughters got 'tween the lawful sheets. to 't, luxury, pell-mell, for i lack soldiers.
excellent! i smell a device.
my lord, this is a poor mad soul, and she says up and down the town that her eldest son is like you. she hath been in good these foolish officers, i beseech you i may have redress against them.
behold yond simpering dame, whose face between her forks presages snow, that minces virtue and does shake the head to hear of pleasure's name. the fitchew, nor the soiled horse, goes to 't with a more riotous appetite. down from the waist they are centaurs, though women all above. but to the girdle do the gods inherit; beneath is all the fiends'. there's hell, there's darkness, there's the sulfurous pit, burning, scalding, stench, consumption! fie, fie, fie, pah, pah!, give me an ounce of civet, good apothecary, to sweeten my imagination. there's money for thee.
i have 't in my nose too.
sir john, sir john, i am well acquainted with your manner of wrenching the true cause the false way. it is not a more than impudent sauciness from you, can thrust me from a level consideration. you have, as it appears to me, practiced upon the easy-yielding spirit of this woman, and made her serve your uses both in purse and in person.
o, let me kiss that hand!
he shall think, by the letters that thou wilt drop, that they come from my niece, and that she's in love with him.
yea, in truth, my lord.
let me wipe it first. it smells of mortality.
my purpose is, indeed, a horse of that color.
pray thee, peace., (to falstaff) pay her the debt you owe her, and unpay the villany you have done her. the one you may do with sterling money, and the other with current repentance.
o ruined piece of nature! this great world shall so wear out to naught. dost thou know me?
and your horse now would make him an ass.
honorable boldness "impudent sauciness." if a man will make curtsy and say nothing, he is virtuous. no, my lord, my humble duty remembered, i will not be your suitor. i say to you, i do desire deliverance from these officers, being upon
i remember thine eyes well enough. dost thou squiny at me? no, do thy worst, blind cupid. i'll not love. read thou this challenge. mark but the penning of it.
ass, i doubt not.
you speak as having power to do wrong; but answer in th' effect of your reputation, and satisfy this poor woman.
were all thy letters suns, i could not see one.
oh, 'twill be admirable!
come hither, hostess.
(aside) i would not take this from report. it is, and my heart breaks at it.
sport royal, i warrant you. i know my physic will work with him. i will plant you two, and let the fool make a third, where he shall find the letter. observe his construction of it. for this night, to bed, and dream on the event. farewell.
now, master gower, what news?
read.
good night, penthesilea.
are near at hand. the rest the paper tells.
what, with the case of eyes?
before me, she's a good wench.
as i am a gentleman!
oh ho, are you there with me? no eyes in your head, nor no money in your purse? your eyes are in a heavy case, your purse in a light. yet you see how this world goes.
she's a beagle, true-bred, and one that adores me. what o' that?
faith, you said so before.
i see it feelingly.
i was adored once too.
as i am a gentleman. come. no more words of it.
what, art mad? a man may see how this world goes with no eyes. look with thine ears. see how yon justice rails upon yon simple thief. hark in thine ear: change places and, handy-dandy, which is the justice, which is the thief? thou hast seen a farmer's dog bark at a beggar?
let's to bed, knight. thou hadst need send for more money.
both my plate and the tapestry of my dining chambers.
ay, sir.
if i cannot recover your niece, i am a foul way out.
glasses, glasses, is the only drinking. and for thy walls, a pretty slight drollery, or the story of the prodigal or the german hunting in waterwork is worth a thousand of these pound, if thou canst. come, an 'twere not for thy humors, there's not a better wench in england. go wash thy face, and draw the action. come, thou must not be in this humor with me. dost not know me? come, come, i know thou wast set
and the creature run from the cur? there thou mightst behold the great image of authority: a dog's obeyed in office. thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand. why dost thou lash that whore? strip thine own back. thou hotly lust'st to use her in that kind for which thou whipp'st her. the usurer hangs the cozener. through tattered clothes great vices do appear; robes and furred gowns hide all. plate sin with gold, and the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks. arm it in rags, a pigmy's straw does pierce it. none does offend, none, i say, none. i'll able 'em. take that of me, my friend, who have the power to seal th' accuser's lips. get thee glass eyes, and like a scurvy politician seem to see the things thou dost not. now, now, now, now, pull off my boots. harder, harder. so.
send for money, knight. if thou hast her not i' the end, call me "cut."
pray thee, sir john, let it be but twenty nobles. i' faith, i am loath to pawn my plate, so god save me, la.
(aside) o matter and impertinency mixed! reason in madness!
if i do not, never trust me, take it how you will.
let it alone. i'll make other shift. you'll be a fool still.
i know thee well enough. thy name is gloucester. thou must be patient. we came crying hither. thou know'st the first time that we smell the air we wawl and cry. i will preach to thee. mark me.
come, come, i'll go burn some sack. 'tis too late to go to bed now. come, knight. come, knight.
well, you shall have it, though i pawn my gown. i hope
alack, alack the day!
give me some music. (music plays) now, good morrow, friends., now, good cesario, but that piece of song, that old and antique song we heard last night. more than light airs and recollected terms of these most brisk and giddy-paced times: come, but one verse.
will i live? (to bardolph) go with her, with her. hook on, hook on.
when we are born, we cry that we are come to this great stage of fools. this a good block. it were a delicate stratagem to shoe a troop of horse with felt. i'll put 't in proof. then, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!
he is not here, so please your lordship, that should sing it.
will you have doll tearsheet meet you at supper?
oh, here he is. lay hand upon him., sir, your most dear daughter, 
who was it?
no more words. let's have her.
no rescue? what, a prisoner? i am even you shall have ransom. let me have surgeons. i am cut to th' brains.
feste, the jester, my lord, a fool that the lady olivia's father took much delight in. he is about the house.
i have heard better news.
you shall have anything.
seek him out, and play the tune the while.
what's the news, my good lord?
no seconds? all myself? why, this would make a man a man of salt, ay, and laying autumn's dust.
(to viola) come hither, boy. if ever thou shalt love, for such as i am, all true lovers are, unstaid and skittish in all motions else save in the constant image of the creature that is beloved. how dost thou like this tune?
where lay the king last night?
good sir, 
where love is throned.
at basingstoke, my lord.
i will die bravely, like a smug bridegroom. what, i will be jovial. come, come. i am a king, my masters, know you that?
thou dost speak masterly. my life upon 't, young though thou art, thine eye hath stay'd upon some favor that it loves. hath it not, boy?
i hope, my lord, all's well. what is the news, my lord?
you are a royal one, and we obey you.
a little, by your favor.
come all his forces back?
then there's life in 't. come, an if you get it, you shall get it by running. sa, sa, sa, sa.
what kind of woman is't?
no; fifteen hundred foot, five hundred horse are marched up to my lord of lancaster against northumberland and the archbishop.
a sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch, past speaking of in a king. thou hast a daughter which twain have brought her to.
of your complexion.
comes the king back from wales, my noble lord?
hail, gentle sir.
she is not worth thee, then. what years, i' faith?
come. go along with me, good master gower.
sir, speed you. what's your will?
about your years, my lord.
my lord!
do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?
too old by heaven. let still the woman take an elder than herself. so wears she to him, for, boy, however we do praise ourselves, our fancies are more giddy and unfirm, more longing, wavering, sooner lost and worn, than women's are.
what's the matter?
most sure and vulgar. everyone hears that
i think it well, my lord.
master gower, shall i entreat you with me to dinner?
but, by your favor, how near's the other army?
or thy affection cannot hold the bent. for women are as roses, whose fair flower being once displayed, doth fall that very hour.
john.
near and on speedy foot. the main descry stands in the hourly thought.
and so they are. alas, that they are so,
sir john, you loiter here too long, being you are to take soldiers up in counties as you go.
i thank you, sir. that's all.
o, fellow, come, the song we had last night., mark it, cesario, it is old and plain; the spinsters and the knitters in the sun and the free maids that weave their thread with bones and dallies with the innocence of love, like the old age.
will you sup with me, master gower?
though that the queen on special cause is here,
are you ready, sir?
what foolish master taught you these manners, sir john?
i thank you, sir.
ay; prithee, sing.
master gower, if they become me not, he was a fool that taught them me., this is the right fencing grace, my lord: tap for tap, and so part fair.
you ever gentle gods, take my breath from me. let not my worser spirit tempt me again to die before you please.
(sings) and in sad cypress let me be laid. fly away, fly away breath, i am slain by a fair cruel maid. my shroud of white, stuck all with yew, my part of death, no one so true did share it. not a flower, not a flower sweet on my black coffin let there be strown. my poor corpse, where my bones shall be thrown. a thousand thousand sighs to save, lay me, o, where sad true lover never find my grave,
now the lord lighten thee. thou art a great fool.
well pray you, father.
(giving money) there's for thy pains.
before god, i am exceeding weary.
now, good sir, what are you?
no pains, sir. i take pleasure in singing, sir.
is 't come to that? i had thought weariness durst not have attached one of so high blood.
a most poor man made tame to fortune's blows, who by the art of known and feeling sorrows am pregnant to good pity. give me your hand, i'll lead you to some biding.
i'll pay thy pleasure then.
faith, it does me; though it discolors the complexion of my to desire small beer?
hearty thanks. to boot and boot.
truly, sir, and pleasure will be paid, one time or another.
why, a prince should not be so loosely studied as to remember so weak a composition.
a proclaimed prize! most happy! that eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh to raise my fortunes. thou old unhappy traitor, that must destroy thee.
give me now leave to leave thee.
belike then my appetite was not princely got, for, by my indeed these humble considerations make me out of love with my greatness. what a disgrace is it to me to remember thy name, or to know thy face tomorrow, or to take note how many pair of silk stockings thou hast, with these, and those of thy shirts, as, one for superfluity and another for use. but that the tennis-court keeper knows better than i, for it is a low ebb of linen with thee when thou keepest not racket there, as thou hast not done a great while, because the rest of god knows whether those that bawl out the ruins of thy linen shall inherit his kingdom; but the midwives say the children are not in the fault, whereupon the world increases and kindreds are mightily strengthened.
now let thy friendly hand put strength enough to 't.
now, the melancholy god protect thee, and the tailor make thy doublet of changeable taffeta, for thy mind is a very opal. i would have men of such constancy put to sea, that their business might be everything and their intent everywhere, for that's it that always makes a good voyage of nothing. farewell.
talk so idly! tell me, how many good young princes would do so, their fathers being so sick as yours at this time is?
wherefore, bold peasant, darest thou support a published traitor? hence, lest that th' infection of his fortune take
let all the rest give place.
shall i tell thee one thing, poins?
'chill not let go, zir, without vurther 'casion.
once more, cesario, get thee to yond same sovereign cruelty. tell her my love, more noble than the world, the parts that fortune hath bestowed upon her, tell her, i hold as giddily as fortune; but 'tis that miracle and queen of gems that nature pranks her in attracts my soul.
yes, faith, and let it be an excellent good thing.
let go, slave, or thou diest!
but if she cannot love you, sir?
it shall serve among wits of no higher breeding than thine.
good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor volk pass. an 'chud ha' bin zwaggered out of my life, 'twould not ha' bin zo long as 'tis by a vortnight. nay, come not near th' old man. keep out, che vor' ye, or i'se try whether your costard or my ballow be the harder. 'chill be plain with you.
i cannot be so answer'd.
go to. i stand the push of your one thing that you will tell.
out, dunghill!
sooth, but you must. say that some lady, as perhaps there is, hath for your love a great a pang of heart as you have for olivia. you cannot love her.
marry, i tell thee it is not meet that i should be sad, now my father is sick, albeit i could tell thee, as to one it pleases me, for fault of a better, to call my friend, i could be sad, and sad
'chill pick your teeth, zir. come, no matter vor your foins.
there is no woman's sides can bide the beating of so strong a passion as love doth give my heart. no woman's heart so big, to hold so much. they lack retention. no motion of the liver, but the palate, that suffer surfeit, cloyment, and revolt; but mine is all as hungry as the sea, and can digest as much. make no compare and that i owe olivia.
very hardly, upon such a subject.
if ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body. and give the letters which thou find'st about me to edmund, earl of gloucester. seek him out upon the british party. o untimely death! (dies)
ay, but i know, 
by this hand, thou thinkest me as far in the devil's book as thou and falstaff for obduracy and persistency. let the end try the man. but i tell thee, my heart bleeds inwardly that my hath in reason taken from me all ostentation of sorrow.
as duteous to the vices of thy mistress as badness would desire.
what dost thou know?
the reason?
what, is he dead?
too well what love women to men may owe. in faith, they are as true of heart as we. as it might be, perhaps, were i a woman, i should your lordship.
what wouldst thou think of me if i should weep?
sit you down, father. rest you. let's see these pockets. the letters that he speaks of may be my friends. he's dead. i am only sorry he had no other death's-man. let us see. (takes letters out of oswald's pocket and opens them) leave, gentle wax, and, manners, blame us not. to know our enemies' minds, we rip their hearts. their papers is more lawful. (reads) "let our reciprocal vows be remembered. you have many opportunities to cut him off. if your will want not, time and place will be fruitfully offered. there is nothing done if he return the conqueror. then am i the prisoner and his bed my gaol, from the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply the place for your labor. your, wife, so i would say, affectionate servant, and for you her own for venture, goneril." o indistinguished space of woman's will! a plot upon her virtuous husband's life, and the exchange my brother!, here in the sands thee i'll rake up, the post unsanctified of murderous lechers. and in the mature time with this ungracious paper strike the sight of the death-practiced duke. for him 'tis well that of thy death and business i can tell.
and what's her history?
i would think thee a most princely hypocrite.
the king is mad. how stiff is my vile sense, of my huge sorrows. better i were distract, so should my thoughts be severed from my griefs, and woes by wrong imaginations lose the knowledge of themselves.
a blank, my lord. she never told her love, but let concealment, like a worm i' the bud, and with a green and yellow melancholy she sat like patience on a monument, smiling at grief. was not this love indeed? we men may say more, swear more, but indeed much in our vows, but little in our love.
fellow to think as every man thinks. never a man's thought in the world keeps the roadway better than thine. every man would think me an hypocrite indeed. and what accites your most worshipful thought to think so?
give me your hand. come, father, i'll bestow you with a friend.
but died thy sister of her love, my boy?
to falstaff.
o thou good kent, how shall i live and work to match thy goodness? my life will be too short, and every measure fail me.
i am all the daughters of my father's house, and all the brothers too, and yet i know not.
and to thee.
to be acknowledged, madam, is o'erpaid. nor more, nor clipped, but so.
ay, that's the theme. to her in haste. give her this jewel. say my love can give no place, bide no denay. (he hands her a jewel)
by this light, i am well spoke on. i can hear it with my own ears. the worst that they can say of me is that i am a second two things, i confess, i cannot help. by the mass, here comes bardolph.
be better suited. these weeds are memories of those worser hours. i prithee, put them off.
come thy ways, signior fabian.
and the boy that i gave falstaff. he had him from me christian, and look if the fat villain have not transformed
pardon, dear madam. yet to be known shortens my made intent. till time and i think meet.
nay, i'll come. if i lose a scruple of this sport, let me be boiled to death with melancholy.
god save your grace.
then be 't so, my good lord., how does the king?
wouldst thou not be glad to have the niggardly rascally sheep-biter come by some notable shame?
and yours, most noble bardolph.
madam, sleeps still.
i would exult, man. you know, he brought me out o' favor with my lady about a bear-baiting here.
(to bardolph) come, you virtuous ass, you bashful fool, must you be blushing? wherefore blush you now? what a to get a pottle-pot's maidenhead?
o you kind gods, cure this great breach in his abusèd nature, th' untuned and jarring senses, o, wind up,
to anger him, we'll have the bear again, and we will fool him black and blue. shall we not, sir andrew?
he calls me e'en now, my lord, through a red lattice, and i could discern no part of his face from the window. at last i spied his eyes, and methought he had made two holes in the
so please your majesty that we may wake the king? he hath slept long.
an we do not, it is pity of our lives.
has not the boy profited?
be governed by your knowledge, and proceed i' th' sway of your own will. is he arrayed?
here comes the little villain.
away, you whoreson upright rabbit, away!
ay, madam. in the heaviness of his sleep
how now, my metal of india?
away, you rascally althea's dream, away!
be by, good madam, when we do awake him. i doubt not of his temperance.
get you all three into the boxtree. malvolio's coming down this walk. he has been yonder i' the sun practising behavior to his own shadow this half hour. observe him, for the love of mockery, for i know this letter will make a contemplative idiot of him. close, in the name of jesting!
instruct us, boy. what dream, boy?
very well.
lie thou there (throwing down a letter), for here comes the trout that must be caught with tickling.
firebrand, and therefore i call him her dream.
please you, draw near., louder the music there!
'tis but fortune, all is fortune. maria once told me she did affect me, and i have heard herself come thus near, that, should she fancy, it should be one of my complexion. besides, she uses me with a more exalted respect than anyone else that follows her. what should i think on 't?
a crown's worth of good interpretation. there 'tis, boy.
(kisses lear) o my dear father, restoration hang repair those violent harms that my two sisters have in thy reverence made!
(aside) here's an overweening rogue!
o, that this good blossom could be kept from cankers! well, there is sixpence to preserve thee.
kind and dear princess!
(aside) o, peace! contemplation makes a rare turkey-cock of him. how he jets under his advanced plumes!
shall have wrong.
had you not been their father, these white flakes did challenge pity of them. was this a face to stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder in the most terrible and nimble stroke of quick cross lightning? to watch, poor perdu!, with this thin helm? mine enemy's meanest dog, against my fire. and wast thou fain, poor father, to hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn in short and musty straw? alack, alack! 'tis wonder that thy life and wits at once
(aside) 'slight, i could so beat the rogue!
and how doth thy master, bardolph?
madam, do you. 'tis fittest.
(aside) peace, i say.
well, my good lord. he heard of your grace's coming to town. there's a letter for you.
how does my royal lord? how fares your majesty?
to be count malvolio!
your master?
you do me wrong to take me out o' th' grave. thou art a soul in bliss, but i am bound do scald like molten lead.
(aside) ah, rogue!
in bodily health, sir.
sir, do you know me?
(aside) pistol him, pistol him.
marry, the immortal part needs a physician, but that moves not him. though that be sick, it dies not.
you are a spirit, i know. where did you die?
(aside) peace, peace!
me as my dog, and he holds his place, for look you how be writes. (he hands the letter to poins)
(aside to doctor) still, still far wide!
there is example for 't. the lady of the strachy married the yeoman of the wardrobe.
(reads) john falstaff, knight. every man must know that as oft as he has occasion to name himself, even like those that say, "there's some of the king's blood spilt." "how comes that?" says he that takes upon him not to conceive. the answer is as ready as a borrower's cap: "i am the king's poor cousin, sir."
he's scarce awake. let him alone awhile.
(aside) fie on him, jezebel!
nay, they will be kin to us, or they will fetch it from japheth. but to the letter. (takes the letter and reads) sir john alstaff, knight, to the son of the king nearest his father, harry prince of wales, greeting.
i am mightily abused. i should ev'n die with pity to see another thus. i know not what to say. i will not swear these are my hands. let's see. i feel this pinprick. would i were assured
(aside) o, peace! now he's deeply in. look how imagination blows him.
why, this is a certificate.
(kneels) o, look upon me, sir, and hold your hands in benediction o'er me. no, sir, you must not kneel.
having been three months married to her, sitting in my state, 
peace! (reads) i will imitate the honorable romans in brevity.
pray, do not mock me. i am a very foolish fond old man, and to deal plainly i fear i am not in my perfect mind. methinks i should know you, and know this man.
(aside) oh, for a stone-bow, to hit him in the eye!
he sure means brevity in breath, short-winded.
yet i am doubtful, for i am mainly ignorant remembers not these garments. nor i know not where i did lodge last night. do not laugh at me, for as i am a man, i think this lady to be my child cordelia.
calling my officers about me, in my branched velvet gown, having come from a daybed, where i have left olivia sleeping, 
(reads) i commend me to thee, i commend thee, and i leave thee. be not too familiar with poins, for he misuses thy favors so much that he swears thou art to marry his sister
and so i am, i am.
(aside) fire and brimstone!
nell. repent at idle times as thou mayest, and so, farewell. thine by yea and no, which is as much as to say, as thou usest him, jack falstaff with my familiars, john with my brothers and sisters, and sir john with all europe.
if you have poison for me, i will drink it. i know you do not love me, for your sisters have, as i do remember, done me wrong. you have some cause; they have not.
(aside) o, peace, peace!
my lord, i'll steep this letter in sack and make him eat it.
no cause, no cause.
and then to have the humor of state, and after a demure travel of regard, telling them i know my place as i would they should do theirs, to ask for my kinsman toby, 
that's to make him eat twenty of his words. but do you use me thus, ned? must i marry your sister?
am i in france?
(aside) bolts and shackles!
god send the wench no worse fortune! but i never said so.
in your own kingdom, sir.
(aside) o peace, peace, peace! now, now.
well, thus we play the fools with the time, and the spirits of master here in london?
do not abuse me.
seven of my people, with an obedient start, make out for him. i frown the while, and perchance wind up watch, or play with my, some rich jewel. toby approaches, curtsies there to me, 
yea, my lord.
be comforted, good madam. the great rage, you see, is killed in him. and yet it is danger desire him to go in. trouble him no more till further settling.
(aside) shall this fellow live?
where sups he? doth the old boar feed in the old frank?
will 't please your highness walk?
(aside) though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.
at the old place, my lord, in eastcheap.
you must bear with me. i am old and foolish.
i extend my hand to him thus, quenching my familiar smile with an austere regard of control, 
what company?
holds it true, sir, that the duke of cornwall was so slain?
(aside) and does not toby take you a blow o' the lips then?
ephesians, my lord, of the old church.
most certain, sir.
saying, "cousin toby, my fortunes having cast me on your niece give me this prerogative of speech, "
sup any women with him?
who is conductor of his people?
(aside) what, what?
none, my lord, but old mistress quickly and mistress doll tearsheet.
as 'tis said, the bastard son of gloucester.
"you must amend your drunkenness."
what pagan may that be?
they say edgar, his banished son, is with the earl of kent in germany.
(aside) out, scab!
a proper gentlewoman, sir, and a kinswoman of my master's.
report is changeable. tis time to look about. the powers of the kingdom approach apace.
(aside) nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot.
even such kin as the parish heifers are to the town bull., shall we steal upon them, ned, at supper?
the arbitrament is like to be bloody. fare you well, sir.
"besides, you waste the treasure of your time with a foolish knight, "
i am your shadow, my lord. i'll follow you.
or well or ill, as this day's battle's fought.
(aside) that's me, i warrant you.
sirrah, you, boy, and bardolph, no word to your master that i am yet come to town. (gives them money) there's for your silence.
(to a gentleman) know of the duke if his last purpose hold, or whether since he is advised by aught to change the course. he's full of alteration and self-reproving. bring his constant pleasure.
"one sir andrew, "
i have no tongue, sir.
our sister's man is certainly miscarried.
(aside) i knew 'twas i, for many do call me fool.
and for mine, sir, i will govern it.
'tis to be doubted, madam.
(seeing the letter) what employment have we here?
fare you well. go.
now, sweet lord, you know the goodness i intend upon you. tell me but truly, but then speak the truth, do you not love my sister?
(aside) now is the woodcock near the gin.
this doll tearsheet should be some road.
in honored love.
(aside) o, peace! and the spirit of humors intimate reading aloud to him!
i warrant you, as common as the way between saint alban's and london.
to the forfended place?
(picking up the letter) by my life, this is my lady's hand these be her very c's, her u's and her t's and thus makes she her great p's. it is, in contempt of question, her hand.
colors, and not ourselves be seen?
that thought abuses you.
(aside) her c's, her u's and her t's. why that?
put on two leathern jerkins and aprons, and wait upon him at his table as drawers.
i am doubtful that you have been conjunct and bosomed with her as far as we call hers.
(reads) "to the unknown beloved, this, and my good wishes", her very phrases! by your leave, wax. soft! and the impressure her lucrece, with which she uses to seal. 'tis my lady. to whom should this be?
from a god to a bull: a heavy decension. it was jove's case. be mine, for in everything the purpose must weigh with the folly. follow me, ned.
no, by mine honor, madam.
(aside) this wins him, liver and all.
i pray thee, loving wife and gentle daughter, give even way unto my rough affairs. put not you on the visage of the times and be, like them, to percy troublesome.
i never shall endure her. dear my lord, be not familiar with her.
(reads) "jove knows i love, but who? lips, do not move;
do what you will; your wisdom be your guide.
fear me not., she and the duke her husband!
"no man must know." what follows? the numbers altered. "no man must know." if this should be thee, malvolio?
alas, sweet wife, my honor is at pawn, and, but my going, nothing can redeem it.
(aside) i had rather lose the battle than that sister
(aside) marry, hang thee, brock!
o yet, for god's sake, go not to these wars. when you were more endeared to it than now, when your own percy, when my heart's dear harry, threw many a northward look to see his father bring up his powers; but he did long in vain. there were two honors lost, yours and your son's. for yours, the god of heaven brighten it. for his, it stuck upon him as the sun in the gray vault of heaven, and by his light to do brave acts. he was indeed the glass wherein the noble youth did dress themselves. he had no legs that practiced not his gait; and speaking thick, which nature made his blemish, for those that could speak low and tardily would turn their own perfection to abuse
our very loving sister, well bemet., sir, this i hear: the king is come to his daughter, with others whom the rigor of our state forced to cry out. where i could not be honest it touches us as france invades our land, not bolds the king, with others whom i fear most just and heavy causes make oppose.
"i may command where i adore, but silence, like a lucrece knife, with bloodless stroke my heart doth gore; m.o.a.i. doth sway my life."
to seem like him. so that in speech, in gait, in diet, in affections of delight, he was the mark and glass, copy and book, that fashioned others. and him, o wondrous him! o miracle of men!, him did you leave, second to none, unseconded by you, in disadvantage, to abide a field where nothing but the sound of hotspur's name did seem defensible. so you left him. never, o never, do his ghost the wrong with others than with him. let them alone. the marshal and the archbishop are strong. had my sweet harry had but half their numbers, today might i, hanging on hotspur's neck,
sir, you speak nobly.
(aside) a fustian riddle!
beshrew your heart, fair daughter, you do draw my spirits from me with new lamenting ancient oversights. but i must go and meet with danger there, or it will seek me in another place
why is this reasoned?
(aside) excellent wench, say i.
oh, fly to scotland till that the nobles and the armèd commons have of their puissance made a little taste.
for these domestic and particular broils are not the question here.
"m.o.a.i. doth sway my life." nay, but first, let me see, let me see, let me see.
if they get ground and vantage of the king, then join you with them like a rib of steel first let them try themselves. so did your son; he was so suffered. so came i a widow, and never shall have length of life enough
let's then determine with the ancient of war on our proceedings.
(aside) what dish o' poison has she dressed him!
to rain upon remembrance with mine eyes for recordation to my noble husband.
i shall attend you presently at your tent.
(aside) and with what wing the staniel checks at it!
come, come, go in with me. 'tis with my mind as with the tide swelled up unto his height, that makes a still-stand, running neither way. but many thousand reasons hold me back. i will resolve for scotland. there am i till time and vantage crave my company.
sister, you'll go with us?
"i may command where i adore." why, she may command me. i serve her, she is my lady. why, this is evident to any formal capacity. there is no obstruction in this. and the end, what should that alphabetical position portend? if i could make that resemble something in me, softly! m.o.a.i., 
what the devil hast thou brought there, applejohns? thou knowest sir john cannot endure an applejohn.
no.
(aside) o, ay, make up that., he is now at a cold scent.
mass, thou sayest true. the prince once set a dish of applejohns before him and told him there were five more sir of these six dry, round, old, withered knights." it angered him to the heart. but he hath forgot that.
'tis most convenient. pray you, go with us.
(aside) sowter will cry upon 't for all this, though it be as rank as a fox.
why then, cover, and set them down, and see if thou canst find out sneak's noise. mistress tearsheet would fain hear
(aside) oh ho, i know the riddle., i will go.
"m", malvolio. "m", why, that begins my name.
dispatch: the room where they supped is too hot. they'll come in straight.
hear me one word.
(aside) did not i say he would work it out? the cur is excellent at faults.
sirrah, here will be the prince and master poins anon, and they will put on two of our jerkins and aprons, and sir john
(to edmund, regan, and goneril) i'll overtake you., 
"m." but then there is no consonancy in the sequel that suffers under probation "a" should follow but "o" does.
by the mass, here will be old utis. it will be an excellent stratagem.
speak.
(aside) and "o" shall end, i hope.
i'll see if i can find out sneak.
(giving albany a letter) before you fight the battle, ope this letter. for him that brought it. wretched though i seem, i can produce a champion that will prove what is avouchèd there. if you miscarry, your business of the world hath so an end,
(aside) ay, or i'll cudgel him and make him cry "o!"
i' faith, sweetheart, methinks now you are in an excellent heart would desire, and your color, i warrant you, is as red as any rose, in good truth, la. but, i' faith, you have drunk too much canaries, and that's a marvellous searching wine, and it perfumes the blood ere one can say "what's this?"
stay till i have read the letter.
and then "i" comes behind.
better than i was. hem.
i was forbid it. when time shall serve, let but the herald cry, and i'll appear again.
(aside) ay, an you had any eye behind you, you might see more detraction at your heels than fortunes before you.
why, that's well said. a good heart's worth gold. lo, here comes sir john.
why, fare thee well. i will o'erlook thy paper.
"m.o.a.i." this simulation is not as the former, and yet to crush this a little, it would bow to me, for every one of these letters are in my name. soft, here follows prose.
(sings) when arthur first in court, empty the jordan.
the enemy's in view. draw up your powers. (gives albany a document) here is the guess of their true strength and forces by diligent discovery, but your haste
(reads) "if this fall into thy hand, revolve. in my stars i am above thee, but be not afraid of greatness. some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrust upon 'em. thy fates open their hands. let thy blood and spirit embrace them. and, to inure thyself to what thou art like to be, cast thy humble slough and appear fresh. be opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants.
sick of a calm, yea, good faith.
we will greet the time.
let thy tongue tang arguments of state. put thyself into the trick of singularity. she thus advises thee that sighs for thee. remember who commended thy yellow stockings and wished to see thee ever cross-gartered. i say, remember. go to, thou art made, if thou desir'st to be so; if not, let me see thee a steward still, the fellow of servants, and not worthy to touch fortune's fingers. farewell. she that would alter services with thee, the fortunate unhappy"
so is all her sect. an they be once in a calm, they are sick.
to both these sisters have i sworn my love, each jealous of the other as the stung are of the adder. which of them shall i take? both? one? or neither? neither can be enjoyed exasperates, makes mad her sister goneril, and hardly shall i carry out my side, her husband being alive. now, then, we'll use his countenance for the battle, which being done, his speedy taking off. as for the mercy which he intends to lear and to cordelia, the battle done and they within our power, shall never see his pardon, for my state
daylight and champaign discovers not more. this is open. i will be proud, i will read politic authors, i will baffle sir toby, i will wash off gross acquaintance, i will be point- devise the very man. i do not now fool myself, to let imagination jade me, for every reason excites to this, that my lady loves me. she did commend my yellow stockings of late, she did praise my leg being cross-gartered, and in this she manifests herself to my love, and with a kind of injunction, drives me to these habits of her liking. i thank my stars i am happy. i will be strange, stout, in yellow stockings, and cross-gartered, even with the swiftness of putting on. jove and my stars be praised! here is yet a postscript.
a pox damn you, muddy rascal. is that all the comfort you give me?
here, father, take the shadow of this tree for your good host. pray that the right may thrive. if ever i return to you again, i'll bring you comfort.
(reads) "thou canst not choose but know who i am. if thou entertainest my love, let it appear in thy smiling. thy smiles become thee well. therefore in my presence still smile, dear my sweet, i prithee."
you make fat rascals, mistress doll.
grace go with you, sir.
jove, i thank thee! i will smile. i will do everything that thou wilt have me.
i make them? gluttony and diseases make them; i make them not.
king lear hath lost, he and his daughter ta'en. give me thy hand. come on.
i will not give my part of this sport for a pension of thousands to be paid from the sophy.
if the cook help to make the gluttony, you help to make the diseases, doll. we catch of you, doll, we catch of you. grant
no further, sir. a man may rot even here.
i could marry this wench for this device.
yea, joy, our chains and our jewels.
what, in ill thoughts again? men must endure ripeness is all. come on.
so could i too.
your broaches, pearls, and ouches, for to serve bravely is to come halting off, you know; to come off the breach with his pike bent bravely, and to surgery bravely, to venture upon
and that's true too.
and ask no other dowry with her but such another jest.
hang yourself, you muddy conger, hang yourself!
some officers take them away. good guard until their greater pleasures first be known that are to censure them.
nor i neither.
by my troth, this is the old fashion. you two never meet but you fall to some discord. you are both, i' good truth, as rheumatic as two dry toasts. you cannot one bear with and that must be you. you are the weaker vessel, as they say, the emptier vessel.
(to lear) we are not the first for thee, oppressèd king, i am cast down. myself could else outfrown false fortune's frown. shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
here comes my noble gull-catcher.
can a weak empty vessel bear such a huge full hogshead? there's a whole merchant's venture of bourdeaux stuff in ome, i'll be friends with thee, jack. thou art going to the
no, no, no, no! come, let's away to prison. when thou dost ask me blessing, i'll kneel down and ask of thee forgiveness. so we'll live, and pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh at gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues who loses and who wins, who's in, who's out, and take upon 's the mystery of things as if we were god's spies. and we'll wear out in a walled prison packs and sects of great ones
wilt thou set thy foot o' my neck?
wars, and whether i shall ever see thee again or no, there is nobody cares.
take them away.
or o' mine either?
sir, ancient pistol's below and would speak with
upon such sacrifices, my cordelia, the gods themselves throw incense. have i caught thee? he that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven and fire us hence like foxes. wipe thine eyes.
shall i play my freedom at tray-trip, and become thy bondslave?
hang him, swaggering rascal! let him not come hither. it is the foul-mouthed'st rogue in england.
ere they shall make us weep. we'll see 'em starve first. come.
i' faith, or i either?
if he swagger, let him not come here. no, by my faith, i must live among my neighbors. i'll no swaggerers: i am in good comes no swaggerers here. i have not lived all this while to have swaggering now. shut the door, i pray you.
come hither, captain. hark. (gives first captain a document) one step i have advanced thee. if thou dost as this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way to noble fortunes. know thou this: that men are as the time is. to be tender-minded will not bear question. either say thou'lt do 't, or thrive by other means.
why, thou hast put him in such a dream that when the image of it leaves him he must run mad.
dost thou hear, hostess?
i'll do 't, my lord.
nay, but say true, does it work upon him?
pray you pacify yourself, sir john. there comes no swaggerers
about it, and write "happy" when thou'st done. mark, i say, instantly, and carry it so
like aqua vitae with a midwife.
dost thou hear? it is mine ancient.
i cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats. if it be man's work, i'll do 't.
if you will then see the fruits of the sport, mark his first approach before my lady. he will come to her in yellow stockings, and 'tis a color she abhors, and cross-gartered, a fashion she detests. and he will smile upon her, which will now be so unsuitable to her disposition, being addicted to a melancholy as she is, that it cannot but turn him into a notable contempt. if you will see it, follow me.
tilly-vally, sir john, ne'er tell me. and your ancient swaggerer comes not in my doors. i was before master tisick, the debuty t' other day, and, as he said to me, 'twas "neighbour quickly," says he, master dumb, our minister, was by then, "neighbour quickly," says he, "receive those that are civil, for," said he, "you are in an ill name." now he said so, i can tell whereupon. "for," says he, "you are an what guests you receive. receive," says he, "no swaggering
(to edmund) sir, you have shown today your valiant strain, and fortune led you well. you have the captives
to the gates of tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit!
companions." there comes none here. you would bless you to hear what he said. no, i'll no swaggerers.
i do require them of you, so to use them as we shall find their merits and our safety may equally determine.
i'll make one too.
he's no swaggerer, hostess, a tame cheater, i' faith. you may swagger with a barbary hen if her feathers turn back in any show of resistance., call him up, drawer.
sir, i thought it fit to send the old and miserable king whose age has charms in it, whose title more, to pluck the common bosom on his side, an turn our impressed lances in our eyes which do command them. with him i sent the queen, tomorrow or at further space t' appear where you shall hold your session. at this time we sweat and bleed. the friend hath lost his friend, and the best quarrels, in the heat, are cursed the question of cordelia and her father requires a fitter place.
save thee, friend, and thy music. dost thou live by thy tabour?
"cheater," call you him? i will bar no honest man my house, nor no cheater, but i do not love swaggering. by my troth, i shake; look you, i warrant you.
i hold you but a subject of this war, not as a brother.
no, sir, i live by the church.
so you do, hostess.
that's as we list to grace him. ere you had spoke so far. he led our powers, bore the commission of my place and person, the which immediacy may well stand up and call itself your brother.
art thou a churchman?
do i? yea, in very truth, do i, an 'twere an aspen leaf. i cannot abide swaggerers.
not so hot. more than in your addition.
no such matter, sir. i do live by the church; for i do live at my house, and my house doth stand by the church.
god save you, sir john.
in my rights, by me invested, he compeers the best.
so thou mayst say the king lies by a beggar if a beggar dwell near him, or the church stands by thy tabor, if thy tabor stand by the church.
welcome, ancient pistol. here, pistol, i charge you with a cup of sack. do you discharge upon mine hostess.
that were the most if he should husband you.
you have said, sir. to see this age! a sentence is but a cheveril glove to a good wit. how quickly the wrong side may be turned outward!
i will discharge upon her, sir john, with two bullets.
jesters do oft prove prophets.
nay, that's certain. they that dally nicely with words may quickly make them wanton.
she is pistol-proof. sir, you shall not hardly offend her.
holla, holla! that eye that told you so looked but asquint.
i would therefore my sister had no name, sir.
than will do me good, for no man's pleasure, i.
from a full-flowing stomach. (to edmund) general, take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony. dispose of them, of me. the walls is thine. my lord and master.
why, man?
then to you, mistress dorothy! i will charge you.
mean you to enjoy him then?
why, sir, her name's a word, and to dally with that word might make my sister wanton. but, indeed, words are very rascals since bonds disgraced them.
charge me! i scorn you, scurvy companion. what, you poor, base, rascally, cheating lack-linen mate! away, you mouldy
the let-alone lies not in your good will.
thy reason, man?
i know you, mistress dorothy.
nor in thine, lord.
troth, sir, i can yield you none without words, and words are grown so false, i am loath to prove reason with them.
away, you cutpurse rascal, you filthy bung, away! by this wine, i'll thrust my knife in your mouldy chaps an you play the saucy cuttle with me. away, you bottle-ale rascal, you god's light, with two points on your shoulder? much!
half-blooded fellow, yes.
i warrant thou art a merry fellow and carest for nothing.
god let me not live, but i will murder your ruff for this.
(to edmund) let the drum strike and prove my title thine.
not so, sir, i do care for something. but in my conscience, sir, i do not care for you. if that be to care for nothing, sir, i would it would make you invisible.
no more, pistol. i would not have you go off here. discharge yourself of our company, pistol.
on capital treason, and in thine attaint this gilded serpent.(indicates goneril) (to regan) for your claim, fair sister, i bar it in the interest of my wife. and i, her husband, contradict your banns. if you will marry, make your loves to me, my lady is bespoke.
art not thou the lady olivia's fool?
no, good captain pistol, not here, sweet captain.
an interlude!
no, indeed, sir; the lady olivia has no folly. she will keep no fool, sir, till she be married, and fools are as like husbands as pilchards are to herrings; the husband's the bigger: i am indeed not her fool, but her corrupter of words.
captain? thou abominable damned cheater, art thou not ashamed to be called captain? an captains were of my mind, they would truncheon you out for taking their names upon you before you have earned them. you a captain? you slave,
thou art armed, gloucester. let the trumpet sound. thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons, there is my pledge. (throws down his glove) i'll make it on thy heart, ere i taste bread, thou art in nothing less
i saw thee late at the count orsino's.
he a captain! hang him, rogue. he lives upon mouldy stewed prunes and dried cakes. a captain? god's light, these villains will make the word as odious as the word "occupy," which was an excellent good word before it was ill sorted.
sick, oh, sick!
foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun. it shines everywhere. i would be sorry, sir, but the fool should be as oft with your master as with my mistress: i think i saw your wisdom there.
pray thee go down, good ancient.
(aside) if not, i'll ne'er trust medicine.
nay, an thou pass upon me, i'll no more with thee. hold, there's expenses for thee.
hark thee hither, mistress doll.
(throwing down his glove) there's my exchange. what in the world he is call by thy trumpet. he that dares approach, on him, on you, who not?, i will maintain my truth and honor firmly.
now jove, in his next commodity of hair, send thee a beard!
not i. i tell thee what, corporal bardolph, i could tear her. i'll be revenged of her.
a herald, ho!
by my troth, i'll tell thee, i am almost sick for one, (aside) though i would not have it grow on my chin. (to fool) is thy lady within?
pray thee go down.
a herald, ho, a herald!
would not a pair of these have bred, sir?
i'll see her damned first to pluto's damnèd lake, by this hand, to th' infernal deep with erebus and tortures vile also. hold hook and line, say i. down, down, dogs! down, fates! have we not hiren here?
(to edmund) trust to thy single virtue, for thy soldiers, all levied in my name, have in my name took their discharge.
yes, being kept together and put to use.
beseek you now, aggravate your choler.
my sickness grows upon me.
cressida to this troilus.
these be good humors indeed. shall pack-horses and hollow pampered jades of asia, which cannot go but thirty mile a day, compare with caesars and with cannibals, and troyant greeks? nay, rather damn them with king cerberus, and let the welkin roar. shall we fall foul for toys?
she is not well. convey her to my tent.
(giving him money) i understand you, sir. 'tis well begged.
by my troth, captain, these are very bitter words.
and read out this. (gives the herald a document)
the matter, i hope, is not great, sir, begging but a beggar. cressida was a beggar. my lady is within, sir. i will construe to them whence you come. who you are and what you would are out of my welkin, i might say "element," but the word is overworn.
begone, good ancient. this will grow to a brawl anon.
sound, trumpet!
this fellow is wise enough to play the fool, and to do that well craves a kind of wit. the quality of persons, and the time, and, like the haggard, check at every feather that comes before his eye. this is a practise as full of labor as a wise man's art, but wise men, folly-fall'n, quite taint their wit.
die men like dogs! give crowns like pins! have we not hiren here?
(reads) "if any man of quality or degree within the lists of the army will maintain upon edmund, supposed earl of gloucester, that he is a manifold traitor, let him appear by the third sound of the trumpet. he is bold in his defense."
save you, gentleman.
o' my word, captain, there's none such here. what the good- quiet.
sound!
and you, sir.
then feed and be fat, my fair calipolis. come, give 's some sack. si fortune me tormente, sperato me contento. fear we broadsides? no, let the fiend give fire. give me some sack, we to full points here? and are etceteras nothing?
again!
dieu vous garde, monsieur.
pistol, i would be quiet.
again!
et vous aussi. votre serviteur!
sweet knight, i kiss thy neaf. what, we have seen the seven stars.
(to herald) ask him his purposes, why he appears
i hope, sir, you are, and i am yours.
a fustian rascal.
what are you? your name, your quality, and why you answer this present summons?
will you encounter the house? my niece is desirous you should enter, if your trade be to her.
"thrust him downstairs"? know we not galloway nags?
o, know, my name is lost. by treason's tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit. i come to cope withal.
i am bound to your niece, sir. i mean, she is the list of my voyage.
quoit him down, bardolph, like a shove-groat shilling. nay, an he do nothing but speak nothing, he shall be nothing here.
which is that adversary?
taste your legs, sir. put them to motion.
come, get you downstairs.
what's he that speaks for edmund, earl of gloucester?
my legs do better understand me, sir, than i understand what you mean by bidding me taste my legs.
what! shall we have incision? shall we imbrue? (snatches up his sword) then death rock me asleep, abridge my doleful days. why then, let grievous, ghastly, gaping wounds untwine the sisters three. come, atropos, i say.
himself. what sayst thou to him?
i mean, to go, sir, to enter.
here's goodly stuff toward!
draw thy sword, that if my speech offend a noble heart behold: it is the privilege of mine honors, my oath, and my profession. i protest, maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence, despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune, false to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father, conspirant 'gainst this high illustrious prince, and from th' extremest upward of thy head to the descent and dust below thy foot this sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent to prove upon thy heart, whereto i speak, thou liest.
i will answer you with gait and entrance. but we are prevented.
give me my rapier, boy.
in wisdom i should ask thy name. but since thy outside looks so fair and warlike, what safe and nicely i might well delay by rule of knighthood, i disdain and spurn. back do i toss these treasons to thy head, with the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart, 
most excellent accomplished lady, the heavens rain odors on you!
i pray thee, jack, i pray thee do not draw.
this sword of mine shall give them instant way, where they shall rest for ever., trumpets, speak!
(aside) that youth's a rare courtier. "rain odors." well.
get you downstairs. (drawing and driving pisto out)
save him, save him!
my matter hath no voice, lady, but to your own most pregnant and vouchsafed ear.
here's a goodly tumult. i'll forswear keeping house afore alas, alas, put up your naked weapons, put up your naked weapons.
this is practice, gloucester. an unknown opposite. thou art not vanquished, but cozened and beguiled.
(aside) "odors," "pregnant," and "vouchsafed." i'll get 'em all three all ready.
i pray thee, jack, be quiet. the rascal's gone. ah, you whoreson little valiant villain, you.
shut your mouth, dame, or with this paper shall i stop it., hold, sir, (gives the letter to edmund) (to goneril) nay, no tearing, lady. i perceive you know it.
let the garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing.
are you not hurt i' the groin? methought he made a shrewd thrust at your belly.
say, if i do? the laws are mine, not thine. who can arraign me for 't?
give me your hand, sir.
have you turned him out o' doors?
most monstrous, oh! (to edmund) know'st thou this paper?
my duty, madam, and most humble service.
yea, sir. the rascal's drunk. you have hurt him, sir, i' the shoulder.
ask me not what i know.
what is your name?
a rascal to brave me!
go after her. she's desperate. govern her.
cesario is your servant's name, fair princess.
ah, you sweet little rogue, you. alas, poor ape, how thou whoreson chops. ah, rogue, i' faith, i love thee. thou art as valorous as hector of troy, worth five of agamemnon, and ten times better than the nine worthies. ah, villain!
what you have charged me with, that have i done, and more, much more. the time will bring it out. 'tis past, and so am i. but what art thou that hast this fortune on me? if thou'rt noble, i do forgive thee.
my servant, sir! 'twas never merry world you're servant to the count orsino, youth.
ah, rascally slave! i will toss the rogue in a blanket.
let's exchange charity. i am no less in blood than thou art, edmund. if more, the more thou'st wronged me. the gods are just, and of our pleasant vices make instruments to plague us. the dark and vicious place where thee he got cost him his eyes.
and he is yours, and his must needs be yours: your servant's servant is your servant, madam.
thee between a pair of sheets.
thou'st spoken right. 'tis true.
for him, i think not on him. for his thoughts,
the music is come, sir.
methought thy very gait did prophesy a royal nobleness. i must embrace thee. let sorrow split my heart if ever i did hate thee or thy father.
madam, i come to whet your gentle thoughts on his behalf.
let them play., play, sirs., sit on my knee, doll. a rascal bragging slave! the rogue fled from me like quicksilver.
worthy prince, i know 't.
o, by your leave, i pray you, i bade you never speak again of him. but, would you undertake another suit, than music from the spheres.
whoreson little tidy bartholomew boar-pig, when wilt thou leave fighting a-days and foining a-nights and begin to patch up thine old body for heaven?
where have you hid yourself? how have you known the miseries of your father?
dear lady, 
peace, good doll. do not speak like a death's-head; do not bid
by nursing them, my lord. list a brief tale, and when 'tis told, oh, that my heart would burst! that followed me so near, o our lives' sweetness,
give me leave, beseech you. i did send, after the last enchantment you did here, a ring in chase of you. so did i abuse under your hard construction must i sit, to force that on you, in a shameful cunning which you knew none of yours. what might you think?
sirrah, what humor's the prince of?
that we the pain of death would hourly die rather than die at once!, taught me to shift into a madman's rags, t' assume a semblance met i my father with his bleeding rings, their precious stones new lost, became his guide, led him, begged for him, saved him from despair. never, o fault!, revealed myself unto him not sure, though hoping of this good success, i asked his blessing, and from first to last told him my pilgrimage. but his flawed heart, alack, too weak the conflict to support, burst smilingly.
have you not set mine honor at the stake, that tyrannous heart can think? to one of your receiving enough is shown. a cypress, not a bosom, hides my heart. so, let me hear you speak.
a good shallow young fellow, he would have made a good pantler; he would a' chipped bread well.
this speech of yours hath moved me, and shall perchance do good. but speak you on. you look as you had something more to say.
i pity you.
they say poins has a good wit.
if there be more, more woeful, hold it in. hearing of this.
that's a degree to love.
tewksbury mustard. there's no more conceit in him than is in a mallet.
this would have seemed a period to such as love not sorrow, but another to amplify too much would make much more and top extremity. who, having seen me in my worst estate, shunned my abhorred society, but then, finding who 'twas that so endured, with his strong arms he fastened on my neck, and bellowed out told the most piteous tale of lear and him that ever ear received, which in recounting
that very oft we pity enemies.
why does the prince love him so then?
his grief grew puissant and the strings of life began to crack. twice then the trumpets sounded,
why then methinks 'tis time to smile again. o world, how apt the poor are to be proud! if one should be a prey, how much the better the clock upbraids me with the waste of time. be not afraid, good youth, i will not have you. and yet when wit and youth is come to harvest, your wife is like to reap a proper man.
because their legs are both of a bigness, and he plays at candles' ends for flap-dragons, and rides the wild mare with the boys, and jumps upon joint stools, and swears with a good grace, and wears his boots very smooth, like unto the sign of the leg, and breeds no bate with telling of discreet weak mind and an able body, for the which the prince admits him; for the prince himself is such another. the weight of a hair will turn the scales between their avoirdupois.
but who was this?
then westward ho! grace and good disposition attend your ladyship! you'll nothing, madam, to my lord by me?
(to poins) would not this nave of a wheel have his ears cut off?
kent, sir, the banished kent, who in disguise followed his enemy king and did him service improper for a slave.
stay, i prithee, tell me what thou thinkest of me.
let's beat him before his whore.
help, help, o, help!
that you do think you are not what you are.
look whe'er the withered elder hath not his poll clawed like a parrot.
what kind of help?
if i think so, i think the same of you.
is it not strange that desire should so many years outlive performance?
speak, man.
then think you right: i am not what i am.
kiss me, doll.
what means that bloody knife?
i would you were as i would have you be!
saturn and venus this year in conjunction! what says th' almanac to that?
'tis hot, it smokes. it came even from the heart of, oh, she's dead!
would it be better, madam, than i am? i wish it might, for now i am your fool.
and look whether the fiery trigon, his man, be not lisping to his master's old tables, his notebook, his counsel keeper.
who dead? speak, man.
in the contempt and anger of his lip! a murderous guilt shows not itself more soon than love that would seem hid. love's night is noon. (to viola) cesario, by the roses of the spring, i love thee so, that, maugre all thy pride, nor wit nor reason can my passion hide. do not extort thy reasons from this clause, for that i woo, thou therefore hast no cause, love sought is good, but given unsought better.
(to doll) thou dost give me flattering busses.
your lady, sir, your lady. and her sister
by innocence i swear, and by my youth i have one heart, one bosom, and one truth, and that no woman has, nor never none and so adieu, good madam. nevermore will i my master's tears to you deplore.
by my troth, i kiss thee with a most constant heart.
i was contracted to them both. all three now marry in an instant.
yet come again, for thou perhaps mayst move that heart, which now abhors, to like his love.
i am old, i am old.
here comes kent.
no, faith, i'll not stay a jot longer.
i love thee better than i love e'er a scurvy young boy of them all.
produce their bodies, be they alive or dead. this judgment of the heavens that makes us tremble
thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason.
thursday; shalt have a cap tomorrow. a merry song! come, it grows late. we'll to bed. thou 'lt forget me when i am gone.
oh, is this he? the time will not allow the compliment which very manners urges.
you must needs yield your reason, sir andrew.
by my troth, thou 'lt set me a-weeping an thou sayest so. harken a' th' end.
i am come to bid my king and master aye good night. is he not here?
marry, i saw your niece do more favors to the count's servingman than ever she bestowed upon me. i saw 't i' the orchard.
some sack, francis.
great thing of us forgot!, 
did she see thee the while, old boy? tell me that.
anon, anon, sir.
seest thou this object, kent?
as plain as i see you now.
ha? a bastard son of the king's?, and art not thou
alack, why thus?
this was a great argument of love in her toward you.
why, thou globe of sinful continents, what a life dost thou lead?
yet edmund was beloved. the one the other poisoned for my sake,
'slight, will you make an ass o' me?
a better than thou. i am a gentleman. thou art a drawer.
even so., cover their faces.
i will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of judgment and reason.
very true, sir, and i come to draw you out by the ears.
i pant for life. some good i mean to do despite of mine own nature. quickly send, be brief in it, to th' castle, for my writ is on the life of lear and on cordelia.
and they have been grand-jurymen since before noah was a sailor.
to london. now the lord bless that sweet face of thine. o jesu, are you come from wales?
run, run, o, run!
she did show favor to the youth in your sight only to exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valor, to put fire in your heart and brimstone in your liver. you should then have accosted her, and with some excellent jests, fire-new from the mint, you should have banged the youth into dumbness.
thou whoreson mad compound of majesty, (indicating doll) by this light flesh and corrupt blood, thou art welcome.
to who, my lord?, who hath the office? send thy token of reprieve.
this was looked for at your hand, and this was balked. the double gilt of this opportunity you let time wash off, and you are now sailed into the north of my lady's opinion, where you will hang like an icicle on a dutchman's beard, unless you do redeem it by some laudable attempt either of valor or policy.
how? you fat fool, i scorn you.
well thought on. take my sword. the captain, give it the captain.
an 't be any way, it must be with valor, for policy i hate. i had as lief be a brownist as a politician.
my lord, he will drive you out of your revenge and turn all to a merriment, if you take not the heat.
haste thee for thy life.
why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis of valor. challenge me the count's youth to fight with him. hurt him in eleven places. my niece shall take note of it, and assure thyself, there is no love-broker in the world can more prevail in man's commendation with woman than report of valor.
you whoreson candle-mine, you how vilely did you speak of me even now before this honest, virtuous, civil
to hang cordelia in the prison and to lay the blame upon her own despair, that she fordid herself.
there is no way but this, sir andrew.
god's blessing of your good heart, and so she is, by my troth.
the gods defend her!, hear him hence awhile.
will either of you bear me a challenge to him?
didst thou hear me?
had i your tongues and eyes, i'd use them so that heaven's vault should crack. she's gone forever. i know when one is dead and when one lives. she's dead as earth. lend me a looking-glass. why then, she lives.
go, write it in a martial hand. be curst and brief. it is no matter how witty, so it be eloquent and full of invention. taunt him with the license of ink. if thou "thou"-est him some thrice, it shall not be amiss; and as many lies as will lie in thy sheet of paper, although the sheet were big enough for the bed of ware in england, set 'em down. go, about it. let there be gall enough in thy ink, though thou write with a goose-pen, no matter. about it.
yea, and you knew me, as you did when you ran away by gad's hill. you knew i was at your back, and spoke it on
is this the promised end?
where shall i find you?
no, no, no; not so. i did not think thou wast within hearing.
or image of that horror?
we'll call thee at the cubiculo. go.
i shall drive you, then, to confess the wilfull abuse, and then i know how to handle you.
fall and cease.
this is a dear manikin to you, sir toby.
no abuse, hal, o' mine honor, no abuse.
this feather stirs. she lives. if it be so, it is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
i have been dear to him, lad, some two thousand strong, or so.
and i know not what?
o my good master!
we shall have a rare letter from him: but you'll not deliver 't?
no abuse, hal.
prithee, away.
never trust me, then. and by all means stir on the youth to an answer. i think oxen and wainropes cannot hale them together. for andrew, if he were opened and you find so much blood in his liver as will clog the foot of a flea, i'll eat the rest of the anatomy.
no abuse?
'tis noble kent, your friend.
and his opposite, the youth, bears in his visage no great presage of cruelty.
no abuse, ned, i' th' world, honest ned, none. i dispraised with thee; in which doing, i have done the part of a careful friend and a true subject, and thy father is to give me thanks for it. no abuse, hal., none, ned, none. no, faith, boys, none.
a plague upon you, murderers, traitors all! i might have saved her. now she's gone for ever., cordelia, cordelia, stay a little. ha? gentle and low, an excellent thing in woman., i killed the slave that was a-hanging thee.
look where the youngest wren of nine comes.
see now whether pure fear and entire cowardice doth not us. is she of the wicked, is thine hostess here of the wicked, or is thy boy of the wicked, or honest bardolph, whose zeal burns in his nose, of the wicked?
'tis true, my lords, he did.
if you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourself into stitches, follow me. yond gull malvolio is turned heathen, a very renegado. for there is no christian that means to be saved by believing rightly can ever believe such impossible passages of grossness. he's in yellow stockings.
answer, thou dead elm, answer.
did i not, fellow? i have seen the day with my good biting falchion and these same crosses spoil me. (to kent) who are you? mine eyes are not o' th' best, i'll tell you straight.
and cross-gartered?
his face is lucifer's privy kitchen, where he doth nothing but roast malt-worms. for the boy, there is a good angel about him, but the devil outbids him too.
if fortune brag of two she loved and hated, one of them we behold.
most villanously, like a pedant that keeps a school i' the church. i have dogged him, like his murderer. he does obey every point of the letter that i dropped to betray him. he does smile his face into more lines than is in the new map with the augmentation of the indies. you have not seen such a thing as 'tis. i can hardly forbear hurling things at him. i know my lady will strike him. if she do, he'll smile and take 't for a great favor.
for the women?
this a dull sight.
come, bring us, bring us where he is.
for the other, i owe her money, and whether she be damned for that i know not.
the same. your servant kent. where is your servant caius?
i would not by my will have troubled you, but, since you make your pleasure of your pains, i will no further chide you.
no, i warrant you.
he's a good fellow, i can tell you that. he'll strike, and quickly too. he's dead and rotten.
i could not stay behind you. my desire, and not all love to see you, though so much as might have drawn one to a longer voyage, but jealousy what might befall your travel, being skilless in these parts, which to a stranger, rough and unhospitable. my willing love, the rather by these arguments of fear, set forth in your pursuit.
no, i think thou art not; i think thou art quit for that. marry, be eaten in thy house contrary to the law, for the which i think thou wilt howl.
no, my good lord. i am the very man, 
my kind antonio, i can no other answer make but thanks, are shuffled off with such uncurrent pay. but were my worth as is my conscience, firm, you should find better dealing. what's to do? shall we go see the relics of this town?
all vitlars do so. what's a joint of mutton or two in a whole lent?
i'll see that straight.
tomorrow, sir. best first go see your lodging.
you, gentlewoman.
that from your first of difference and decay have followed your sad steps.
i am not weary, and 'tis long to night: i pray you, let us satisfy our eyes with the memorials and the things of fame that do renown this city.
what says your grace?
you're welcome hither.
would you'd pardon me; once in a sea-fight 'gainst the count his galleys i did some service, of such note indeed, that were i ta'en here it would scarce be answered.
his grace says that which his flesh rebels against.
nor no man else. all's cheerless, dark, and deadly. and desperately are dead.
belike you slew great number of his people?
who knocks so loud at door? look to th' door there, francis.
ay, so i think.
albeit the quality of the time and quarrel might well have given us bloody argument. it might have since been answered in repaying what we took from them, which, for traffic's sake, for which, if i be lapsèd in this place, i shall pay dear.
peto, how now, what news?
he knows not what he says, and vain it is that we present us to him.
do not then walk too open.
and there are twenty weak and wearied posts come from the north, and as i came along i met and overtook a dozen captains, bareheaded, sweating, knocking at the taverns
very bootless.
it doth not fit me. hold, sir, here's my purse. (giving him money) is best to lodge. i will bespeak our diet, whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge with viewing of the town. there shall you have me.
by heaven, poins, i feel me much to blame so idly to profane the precious time when tempest of commotion, like the south borne with black vapour, doth begin to melt give me my sword and cloak., falstaff, good night.
edmund is dead, my lord.
why i your purse?
now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night, and we must hence and leave it unpicked.
that's but a trifle here., what comfort to this great decay may come shall be applied. for us, we will resign during the life of this old majesty to him our absolute power.
you have desire to purchase, and your store, i think, is not for idle markets, sir.
more knocking at the door?
you, to your rights with boot, and such addition as your honors have more than merited., all friends shall taste the wages of their virtue, and all foes the cup of their deservings. o, see, see!
i'll be your purse-bearer and leave you for an hour.
how now, what's the matter?
why should a dog, a horse, a rat have life, and thou no breath at all? oh, thou'lt come no more, never, never, never, never, never., pray you, undo this button. thank you, sir. look there, look there. o, o, o, o. (dies)
to the elephant.
a dozen captains stay at door for you.
he faints!, my lord, my lord!
i do remember.
(to the page) pay the musicians, sirrah., farewell, hostess., farewell, doll. you see, my good wenches, how men of merit are sought after. the undeserver may sleep wenches. if i be not sent away post, i will see you again ere i go.
break, heart. i prithee, break!
i have sent after him. he says he'll come. how shall i feast him? what bestow of him? for youth is bought more oft than begged or borrow'd. i speak too loud., and suits well for a servant with my fortunes. where is malvolio?
i cannot speak. if my heart be not ready to burst, well, sweet jack, have a care of thyself.
(to lear) look up, my lord.
he's coming, madam; but in very strange manner. he is sure possessed, madam.
farewell, farewell.
vex not his ghost. o, let him pass. he hates him that would upon the rack of this tough world stretch him out longer.
why, what's the matter? does he rave?
well, fare thee well. i have known thee these twenty-nine years, come peascod time, but an honester and truer-hearted man, well, fare thee well.
oh, he is gone indeed.
no, madam, he does nothing but smile. your ladyship were best to have some guard about you if he come, for sure the man is tainted in 's wits.
(within) mistress tearsheet!
the wonder is he hath endured so long.
go call him hither.
what's the matter?
bear them from hence. our present business is to general woe. (to kent and edgar) friends of my soul, you twain rule in this realm, and the gored state sustain.
i am as mad as he,
(within) bid mistress tearsheet come to my master.
my master calls me. i must not say no.
how now, malvolio?
o, run, doll, run, run, good doll. come., she comes blubbered., yea! will you come, doll?
the weight of this sad time we must obey. speak what we feel, not what we ought to say. the oldest hath borne most. we that are young
sweet lady, ho, ho.
go call the earls of surrey and of warwick; but, ere they come, bid them o'erread these letters and well consider of them. make good speed.
smilest thou? i sent for thee upon a sad occasion.
how many thousand of my poorest subjects nature's soft nurse, how have i frighted thee, that thou no more wilt weigh my eyelids down and steep my senses in forgetfulness? why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky cribs, and hushed with buzzing night-flies to thy slumber, than in the perfumed chambers of the great, under the canopies of costly state, and lull'd with sound of sweetest melody? in loathsome beds and leavest the kingly couch a watch-case or a common 'larum bell? wilt thou upon the high and giddy mast seal up the shipboy's eyes, and rock his brains and in the visitation of the winds, who take the ruffian billows by the top, curling their monstrous heads and hanging them with deafening clamor in the slippery clouds canst thou, o partial sleep, give thy repose to the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude,
boatswain!
sad, lady! i could be sad. this does make some obstruction in the blood, this cross-gartering, but what of that? if it please the eye of one, it is with me as the very true sonnet is, "please one, and please all."
and, in the calmest and most stillest night, with all appliances and means to boot, uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.
here, master. what cheer?
why, how dost thou, man? what is the matter with thee?
many good morrows to your majesty.
good, speak to th' mariners. fall to 't yarely, or we run ourselves aground. bestir, bestir.
not black in my mind, though yellow in my legs. it did come to his hands, and commands shall be executed. i think we do know the sweet roman hand.
is it good morrow, lords?
heigh, my hearts! cheerly, cheerly, my hearts! yare! yare!
wilt thou go to bed, malvolio?
'tis one o'clock, and past.
good boatswain, have care. where's the master? play the men.
to bed? "ay, sweetheart, and i'll come to thee."
have you read o'er the letter that i sent you?
i pray now, keep below.
god comfort thee! why dost thou smile so, and kiss thy hand so oft?
we have, my liege.
where is the master, boatswain?
how do you, malvolio?
then you perceive the body of our kingdom how foul it is, what rank diseases grow
you do assist the storm.
at your request! yes, nightingales answer daws!
it is but as a body yet distempered, which to his former strength may be restored with good advice and little medicine. my lord northumberland will soon be cooled.
nay, good, be patient.
why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my lady?
and see the revolution of the times make mountains level, and the continent, weary of solid firmness, melt itself into the sea, and other times to see too wide for neptune's hips; how chance's mocks and changes fill the cup of alteration
when the sea is. hence! what cares these roarers for the name of king? to cabin, silence! trouble us not.
"be not afraid of greatness." 'twas well writ.
with divers liquors! o, if this were seen, the happiest youth, viewing his progress through, would shut the book, and sit him down and die. 'tis not ten years gone since richard and northumberland, great friends, did feast together, and in two years after this percy was the man nearest my soul, who like a brother toiled in my affairs and laid his love and life under my foot, yea, for my sake, even to the eyes of richard (to warwick) you, cousin nevil, as i may remember, when richard, with his eye brimful of tears, then checked and rated by northumberland, did speak these words, now proved a prophecy? my cousin bolingbroke ascends my throne", though then, god knows, i had no such intent, but that necessity so bowed the state that i and greatness were compelled to kiss, "the time will come that foul sin, gathering head, shall break into corruption", so went on, foretelling this same time's condition and the division of our amity.
good, yet remember whom thou hast aboard.
what meanest thou by that, malvolio?
figuring the nature of the times deceased, the which observed, a man may prophesy, with a near aim, of the main chance of things as yet not come to life, which in their seeds such things become the hatch and brood of time, and by the necessary form of this,
none that i more love than myself. you are a councilor. if you can command these elements to silence and work the peace of the present, we will not hand a rope more. use your authority. if you cannot, give thanks you have lived so long and make yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of the hour, if it so hap., cheerly, good hearts!, out of our way, i say.
"some are born great, "
king richard might create a perfect guess that great northumberland, then false to him, which should not find a ground to root upon unless on you.
i have great comfort from this fellow. methinks he hath no drowning mark upon him. his complexion is perfect gallows. stand fast, good fate, to his hanging. make the rope of his destiny our cable, for our own doth little advantage. if he be not born to be hanged, our case is miserable.
ha?
are these things then necessities? then let us meet them like necessities. they say the bishop and northumberland are fifty thousand strong.
down with the topmast! yare, lower, lower! bring her to try wi' th' main course.
"some achieve greatness, "
it cannot be, my lord. rumor doth double, like the voice and echo, to go to bed. upon my soul, my lord, the powers that you already have sent forth shall bring this prize in very easily. to comfort you the more, i have received your majesty hath been this fortnight ill, and these unseasoned hours perforce must add unto your sickness.
a plague upon this howling! they are louder than the weather or our office.
what sayest thou?
i will take your counsel. and were these inward wars once out of hand,
yet again? what do you here? shall we give o'er and drown?
"and some have greatness thrust upon them."
come on, come on, come on. give me your hand, sir, give me your hand, sir. an early stirrer, by the rood. and how doth my good cousin silence?
a pox o' your throat, you bawling, blasphemous, incharitable dog!
heaven restore thee!
good morrow, good cousin shallow.
work you, then.
"remember who commended thy yellow stockings, "
daughter and mine, my goddaughter ellen?
hang, cur! hang, you whoreson insolent noisemaker! we are less afraid to be drowned than thou art.
thy yellow stockings?
alas, a black ousel, cousin shallow.
i'll warrant him for drowning though the ship were no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky as an unstanched wench.
"and wished to see thee cross-gartered."
by yea and no, sir. i dare say my cousin william is become a good scholar. he is at oxford still, is he not?
lay her off!
cross-gartered?
indeed, sir, to my cost.
all lost! to prayers, to prayers, all lost!
"go to, thou art made, if thou desirest to be so, "
he must then to the inns o' court shortly. i was once of clement's inn, where i think they will talk of mad shallow yet.
what, must our mouths be cold?
am i made?
you were called "lusty shallow" then, cousin.
the king and prince at prayers. let's assist them, for our case is as theirs.
"if not, let me see thee a servant still."
anything indeed too, and roundly too. there was i, and little john doit of staffordshire, and black george barnes, and francis pickbone, and will squele, a cotswold man. you had not four such swinge-bucklers in all the inns o' court
i'm out of patience.
why, this is very midsummer madness.
were and had the best of them all at commandment. then was jack falstaff, now sir john, a boy, and page to thomas mowbray, duke of norfolk.
we are merely cheated of our lives by drunkards. this wide-chopped rascal, would thou mightst lie drowning the washing of ten tides!
madam, the young gentleman of the count orsino's is returned. i could hardly entreat him back. he attends your ladyship's pleasure.
this sir john, cousin, that comes hither anon about soldiers?
he'll be hanged yet, though every drop of water swear against it and gape at widest to glut him.
i'll come to him.
head at the court gate, when he was a crack not thus high; and the very same day did i fight with one sampson stockfish, a fruiterer, behind grey's inn. jesu, jesu, the mad days that i have spent! and to see how many of my old acquaintance
(within) mercy on us!, we split, we split!, farewell, my wife and children!, farewell, brother!, we split, we split, we split!
good maria, let this fellow be looked to. where's my cousin toby? let some of my people have a special care of him. i would not have him miscarry for the half of my dowry.
we shall all follow, cousin.
let's all sink wi' th' king.
oh, ho! do you come near me now? no worse man than sir toby to look to me. this concurs directly with the letter. she sends him on purpose that i may appear stubborn to him, for she incites me to that in the letter. "cast thy humble slough," says she. "be opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants. let thy tongue tang with arguments of state. put thyself into the trick of singularity," and consequently sets down the manner how: as, a sad face, a reverend carriage, a slow tongue, in the habit of some sir of note, and so forth. i have limed her, but it is jove's doing, and jove make me thankful! and when she went away now, "let this fellow be looked to." "fellow!" not "malvolio," nor after my degree, but "fellow." why, everything adheres together, that no dram of a scruple, no scruple of a scruple, no obstacle, no incredulous or unsafe circumstance, what can be said? nothing that can be can come between me and the full prospect of my hopes. well, jove, not i, is the doer of this, and he is to be thanked.
certain, 'tis certain; very sure, very sure. death, as the psalmist saith, is certain to all. all shall die. how a good yoke of bullocks at stamford fair?
let's take leave of him.
which way is he, in the name of sanctity? if all the devils of hell be drawn in little, and legion himself possessed him, yet i'll speak to him.
by my troth, cousin, i was not there.
now would i give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of barren ground: long heath, brown furze, anything. the wills above be done, but i would fain die a dry death.
here he is, here he is. how is't with you, sir? how is't with you, man?
death is certain. is old dooble of your town living yet?
if by your art, my dearest father, you have put the wild waters in this roar, allay them. the sky, it seems, would pour down stinking pitch, but that the sea, mounting to th' welkin's cheek, with those that i saw suffer. a brave vessel who had, no doubt, some noble creature in her dashed all to pieces. oh, the cry did knock against my very heart! poor souls, they perished. have sunk the sea within the earth or ere it should the good ship so have swallowed and the fraughting souls within her.
go off, i discard you. let me enjoy my private. go off.
dead, sir.
be collected. no more amazement. tell your piteous heart
(to sir toby belch) lo, how hollow the fiend speaks within him! did not i tell you? sir toby, my lady prays you to have a care of him.
jesu, jesu, dead! he drew a good bow, and dead? he shot a fine shoot. john o' gaunt loved him well, and betted much clout at twelve score, and carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and fourteen and a half, that it would have done a man's heart good to see. how a score of ewes now?
oh, woe the day!
aha! does she so?
thereafter as they be, a score of good ewes may be worth ten
no harm. i have done nothing but in care of thee, of thee, my dear one, thee my daughter, who art ignorant of what thou art, naught knowing of whence i am, nor that i am more better and thy no greater father.
(to fabian and maria) go to, go to! peace, peace. we must deal gently with him. let me alone., how do you, malvolio? how is 't with you? what, man, defy the devil! consider, he's an enemy to mankind.
and is old dooble dead?
more to know did never meddle with my thoughts.
do you know what you say?
here come two of sir john falstaff's men, as i think.
'tis time i should inform thee farther. lend thy hand and pluck my magic garment from me.
(to sir toby belch) la you, an you speak ill of the devil, how he takes it at heart! pray god, he be not bewitched!
good morrow, honest gentlemen.
so, the direful spectacle of the wrack, which touched the very virtue of compassion in thee, i have with such provision in mine art so safely ordered that there is no soul, betid to any creature in the vessel, which thou heard'st cry, which thou sawst sink. sit down. for thou must now know farther.
carry his water to the wisewoman.
i beseech you, which is justice shallow?
you have often begun to tell me what i am, but stopped concluding, "stay. not yet."
marry, and it shall be done tomorrow morning if i live. my lady would not lose him for more than i'll say.
one of the king's justices of the peace. what is your good pleasure with me?
the hour's now come. the very minute bids thee ope thine ear. obey and be attentive. canst thou remember a time before we came unto this cell? out three years old.
how now, mistress?
my captain, sir, commends him to you, my captain, sir john falstaff, a tall gentleman, by heaven, and a most gallant
certainly, sir, i can.
o lord!
he greets me well, sir. i knew him a good backsword man. how doth the good knight? may i ask how my lady his wife doth?
by what? by any other house or person? of anything the image tell me that hath kept with thy remembrance.
(to maria) prithee, hold thy peace. this is not the way. do you not see you move him? let me alone with him.
sir, pardon. a soldier is better accommodated than with a
'tis far off, that my remembrance warrants. had i not four or five women once that tended me?
no way but gentleness, gently, gently. the fiend is rough and will not be roughly used.
it is well said, in faith, sir, and it is well said indeed too. "better accommodated." it is good, yea, indeed, is it. good phrases are surely, and ever were, very commendable.
thou hadst, and more, miranda. but how is it that this lives in thy mind? what seest thou else if thou rememberest aught ere thou camest here, how thou camest here thou mayst.
(to malvolio) why, how now, my bawcock! how dost thou, chuck?
"accommodated." it comes of accommodo. very good, a good phrase.
but that i do not.
sir!
this day, i know not the phrase, but i will maintain the word with my sword to be a soldierlike word, and a word of exceeding good command, by heaven. "accommodated," that is when a man is, as they say, accommodated, or when accommodated, which is an excellent thing.
twelve year since, miranda, twelve year since, thy father was the duke of milan and
ay, biddy, come with me., what, man! 'tis not for gravity to play at cherry-pit with satan. hang him, foul collier!
it is very just. look, here comes good sir john., give me your good hand, give me your worship's good hand. by my troth, you like well and bear your years very well. welcome,
sir, are not you my father?
get him to say his prayers, good sir toby, get him to pray.
i am glad to see you well, good master robert shallow., master sure-card, as i think?
thy mother was a piece of virtue and she said thou wast my daughter. and thy father was duke of milan, and thou his only heir and princess no worse issued.
my prayers, minx?
no, sir john. it is my cousin silence, in commission with me.
oh, the heavens! or blessè was 't we did?
(to sir toby belch) no, i warrant you, he will not hear of godliness.
good master silence, it well befits you should be of the
both, both, my girl. by foul play, as thou sayst, were we heaved thence, but blessedly holp hither.
go, hang yourselves all! you are idle, shallow things. i am not of your element. you shall know more hereafter.
your good worship is welcome.
oh, my heart bleeds to think o' th' teen that i have turned you to,
is 't possible?
fie, this is hot weather, gentlemen. have you provided me here half a dozen sufficient men?
my brother and thy uncle, called antonio, i pray thee, mark me (that a brother should be so perfidious!), he whom next thyself of all the world i loved and to him put through all the signories it was the first, and prospero the prime duke, being so reputed in dignity, and for the liberal arts without a parallel. those being all my study, and to my state grew stranger, being transported and rapt in secret studies. thy false uncle, dost thou attend me?
if this were played upon a stage now, i could condemn it as an improbable fiction.
marry, have we, sir. will you sit?
sir, most heedfully.
his very genius hath taken the infection of the device, man.
let me see them, i beseech you.
being once perfected how to grant suits, to trash for overtopping, new created the creatures that were mine, i say, or changed 'em, or else new formed 'em, having both the key of officer and office, set all hearts i' th' state the ivy which had hid my princely trunk, and sucked my verdure out on 't. thou attend'st not.
nay, pursue him now, lest the device take air and taint.
where's the roll? where's the roll? where's the roll? let me see, let me see, let me see. so, so, so, so, so. so, so. yea, marry, sir., rafe mouldy!, let them appear as i call, let them do so, let them do so. let me see, where is mouldy?
o, good sir, i do.
why, we shall make him mad indeed.
here, an it please you.
i pray thee, mark me. i, thus neglecting worldly ends, all dedicated with that which, but by being so retired, o'erprized all popular rate, in my false brother awaked an evil nature. and my trust, like a good parent, did beget of him as my trust was, which had indeed no limit, a confidence sans bound. he being thus lorded, not only with what my revenue yielded but what my power might else exact, like one made such a sinner of his memory to credit his own lie, he did believe he was indeed the duke, out o' th' substitution and executing th' outward face of royalty, dost thou hear?
the house will be the quieter.
what think you, sir john? a good-limbed fellow; young, strong, and of good friends.
your tale, sir, would cure deafness.
come, we'll have him in a dark room and bound. my niece is already in the belief that he's mad. we may carry it thus, for our pleasure and his penance, till our very pastime, tired out of breath, prompt us to have mercy on him, at which time we will bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a finder of madmen. but see, but see!
is thy name mouldy?
to have no screen between this part he played and him he played it for, he needs will be absolute milan. me, poor man, my library he thinks me now incapable, confederates, so dry he was for sway, wi' th' king of naples to give him annual tribute, do him homage, subject his coronet to his crown and bend to most ignoble stooping.
more matter for a may morning.
yea, an 't please you.
oh, the heavens!
(presenting a paper) here's the challenge, read it. warrant there's vinegar and pepper in 't.
'tis the more time thou wert used.
mark his condition and the event. then tell me if this might be a brother.
is 't so saucy?
ha, ha, ha, most excellent, i' faith! things that are mouldy lack use. very singular good, in faith. well said, sir john, very well said.
i should sin to think but nobly of my grandmother.
ay, is 't, i warrant him. do but read.
prick him.
now the condition. the king of naples, being an enemy to me inveterate, hearkens my brother's suit, which was that he, in lieu o' th' premises of homage and i know not how much tribute, out of the dukedom, and confer fair milan with all the honors on my brother. whereon, a treacherous army levied, one midnight fated to th' purpose did antonio open the ministers for th' purpose hurried thence me and thy crying self.
give me. (reads) "youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art but a scurvy fellow."
alone. my old dame will be undone now for one to do her husbandry and her drudgery. you need not to have pricked me. there are other men fitter to go out than i.
alack, for pity! i, not remembering how i cried out then, will cry it o'er again. it is a hint
good, and valiant.
go to. peace, mouldy. you shall go. mouldy, it is time you were
hear a little further and then i'll bring thee to the present business which now 's upon 's, without the which this story were most impertinent.
(reads) "wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind, why i do call thee so, for i will show thee no reason for 't."
spent?
wherefore did they not that hour destroy us?
a good note, that keeps you from the blow of the law.
peace, fellow, peace. stand aside. know you where you are?, for th' other, sir john. let me see., simon shadow!
well demanded, wench. so dear the love my people bore me, nor set a mark so bloody on the business, but with colors fairer painted their foul ends. in few, they hurried us aboard a bark, a rotten carcass of a butt, not rigged, nor tackle, sail, nor mast. the very rats instinctively had quit it. there they hoist us to cry to th' sea that roared to us, to sigh did us but loving wrong.
(reads) "thou comest to the lady olivia, and in my sight she uses thee kindly. but thou liest in thy throat. that is not the matter i challenge thee for."
yea, marry, let me have him to sit under. he's like to be a
alack, what trouble was i then to you!
very brief, and to exceeding good sense, less.
where's shadow?
oh, a cherubim thou wast that did preserve me. thou didst smile infusèd with a fortitude from heaven, under my burthen groaned; which raised in me an undergoing stomach to bear up against what should ensue.
(reads) "i will waylay thee going home, where if it be thy chance to kill me, "
here, sir.
how came we ashore?
good.
shadow, whose son art thou?
by providence divine. a noble neapolitan, gonzalo, out of his charity, who being then appointed master of this design, did give us, with rich garments, linens, stuffs, and necessaries, knowing i loved my books, he furnished me from mine own library with volumes that i prize above my dukedom.
(reads) "thou killest me like a rogue and a villain."
my mother's son, sir.
would i might but ever see that man!
still you keep o' the windy side of the law. good.
the son of the female is the shadow of the male. it is often so, indeed, but much of the father's substance.
now i arise. sit still, and hear the last of our sea-sorrow. here in this island we arrived, and here have i, thy schoolmaster, made thee more profit than other princesses can that have more time
(reads) "fare thee well, and god have mercy upon one of our souls. he may have mercy upon mine, but my hope is better, and so look to thyself. thy friend, as thou usest him, and thy sworn enemy, andrew aguecheek"
do you like him, sir john?
heavens thank you for 't! and now, i pray you, sir, for still 'tis beating in my mind, your reason for raising this sea storm?
if this letter move him not, his legs cannot. i'll give 't him.
shadow will serve for summer. prick him, for we have a
know thus far forth: by accident most strange, bountiful fortune brought to this shore. and by my prescience i find my zenith doth depend upon a most auspicious star, whose influence if now i court not but omit, my fortunes
you may have very fit occasion for 't. he is now in some commerce with my lady and will by and by depart.
thomas wart!
thou art inclined to sleep. 'tis a good dullness, and give it way. i know thou canst not choose.
go, sir andrew. scout me for him at the corner the orchard like a bum-baily. so soon as ever thou seest him, draw, and as thou drawest, swear horrible, for it comes to pass oft that a terrible oath, with a swaggering accent sharply twanged off, gives manhood more approbation than ever proof itself would have earned him. away!
where's he?
come away, servant, come. i am ready now. approach, my ariel, come.
nay, let me alone for swearing.
here, sir.
to answer thy best pleasure, be 't to fly, to swim, to dive into the fire, to ride on the curled clouds. to thy strong bidding, task ariel and all his quality.
now will not i deliver his letter, for the behavior of the young gentleman gives him out to be of good capacity and breeding. his employment between his lord and my niece confirms no less. therefore this letter, being so excellently ignorant, will breed no terror in the youth. he will find it comes from a clodpole. but, sir, i will deliver his challenge by word of mouth, set upon aguecheek a notable report of valor, and drive the gentleman (as i know his youth will aptly receive it) into a most hideous opinion of his rage, skill, fury, and impetuosity. this will so fright them both that they will kill one another by the look, like cockatrices.
is thy name wart?
hast thou, spirit,
here he comes with your niece. give them way till he take leave, and presently after him.
yea, sir.
to every article. i boarded the king's ship. now on the beak, now in the waist, the deck, in every cabin, i flamed amazement. sometime i'd divide, the yards, and bowsprit would i flame distinctly, then meet and join. jove's lightning, the precursors o' th' dreadful thunderclaps, more momentary and sight-outrunning were not. the fire and cracks seem to besiege and make his bold waves tremble, yea, his dread trident shake.
i will meditate the while upon some horrid message for a challenge.
thou art a very ragged wart.
my brave spirit! who was so firm, so constant, that this coil would not infect his reason?
i have said too much unto a heart of stone and laid mine honor too unchary on 't. there's something in me that reproves my fault, that it but mocks reproof.
shall i prick him down, sir john?
not a soul some tricks of desperation. all but mariners plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel, then all afire with me. the king's son, ferdinand, with hair up-staring, then, like reeds, not hair, and all the devils are here."
with the same 'havior that your passion bears goes on my master's grief.
it were superfluous, for his apparel is built upon his back, and the whole frame stands upon pins. prick him no more.
why, that's my spirit! but was not this nigh shore?
here, wear this jewel for me. 'tis my picture. and i beseech you come again tomorrow. what shall you ask of me that i'll deny, that honor, saved, may upon asking give?
well., francis feeble!
close by, my master.
nothing but this: your true love for my master.
here, sir.
but are they, ariel, safe?
which i have given to you?
what trade art thou, feeble?
not a hair perished. on their sustaining garments not a blemish, in troops i have dispersed them 'bout the isle. the king's son have i landed by himself, whom i left cooling of the air with sighs in an odd angle of the isle, and sitting,
i will acquit you.
a woman's tailor, sir.
of the king's ship, the mariners, say how thou hast disposed, and all the rest o' th' fleet.
well, come again tomorrow. fare thee well. a fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.
shall i prick him, sir?
safely in harbor is the king's ship. in the deep nook where once thou called'st me up at midnight to fetch dew
gentleman, god save thee.
you may, but if he had been a man's tailor, he'd ha' pricked you., wilt thou make as many holes in an enemy's battle as thou hast done in a woman's petticoat?
the mariners all under hatches stowed, who, with a charm joined to their suffered labor, i have left asleep. and for the rest o' th' fleet, which i dispersed, they all have met again bound sadly home for naples, supposing that they saw the king's ship wracked and his great person perish.
and you, sir.
i will do my good will, sir. you can have no more.
ariel, thy charge exactly is performed. but there's more work.
that defense thou hast, betake thee to 't. of what nature the wrongs are thou hast done him, i know not, but thy intercepter, full of despite, bloody as the hunter, attends thee at the orchard end. dismount thy tuck, be yare in thy preparation, for thy assailant is quick, skillful and deadly.
feeble. thou wilt be as valiant as the wrathful dove or most magnanimous mouse., prick the woman's tailor well, master shallow, deep, master shallow.
past the mid season.
you mistake, sir. i am sure no man hath any quarrel to me. my remembrance is very free and clear from any image of offense done to any man.
i would wart might have gone, sir.
at least two glasses. the time 'twixt six and now must by us both be spent most preciously.
you'll find it otherwise, i assure you. therefore, if you hold your life at any price, betake you to your guard, for your opposite hath in him what youth, strength, skill, and wrath can furnish man withal.
and make him fit to go. i cannot put him to a private soldier that is the leader of so many thousands. let that suffice, most forcible feeble.
is there more toil? since thou dost give me pains, let me remember thee what thou hast promised,
i pray you, sir, what is he?
it shall suffice, sir.
how now? moody? what is 't thou canst demand?
he is knight, dubbed with unhatched rapier and on carpet consideration, but he is a devil in private brawl. souls and bodies hath he divorced three, and his incensement at this moment is so implacable that satisfaction can be none but by pangs of death and sepulchre. hob, nob, is his word. "give 't or take 't."
i am bound to thee, reverend feeble., who is next?
my liberty.
i will return again into the house and desire some conduct of the lady. i am no fighter. i have heard of some kind of men that put quarrels purposely on others, to taste their valor. belike this is a man of that quirk.
peter bullcalf o' th' green.
before the time be out? no more!
sir, no. his indignation derives itself out of a very competent injury. therefore get you on and give him his desire. back you shall not to the house, unless you undertake that with me which with as much safety you might answer him. therefore on, or strip your sword stark naked, for meddle you must, that's certain, or forswear to wear iron about you.
yea, marry, let's see bullcalf.
i prithee, remember i have done thee worthy service, told thee no lies, made thee no mistakings, served to bate me a full year.
this is as uncivil as strange. i beseech you, do me this courteous office, as to know of the knight what my offense to him is. it is something of my negligence, nothing of my purpose.
here, sir.
dost thou forget from what a torment i did free thee?
i will do so. signior fabian, stay you by this gentleman till my return.
fore god, a likely fellow. come, prick me bullcalf till he
no.
pray you, sir, do you know of this matter?
o lord, good my lord captain, 
thou dost, and think'st it much to tread the ooze to run upon the sharp wind of the north, to do me business in the veins o' th' earth when it is baked with frost.
i know the knight is incensed against you, even to a mortal arbitrament, but nothing of the circumstance more.
what, dost thou roar before thou art pricked?
i do not, sir.
i beseech you, what manner of man is he?
o lord, sir, i am a diseased man.
thou liest, malignant thing! hast thou forgot was grown into a hoop? hast thou forgot her?
nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him by his form, as you are like to find him in the proof of his valor. he is, indeed, sir, the most skillful, bloody, and fatal opposite that you could possibly have found in any part of illyria. will you walk towards him? i will make your peace with him if i can.
what disease hast thou?
no, sir.
i shall be much bound to you for 't. i am one that had rather go with sir priest than sir knight. i care not who knows so much of my mettle.
ringing in the king's affairs upon his coronation day, sir.
thou hast. where was she born? speak. tell me.
why, man, he's a very devil. i have not seen such a firago. i had a pass with him, rapier, scabbard, and all, and he gives me the stuck-in with such a mortal motion, that it is inevitable. and on the answer, he pays you as surely as your feet hit the ground they step on. they say he has been fencer to the sophy.
come, thou shalt go to the wars in a gown. we will have away thy cold, and i will take such order that my friends shall ring for thee., (to shallow) is here all?
sir, in argier.
pox on 't! i'll not meddle with him.
but four here, sir, and so i pray you go in with me to dinner.
oh, was she so? i must which thou forget'st. this damned witch sycorax, for mischiefs manifold and sorceries terrible to enter human hearing, from argier, thou know'st, was banished. for one thing she did
ay, but he will not now be pacified. fabian can scarce hold him yonder.
come, i will go drink with you, but i cannot tarry dinner. i am glad to see you, by my troth, master shallow.
ay, sir.
plague on 't, an i thought he had been valiant and so cunning in fence, i'd have seen him damned ere i'd have challenged him. let him let the matter slip, and i'll give him my horse, gray capilet.
o, sir john, do you remember since we lay all night in the
this blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child and here was left by th' sailors. thou, my slave, as thou report'st thyself, wast then her servant. to act her earthy and abhorred commands, refusing her grand hests, she did confine thee, by help of her more potent ministers and in her most unmitigable rage, imprisoned thou didst painfully remain a dozen years; within which space she died and left thee there, where thou didst vent thy groans as fast as mill wheels strike. then was this island, a freckled whelp hag-born, not honored with a human shape.
i'll make the motion. stand here, make a good show on 't. i'll ride your horse as well as i ride you.
no more of that, good master shallow, no more of that.
yes, caliban, her son.
(to fabian) i have his horse to take up the quarrel. i have persuaded him the youth's a devil.
ha, 'twas a merry night. and is jane nightwork alive?
dull thing, i say so. he, that caliban whom now i keep in service. thou best know'st of ever angry bears. it was a torment did make wolves howl and penetrate the breasts to lay upon the damned, which sycorax could not again undo. it was mine art, the pine and let thee out.
he is as horribly conceited of him, and pants and looks pale, as if a bear were at his heels.
she lives, master shallow.
i thank thee, master.
(to viola) there's no remedy, sir; he will fight with you for 's oath sake. marry, he hath better bethought him of his quarrel, and he finds that now scarce to be worth talking of. therefore, draw for the supportance of his vow. he protests he will not hurt you.
she never could away with me.
if thou more murmur'st, i will rend an oak and peg thee in his knotty entrails till thou hast howled away twelve winters.
(aside) pray god defend me! a little thing would make me tell them how much i lack of a man.
master shallow.
pardon, master. and do my spiriting gently.
give ground, if you see him furious.
by the mass, i could anger her to th' heart. she was then a bona roba. doth she hold her own well?
do so, and after two days i will discharge thee.
come, sir andrew, there's no remedy. the gentleman will, for his honor's sake, have one bout with you. he cannot by the duello avoid it. but he has promised me, as he is a gentleman and a soldier, he will not hurt you. come on, to 't.
old, old, master shallow.
that's my noble master! what shall i do? say, what? what shall i do?
pray god, he keep his oath!
she's old, and had robin nightwork by old nightwork before i came to clement's inn.
go make thyself like a nymph o' th' sea. be subject to every eyeball else. go take this shape and hither come in 't. go hence with diligence.
i do assure you, 'tis against my will.
that's fifty-five year ago.
(to miranda) awake, dear heart, awake! thou hast slept well.
put up your sword. if this young gentleman have done offence, i take the fault on me. if you offend him, i for him defy you.
ha, cousin silence, that thou hadst seen that that this knight
(waking) the strangeness of your story put heaviness in me.
you, sir? why, what are you?
we have heard the chimes at midnight, master shallow.
shake it off. come on. we'll visit caliban, my slave who never yields us kind answer.
than you have heard him brag to you he will.
that we have, that we have, that we have. in faith, sir john, we have. our watchword was "hem, boys." come, let's to dinner; come, let's to dinner. jesus, the days that we have
'tis a villain, sir,
nay, if you be an undertaker, i am for you.
good master corporate bardolph, stand my friend, and here's four harry ten-shillings in french crowns for you. in very truth, sir, i had as lief be hanged, sir, as go. and yet, for mine own part, sir, i do not care, but rather because i am my friends. else, sir, i did not care, for mine own part, so much.
but as 'tis, we cannot miss him. he does make our fire, fetch in our wood, and serves in offices that profit us., what, ho! slave! caliban! thou earth, thou! speak.
o good sir toby, hold! here come the officers.
go to. stand aside.
(within) there's wood enough within.
(to antonio) i'll be with you anon.
and, good master corporal captain, for my old dame's sake, stand my friend. she has nobody to do anything about you shall have forty, sir.
come, thou tortoise! when?
(to andrew) pray, sir, put your sword up, if you please.
go to. stand aside.
fine apparition! my quaint ariel, hark in thine ear. (whispers to ariel)
marry, will i, sir. and for that i promised you, i'll be as good as my word. he will bear you easily and reins well.
by my troth, i care not. a man can die but once. we owe god a death. i'll ne'er bear a base mind. an 't be my destiny, so; it go which way it will, he that dies this year is quit for the next.
my lord it shall be done.
this is the man. do thy office.
well said. th' art a good fellow.
(to caliban) thou poisonous slave, got by the devil himself
antonio, i arrest thee at the suit of count orsino.
faith, i'll bear no base mind.
as wicked dew as e'er my mother brushed with raven's feather from unwholesome fen drop on you both! a southwest blow on ye and blister you all o'er!
you do mistake me, sir.
come, sir, which men shall i have?
side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up. urchins shall, forth at vast of night that they may work, all exercise on thee. thou shalt be pinched as thick as honeycomb, each pinch more stinging
no, sir, no jot. i know your favor well, though now you have no sea-cap on your head., take him away. he knows i know him well.
four of which you please.
i must eat my dinner. this island's mine, by sycorax my mother, which thou takest from me. when thou camest first, thou strok'st me and made much of me, wouldst give me water with berries in 't, and teach me how that burn by day and night. and then i loved thee and showed thee all the qualities o' th' isle, the fresh springs, brine pits, barren place and fertile. cursed be i that did so! all the charms for i am all the subjects that you have, which first was mine own king. and here you sty me in this hard rock, whiles you do keep from me the rest o' th' island.
i must obey. (to viola) this comes with seeking you:
sir, a word with you. (aside to falstaff) i have three pound to free mouldy and bullcalf.
thou most lying slave, filth as thou art, with human care, and lodged thee in mine own cell till thou didst seek to violate the honor of my child.
what will you do, now my necessity makes me to ask you for my purse? it grieves me much more for what i cannot do for you than what befalls myself. you stand amazed,
go to, well.
oh ho, oh ho! would 't had been done! this isle with calibans.
come, sir, away.
come, sir john, which four will you have?
abhorrèd slave, which any print of goodness wilt not take, being capable of all ill! i pitied thee, took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour know thine own meaning, but wouldst gabble like a thing most brutish, i endowed thy purposes with words that made them known. but thy vile race, though thou didst learn, had that in 't which good natures deservedly confined into this rock, who hadst deserved more than a prison.
(to viola) i must entreat of you some of that money.
do you choose for me.
you taught me language, and my profit on 't is i know how to curse. the red plague rid you
what money, sir? for the fair kindness you have showed me here, and part being prompted by your present trouble, i'll lend you something. my having is not much. i'll make division of my present with you. hold, there's half my coffer. (offering him money)
marry, then, mouldy, bullcalf, feeble, and shadow.
hag-seed, hence! fetch us in fuel. and be quick, thou 'rt best, to answer other business. shrug'st thou, malice? if thou neglect'st or dost unwillingly what i command, i'll rack thee with old cramps, that beasts shall tremble at thy din.
will you deny me now? is 't possible that my deserts to you lest that it make me so unsound a man as to upbraid you with those kindnesses that i have done for you.
mouldy and bullcalf! for you, mouldy, stay at home till you are past service., and for your part, bullcalf, grow till you
no, pray thee. (aside) i must obey. his art is of such power, it would control my dam's god, setebos, and make a vassal of him.
i know of none, nor know i you by voice or any feature. than lying, vainness, babbling, drunkenness, or any taint of vice whose strong corruption inhabits our frail blood, 
sir john, sir john, do not yourself wrong. they are your likeliest men, and i would have you served with the best.
so, slave, hence!
o heavens themselves!
will you tell me, master shallow, how to choose a man? care i for the limb, the thews, the stature, bulk, and big here's wart. you see what a ragged appearance it is. he shall
come unto these yellow sands, and then take hands. curtsied when you have, and kissed the wild waves whist. foot it featly here and there, and, sweet sprites, bear the burden. hark, hark!
come, sir, i pray you, go.
charge you and discharge you with the motion of a pewterer's hammer, come off and on swifter than he that gibbets on the brewer's bucket. and this same half-faced the enemy. the foeman may with as great aim level at the edge of a penknife. and for a retreat, how swiftly will this feeble the woman's tailor, run off! o, give me the spare men, and spare me the great ones., put me a caliver into
(dispersedly, within) bow-wow.
i snatched one half out of the jaws of death, relieved him with such sanctity of love, and to his image, which methought did promise most venerable worth, did i devotion.
hold, wart. traverse. thas, thas, thas.
the watchdogs bark.
what's that to us? the time goes by. away!
come, manage me your caliver: so, very well, go to, very good, exceeding good. o, give me always a little, lean, old, chopped, bald shot. well said, i' faith, wart. th' art a good
(within) bow-wow.
but oh, how vile an idol proves this god! thou hast, sebastian, done good feature shame. in nature there's no blemish but the mind. none can be called deformed but the unkind. are empty trunks o'erflourished by the devil.
he is not his craft's master. he doth not do it right. i remember at mile end green, when i lay at clement's inn, i was then sir dagonet in arthur's show, there was a little quiver fellow, and he would manage you his piece thus. and in. "rah, tah, tah," would he say. "bounce," would he say, and away again would he go, and again would he come. i shall ne'er see such a fellow.
hark, hark! i hear cry "cock-a-diddle-dow."
the man grows mad. away with him. come, come, sir.
these fellows will do well, master shallow., god keep fare you well, gentlemen both. i thank you. i must a dozen mile to-night., bardolph, give the soldiers coats.
where should this music be? i' th' air or th' earth? it sounds no more, and sure, it waits upon some god o' th' island. sitting on a bank, this music crept by me upon the waters, allaying both their fury and my passion with its sweet air. thence i have followed it, or it hath drawn me rather. but 'tis gone.
lead me on.
sir john, the lord bless you. god prosper your affairs. god send us peace. at your return, visit our house. let our old
(sings) full fathom five thy father lies. of his bones are coral made. those are pearls that were his eyes. nothing of him that doth fade, but doth suffer a sea-change into something rich and strange. sea-nymphs hourly ring his knell
methinks his words do from such passion fly, prove true, imagination, oh, prove true, that i, dear brother, be now ta'en for you!
the court.
(within) ding-dong.
come hither, knight. come hither, fabian. we'll whisper o'er a couplet or two of most sage saws.
fore god, would you would, master shallow.
hark, now i hear them.
yet living in my glass. even such and so in favor was my brother, and he went
go to. i have spoke at a word. god keep you.
(within) ding-dong, bell.
still in this fashion, color, ornament, for him i imitate. oh, if it prove,
fare you well, gentle gentlemen.
the ditty does remember my drowned father. that the earth owes. i hear it now above me.
a very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward than a hare. his dishonesty appears in leaving his friend here in necessity and denying him. and for his cowardship, ask fabian.
on, bardolph. lead the men away.
(to miranda) the fringèd curtains of thine eye advance and say what thou seest yond.
a coward, a most devout coward, religious in it.
as i return, i will fetch off these justices. i do see the bottom of justice shallow. lord, lord, how subject we old men are to this vice of lying. this same starved justice hath done nothing but prate to me of the wildness of his youth and the word a lie, duer paid to the hearer than the turk's tribute. i do remember him at clement's inn, like a man made after supper of a cheese paring. when he was naked, he was, for all the world, like a forked radish with a head fantastically dimensions to any thick sight were invincible. he was the very genius of famine, yet lecherous as a monkey, and the whores called him "mandrake." he came ever in the rearward of the fashion, and sung those tunes to the and swore they were his fancies or his good-nights. and now is this vice's dagger become a squire, and talks as familiarly of john o' gaunt as if he had been sworn brother to him, and i'll be sworn he ne'er saw him but once in the
what is 't? a spirit? lord, how it looks about! believe me, sir,
'slid, i'll after him again and beat him.
marshal's men. i saw it and told john o' gaunt he beat his own name, for you might have thrust him and all his apparel into an eel-skin; the case of a treble hautboy was a mansion for him, a court. and now has he land and beefs. well, i'll i'll make him a philosopher's two stones to me. if the young dace be a bait for the old pike, i see no reason in the law of nature but i may snap at him. let time shape, and there an end.
no, wench! it eats and sleeps and hath such senses as we have, such. this gallant which thou seest was in the wrack. and, but he's something stained with grief that's beauty's canker, thou mightst call him and strays about to find 'em.
do, cuff him soundly, but never draw thy sword.
what is this forest called?
i might call him a thing divine, for nothing natural i ever saw so noble.
an i do not, 
'tis gaultree forest, an 't shall please your grace.
(aside) it goes on, i see, as my soul prompts it., spirit, fine spirit! i'll free thee
come, let's see the event.
here stand, my lords, and send discoverers forth to know the numbers of our enemies.
(seeing miranda) most sure, the goddess on whom these airs attend!, vouchsafe my prayer may know if you remain upon this island, and that you will some good instruction give which i do last pronounce, is, o you wonder!, if you be maid or no.
i dare lay any money 'twill be nothing yet.
we have sent forth already.
no wonder, sir, but certainly a maid.
will you make me believe that i am not sent for you?
'tis well done. my friends and brethren in these great affairs, i must acquaint you that i have received new-dated letters from northumberland, their cold intent, tenor, and substance, thus: as might hold sortance with his quality, the which he could not levy; whereupon he is retired, to ripe his growing fortunes, to scotland, and concludes in hearty prayers and fearful melting of their opposite.
my language! heavens, i am the best of them that speak this speech,
go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow. let me be clear of thee.
thus do the hopes we have in him touch ground and dash themselves to pieces.
how? the best? what wert thou if the king of naples heard thee?
well held out, i' faith. no, i do not know you, nor i am not sent to you by my lady, to bid you come speak with her, nor your name is not master cesario, nor this is not my nose neither. nothing that is so is so.
now, what news?
a single thing, as i am now, that wonders to hear thee speak of naples. he does hear me, and that he does i weep. myself am naples, the king my father wracked.
i prithee, vent thy folly somewhere else. thou know'st not me.
west of this forest, scarcely off a mile, and, by the ground they hide, i judge their number upon or near the rate of thirty thousand.
alack, for mercy!
vent my folly? he has heard that word of some great man and now applies it to a fool. vent my folly! i am afraid this great lubber, the world, will prove a cockney. i prithee now, ungird thy strangeness and tell me what i shall vent to my lady. shall i vent to her that thou art coming?
the just proportion that we gave them out. let us sway on and face them in the field.
yes, faith, and all his lords, the duke of milan and his brave son being twain.
i prithee, foolish greek, depart from me. there's money for thee. (giving money) if you tarry longer, i shall give worse payment.
what well-appointed leader fronts us here?
(aside) the duke of milan and his more braver daughter could control thee they have changed eyes., delicate ariel, i'll set thee free for this. (to ferdinand) a word, good sir. i fear you have done yourself some wrong. a word.
by my troth, thou hast an open hand. these wise men that give fools money get themselves a good report, after fourteen years' purchase.
i think it is my lord of westmoreland.
is the third man that e'er i saw, the first that e'er i sighed for. pity move my father to be inclined my way!
(to sebastian) now, sir, have i met you again? there's for you.
health and fair greeting from our general, the prince lord john and duke of lancaster.
(to miranda) oh, if a virgin, the queen of naples.
(returning the blow) why, there's for thee, and there, and there. are all the people mad?
say on, my lord of westmoreland, in peace,
soft, sir! one word more. (aside) they are both in either's powers, but this swift business i must uneasy make lest too light winning (to ferdinand) one word more. i charge thee that thou attend me. thou dost here usurp the name thou owest not, and hast put thyself upon this island as a spy to win it
hold, sir, or i'll throw your dagger o'er the house.
then, my lord, unto your grace do i in chief address the substance of my speech. if that rebellion came like itself, in base and abject routs, led on by bloody youth, guarded with rage, i say, if damn'd commotion so appeared in his true, native, and most proper shape, you, reverend father, and these noble lords had not been here to dress the ugly form
no, as i am a man!
(aside) this will i tell my lady straight. i would not be in some of your coats for two pence.
with your fair honors. you, lord archbishop, whose see is by a civil peace maintained, whose beard the silver hand of peace hath touched, whose learning and good letters peace hath tutored, the dove and very blessèd spirit of peace, wherefore do you so ill translate yourself out of the speech of peace, that bears such grace, into the harsh and boist'rous tongue of war, your pens to lances, and your tongue divine to a trumpet and a point of war?
there's nothing ill can dwell in such a temple. if the ill spirit have so fair a house, good things will strive to dwell with 't.
(seizing sebastian) come on, sir, hold!
wherefore do i this? so the question stands. briefly, to this end: we are all diseased, have brought ourselves into a burning fever, and we must bleed for it; of which disease our late king richard, being infected, died. but, my most noble lord of westmoreland, nor do i as an enemy to peace troop in the throngs of military men, but rather show awhile like fearful war to diet rank minds sick of happiness our very veins of life. hear me more plainly. i have in equal balance justly weighed what wrongs our arms may do, what wrongs we suffer, and find our griefs heavier than our offenses. and are enforced from our most quiet there by the rough torrent of occasion, and have the summary of all our griefs, when time shall serve, to show in articles;
(to miranda) speak not you for him. he's a traitor. (to ferdinand) come, i'll manacle thy neck and feet together. seawater shalt thou drink. thy food shall be wherein the acorn cradled. follow.
nay, let him alone. i'll go another way to work with him. i'll have an action of battery against him if there be any law in illyria. though i struck him first, yet it's no matter for that.
and might by no suit gain our audience. when we are wronged and would unfold our griefs, we are denied access unto his person even by those men that most have done us wrong. whose memory is written on the earth with yet appearing blood, and the examples of every minute's instance, present now, hath put us in these ill-beseeming arms, but to establish here a peace indeed, concurring both in name and quality.
no. i will resist such entertainment till mine enemy has more power.
(to sir toby belch) let go thy hand.
when ever yet was your appeal denied? wherein have you been gallèd by the king? that you should seal this lawless bloody book of forged rebellion with a seal divine and consecrate commotion's bitter edge?
o dear father, make not too rash a trial of him, for
come, sir, i will not let you go. come, my young soldier, put up your iron. you are well fleshed. come on.
my brother general, the commonwealth, i make my quarrel in particular.
what, i say? my foot my tutor?, put thy sword up, traitor, who makest a show but darest not strike, thy conscience is so possessed with guilt. come from thy ward, for i can here disarm thee with this stick
i will be free from thee.
there is no need of any such redress, or if there were, it not belongs to you.
beseech you, father.
what wouldst thou now? if thou darest tempt me further, draw thy sword.
why not to him in part, and to us all and suffer the condition of these times to lay a heavy and unequal hand upon our honors?
hence! hang not on my garments.
what, what? nay, then i must have an ounce or two of this malapert blood from you.
o, my good lord mowbray, construe the times to their necessities,
sir, have pity, i'll be his surety.
hold, toby! on thy life i charge thee, hold!
and not the king, that doth you injuries. yet for your part, it not appears to me either from the king or in the present time that you should have an inch of any ground to all the duke of norfolk's seigniories, your noble and right well remembered father's?
silence! one word more shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. what, an advocate for an imposter? hush, having seen but him and caliban. foolish wench, to th' most of men this is a caliban and they to him are angels.
madam!
what thing, in honor, had my father lost, that need to be revived and breathed in me? was force perforce compelled to banish him, and then that harry bolingbroke and he, being mounted and both rousèd in their seats, their neighing coursers daring of the spur, their eyes of fire sparking through sights of steel and the loud trumpet blowing them together, then, then, when there was nothing could have stayed my father from the breast of bolingbroke, his own life hung upon the staff he threw, then threw he down himself and all their lives that by indictment and by dint of sword have since miscarried under bolingbroke.
my affections are then most humble. i have no ambition
will it be ever thus? ungracious wretch, fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves, where manners ne'er were preach'd! out of my sight!, rudesby, be gone!
the earl of hereford was reputed then in england the most valiant gentleman. who knows on whom fortune would then have smiled? but if your father had been victor there, for all the country in a general voice cried hate upon him; and all their prayers and love
(to ferdinand) come on. obey. thy nerves are in their infancy again and have no vigor in them.
i prithee, gentle friend, let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion, sway in this uncivil and unjust extent against thy peace. go with me to my house, this ruffian hath botched up, that thou thereby mayst smile at this. thou shalt not choose but go. do not deny. beshrew his soul for me! he started one poor heart of mine in thee.
were set on hereford, whom they doted on and blessed and graced, indeed more than the king. here come i from our princely general to know your griefs, to tell you from his grace that he will give you audience; and wherein it shall appear that your demands are just, that might so much as think you enemies.
so they are. my spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up. the wrack of all my friends, nor this man's threats, to whom i am subdued, are but light to me, might i but through my prison once a day behold this maid. all corners else o' th' earth have i in such a prison.
or i am mad, or else this is a dream. let fancy still my sense in lethe steep.
but he hath forced us to compel this offer; and it proceeds from policy, not love.
(aside) it works! (to ferdinand) come on. (aside) thou hast done well, fine ariel! (to ferdinand) follow me.
if it be thus to dream, still let me sleep!
mowbray, you overween to take it so. for, lo, within a ken our army lies, upon mine honor, all too confident to give admittance to a thought of fear. our battle is more full of names than yours, our armor all as strong, our cause the best. then reason will our hearts should be as good. say you not then our offer is compelled.
(to ferdinand) be of comfort. my father's of a better nature, sir, than he appears by speech. this is unwonted which now came from him.
nay, come, i prithee. would thou'dst be ruled by me!
well, by my will, we shall admit no parley.
as mountain winds. but then exactly do all points of my command.
madam, i will.
a rotten case abides no handling.
to th' syllable.
oh, say so, and so be!
hath the prince john a full commission, in very ample virtue of his father, to hear and absolutely to determine
(to ferdinand) come, follow.
nay, i prithee, put on this gown and this beard. make him believe thou art sir topas the curate. do it quickly. i'll call sir toby the whilst.
that is intended in the general's name. i muse you make so slight a question.
(to alonso) beseech you, sir, be merry. you have cause, so have we all, of joy, for our escape is much beyond our loss. our hint of woe the masters of some merchant, and the merchant have just our theme of woe. but for the miracle, i mean our preservation, few in millions can speak like us. then wisely, good sir, weigh
well, i'll put it on, and i will dissemble myself in 't, and i would i were the first that ever dissembled in such a gown.
then take, my lord of westmoreland, this schedule, for this contains our general grievances. all members of our cause, both here and hence, that are insinewed to this action, acquitted by a true substantial form and present execution of our wills we come within our awful banks again and knit our powers to the arm of peace.
prithee, peace.
i am not tall enough to become the function well, nor lean enough to be thought a good student, but to be said an honest man and a good housekeeper goes as fairly as to say a careful man and a great scholar. the competitors enter.
this will i show the general. please you, lords, in sight of both our battles we may meet, or to the place of difference call the swords which must decide it.
(to antonio) he receives comfort like cold porridge.
jove bless thee, master parson.
my lord, we will do so.
(to sebastian) the visitor will not give him o'er so.
bonos dies, sir toby. for, as the old hermit of prague, that never saw pen and ink, very wittily said to a niece of king gorboduc, "that that is is." so i, being master parson, am master parson. for, what is "that" but "that," and "is" but "is"?
there is a thing within my bosom tells me that no conditions of our peace can stand.
look he's winding up the watch of his wit. by and by it will strike.
to him, sir topas.
upon such large terms and so absolute as our conditions shall consist upon, our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains.
(to alonso) sir, 
(disguising his voice) what ho, i say! peace in this prison!
yea, but our valuation shall be such yea, every idle, nice, and wanton reason, shall to the king taste of this action,
(to antonio) one. tell.
the knave counterfeits well. a good knave.
that, were our royal faiths martyrs in love, we shall be winnowed with so rough a wind and good from bad find no partition.
when every grief is entertained that's offered, comes to th' entertainer, 
(from within) who calls there?
no, no, my lord. note this: the king is weary of dainty and such picking grievances, for he hath found to end one doubt by death and therefore will he wipe his tables clean and keep no telltale to his memory that may repeat and history his loss to new remembrance. for full well he knows as his misdoubts present occasion; his foes are so enrooted with his friends that, plucking to unfix an enemy, he doth unfasten so and shake a friend; that hath enraged him on to offer strokes, as he is striking holds his infant up and hangs resolved correction in the arm that was upreared to execution.
a dollar.
sir topas the curate, who comes to visit malvolio the lunatic.
on late offenders, that he now doth lack the very instruments of chastisement, so that his power, like to a fangless lion, may offer but not hold.
dolor comes to him, indeed. you have spoken truer than you purposed.
sir topas, sir topas, good sir topas, go to my lady, 
'tis very true, if we do now make our atonement well, our peace will, like a broken limb united, grow stronger for the breaking.
you have taken it wiselier than i meant you should.
out, hyperbolical fiend! how vexest thou this man! talkest thou nothing but of ladies?
be it so. here is returned my lord of westmoreland.
(to alonso) therefore, my lord, 
(aside) well said, master parson.
to meet his grace just distance 'tween our armies.
(to sebastian) fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!
sir topas, never was man thus wronged. good sir topas, do not think i am mad. they have laid me here in hideous darkness.
your grace of york, in god's name then set forward.
(to gonzalo) i prithee, spare.
fie, thou dishonest satan! i call thee by the most modest terms, for i am one of those gentle ones that will use the devil himself with courtesy. sayest thou that house is dark?
before, and greet his grace., (to westmoreland) my lord, we come.
well, i have done. but yet, 
as hell, sir topas.
you are well encountered here, my cousin mowbray., and so to you, lord hastings, and to all., my lord of york, it better showed with you when that your flock, assembled by the bell, encircled you to hear with reverence than now to see you here, an iron man talking, cheering a rout of rebels with your drum, turning the word to sword, and life to death. that man that sits within a monarch's heart would he abuse the countenance of the king, alack, what mischiefs might he set abroach in shadow of such greatness! with you, lord bishop,
(to antonio) he will be talking.
why, it hath bay windows transparent as barricadoes, and the clerestories toward the south-north are as lustrous as ebony. and yet complainest thou of obstruction?
it is even so. who hath not heard it spoken to us the speaker in his parliament, to us th' imagined voice of god himself, the very opener and intelligencer between the grace, the sanctities, of heaven, but you misuse the reverence of your place, employ the countenance and grace of heaven as a false favorite doth his prince's name, in deeds dishonorable? you have ta'en up, the subjects of his substitute, my father, and both against the peace of heaven and him have here up-swarmed them.
which, of he or adrian, for a good wager, first begins to crow?
i am not mad, sir topas. i say to you this house is dark.
good my lord of lancaster, but, as i told my lord of westmoreland, the time misordered doth, in common sense, crowd us and crush us to this monstrous form to hold our safety up. i sent your grace the which hath been with scorn shoved from the court, whereon this hydra son of war is born, whose dangerous eyes may well be charmed asleep with grant of our most just and right desires, stoop tamely to the foot of majesty.
the old cock.
madman, thou errest. i say, there is no darkness but ignorance, in which thou art more puzzled than the egyptians in their fog.
if not, we ready are to try our fortunes to the last man.
the cockerel.
i say, this house is as dark as ignorance, though ignorance were as dark as hell. and i say, there was never man thus abused. i am no more mad than you are. make the trial of it in any constant question.
and though we here fall down, we have supplies to second our attempt;
done. the wager?
what is the opinion of pythagoras concerning wildfowl?
and so success of mischief shall be born, and heir from heir shall hold this quarrel up whiles england shall have generation.
a laughter.
that the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.
you are too shallow, hastings, much too shallow
a match!
what thinkest thou of his opinion?
pleaseth your grace to answer them directly how far forth you do like their articles.
though this island seem to be desert, 
i think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his opinion.
i like them all, and do allow them well, and swear here by the honor of my blood, and some about him have too lavishly wrested his meaning and authority. (to archbishop) my lord, these griefs shall be with speed redressed; upon my soul, they shall. if this may please you, as we will ours, and here, between the armies, let's drink together friendly and embrace, that all their eyes may bear those tokens home of our restorèd love and amity.
(to sebastian) ha, ha, ha!
fare thee well. remain thou still in darkness. thou shalt hold the opinion of pythagoras ere i will allow of thy wits, and fear to kill a woodcock lest thou dispossess the soul of thy grandam. fare thee well.
i take your princely word for these redresses.
so you're paid.
sir topas, sir topas!
i give it you, and will maintain my word, and thereupon i drink unto your grace.
uninhabitable and almost inaccessible, 
my most exquisite sir topas!
go, captain, and deliver to the army this news of peace. let them have pay, and part.
yet, 
nay, i am for all waters.
to you, my noble lord of westmoreland.
yet, 
he sees thee not.
i pledge your grace, and if you knew what pains i have bestowed to breed this present peace, you would drink freely. but my love to you
he could not miss 't.
to him in thine own voice, and bring me word how thou findest him. i would we were well rid of this knavery. if he may be conveniently delivered, i would he were, for i am now so far in offense with my niece that i cannot pursue with any safety this sport to the upshot. come by and by to my chamber.
i do not doubt you.
it must needs be of subtle, tender, and delicate temperance.
(sings in his own voice) hey, robin, jolly robin,
i am glad of it., health to my lord and gentle cousin, mowbray.
temperance was a delicate wench.
fool!
you wish me health in very happy season, for i am on the sudden something ill.
ay, and a subtle, as he most learnedly delivered.
(sings) my lady is unkind, perdy.
but heaviness foreruns the good event.
the air breathes upon us here most sweetly.
fool!
therefore be merry, coz; since sudden sorrow serves to say thus: "some good thing comes tomorrow."
as if it had lungs, and rotten ones.
(sings) alas, why is she so?
believe me, i am passing light in spirit.
or as 'twere perfumed by a fen.
fool, i say!
so much the worse if your own rule be true.
here is everything advantageous to life.
(sings) she loves another, who calls, ha?
the word of peace is rendered. hark how they shout.
true. save means to live.
good fool, as ever thou wilt deserve well at my hand, help me to a candle, and pen, ink, and paper. as i am a gentleman, i will live to be thankful to thee for 't.
this had been cheerful after victory.
of that there's none, or little.
master malvolio?
a peace is of the nature of a conquest, for then both parties nobly are subdued,
how lush and lusty the grass looks! how green!
ay, good fool.
go, my lord, and let our army be dischargèd too.
the ground indeed is tawny.
alas, sir, how fell you besides your five wits?
and, good my lord, so please you, let our trains march by us, that we may peruse the men we should have coped withal.
with an eye of green in 't.
fool, there was never a man so notoriously abused: i am as well in my wits, fool, as thou art.
go, good lord hastings,
he misses not much.
but as well? then you are mad indeed, if you be no better in your wits than a fool.
i trust, lords, we shall lie tonight together.
no, he doth but mistake the truth totally.
they have here propertied me, keep me in darkness, send ministers to me, asses!, and do all they can to face me out of my wits.
now, cousin, wherefore stands our army still?
but the rarity of it is, which is indeed almost beyond credit, 
advise you what you say. the minister is here. (in the voice of sir topas) malvolio, malvolio, thy wits the heavens restore! endeavor thyself to sleep, and leave thy vain bibble-babble.
the leaders, having charge from you to stand, will not go off until they hear you speak.
as many vouched rarities are.
sir topas!
they know their duties.
that our garments, being, as they were, drenched in the sea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with salt water.
(as sir topas) maintain no words with him, good fellow. (in his own voice) who, i, sir? not i, sir. god b' wi' you, good sir topas. (as sir topas) marry, amen. (in his own voice) i will, sir, i will.
my lord, our army is dispersed already. like youthful steers unyoked, they take their courses east, west, north, south, or, like a school broke up, each hurries toward his home and sporting-place.
if but one of his pockets could speak, would it not say he lies?
fool, fool, fool, i say!
i do arrest thee, traitor, of high treason., and you, lord archbishop, and you, lord mowbray, of capital treason i attach you both.
ay, or very falsely pocket up his report.
alas, sir, be patient. what say you sir? i am shent for speaking to you.
is this proceeding just and honorable?
methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we put them on first in afric, at the marriage of the king's fair daughter claribel to the king of tunis.
good fool, help me to some light and some paper. i tell thee, i am as well in my wits as any man in illyria.
is your assembly so?
'twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.
well-a-day that you were, sir.
will you thus break your faith?
tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to their queen.
by this hand, i am. good fool, some ink, paper, and light, and convey what i will set down to my lady. it shall advantage thee more than ever the bearing of letter did.
i pawned thee none. i promised you redress of these same grievances whereof you did complain, which, by mine honor, i will perform with a most christian care. meet for rebellion and such acts as yours. most shallowly did you these arms commence, fondly brought here, and foolishly sent hence., strike up our drums; pursue the scattered stray. some guard these traitors to the block of death, treason's true bed and yielder-up of breath.
not since widow dido's time.
i will help you to 't. but tell me true, are you not mad indeed? or do you but counterfeit?
what's your name, sir? of what condition are you, and of what place, i pray?
widow! a pox o' that! how came that "widow" in? widow dido!
believe me, i am not. i tell thee true.
i am a knight, sir, and my name is colevile of the dale.
what if he had said "widower æneas" too? good lord, how you take it!
nay, i'll ne'er believe a madman till i see his brains. i will fetch you light, and paper, and ink.
well, then, colevile is your name, a knight is your degree, traitor your degree, and the dungeon your place, a place deep enough so shall you be still colevile of the dale.
"widow dido" said you? you make me study of that. she was of carthage, not of tunis.
fool, i'll requite it in the highest degree. i prithee, be gone.
are not you sir john falstaff?
this tunis, sir, was carthage.
(sings) and anon, sir, i'll be with you again, in a trice, like to the old vice, who, with dagger of lath in his rage and his wrath, cries "aha," to the devil, like a mad lad, adieu, goodman devil."
as good a man as he, sir, whoe'er i am. do ye yield, sir, or lovers and they weep for thy death. therefore rouse up fear and trembling, and do observance to my mercy.
carthage?
this is the air, that is the glorious sun. this pearl she gave me, i do feel 't and see 't, and though 'tis wonder that enwraps me thus, yet 'tis not madness. where's antonio, then? yet there he was, and there i found this credit, that he did range the town to seek me out. his counsel now might do me golden service. for though my soul disputes well with my sense yet doth this accident and flood of fortune so far exceed all instance, all discourse, that i am ready to distrust mine eyes and wrangle with my reason that persuades me or else the lady's mad. yet if 'twere so, she could not sway her house, command her followers, take and give back affairs and their dispatch with such a smooth, discreet, and stable bearing that is deceivable. but here the lady comes.
i think you are sir john falstaff, and in that thought yield me.
i assure you, carthage.
(to sebastian) blame not this haste of mine. if you mean well, now go with me and with this holy man and underneath that consecrated roof, plight me the full assurance of your faith, that my most jealous and too doubtful soul may live at peace. he shall conceal it what time we will our celebration keep according to my birth. what do you say?
i have a whole school of tongues in this belly of mine, and not a tongue of them all speaks any other word but my name. an i had but a belly of any indifferency, i were simply the most active fellow in europe. my womb, my womb, my womb undoes me. here comes our general.
his word is more than the miraculous harp. he hath raised the wall and houses too.
i'll follow this good man, and go with you; and, having sworn truth, ever will be true.
the heat is past. follow no further now.
what impossible matter will he make easy next?
that they may fairly note this act of mine.
call in the powers, good cousin westmoreland.
i think he will carry this island home in his pocket and give it his son for an apple.
now, as thou lovest me, let me see his letter.
now, falstaff, where have you been all this while? when everything is ended, then you come. one time or other break some gallows' back.
and sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring forth more islands.
good master fabian, grant me another request.
i would be sorry, my lord, but it should be thus. i never knew yet but rebuke and check was the reward of valor. do you think me a swallow, an arrow, or a bullet? have i in my poor hither with the very extremest inch of possibility. i have foundered ninescore and odd posts, and here, travel-tainted as i am, have in my pure and immaculate valor taken sir john colevile of the dale, a most furious knight and that i may justly say, with the hook-nosed fellow of rome, "there, cousin, i came, saw, and overcame."
ay.
anything.
it was more of his courtesy than your deserving.
why, in good time.
do not desire to see this letter.
i know not. here he is, and here i yield him. and i beseech or, by the lord, i will have it in a particular ballad else, with mine own picture on the top on 't, colevile kissing my foot; to the which course if i be enforced, if you do not all show
(to alonso) sir, we were talking that our garments seem now as fresh as when we were at tunis at the marriage of your daughter, who is now queen.
this is, to give a dog and in recompense desire my dog again.
like gilt twopences to me, and i in the clear sky of fame o'ershine you as much as the full moon doth the cinders of the element (which show like pins' heads to her), believe not the word of the noble. therefore let me have right, and let desert mount.
and the rarest that e'er came there.
belong you to the lady olivia, friends?
thine's too heavy to mount.
bate, i beseech you, widow dido.
ay, sir, we are some of her trappings.
let it shine, then.
oh, widow dido? ay, widow dido.
i know thee well. how dost thou, my good fellow?
thine's too thick to shine.
is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day i wore it? i mean, in a sort.
truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse for my friends.
let it do something, my good lord, that may do me good, and call it what you will.
that "sort" was well fished for.
just the contrary. the better for thy friends.
is thy name colevile?
when i wore it at your daughter's marriage?
no, sir, the worse.
it is, my lord.
you cram these words into mine ears against the stomach of my sense. would i had never married my daughter there! for, coming thence, who is so far from italy removed i ne'er again shall see her., o thou mine heir of naples and of milan, what strange fish hath made his meal on thee?
how can that be?
a famous rebel art thou, colevile.
sir, he may live. and ride upon their backs. he trod the water, whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted the surge most swoll'n that met him. his bold head 'bove the contentious waves he kept, and oared to th' shore, that o'er his wave-worn basis bowed, as stooping to relieve him. i not doubt he came alive to land.
marry, sir, they praise me and make an ass of me, now my foes tell me plainly i am an ass. so that by my foes, sir i profit in the knowledge of myself, and by my friends, i am abused. so that, conclusions to be as kisses, if your four negatives make your two affirmatives, why then the worse for my friends and the better for my foes.
and a famous true subject took him.
no, no, he's gone.
why, this is excellent.
i am, my lord, but as my betters are that led me hither. had they been ruled by me,
sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss, but rather loose her to an african, where she at least is banished from your eye, who hath cause to wet the grief on 't.
by my troth, sir, no, though it please you to be one of my friends.
i know not how they sold themselves, but thou, like a kind fellow, gavest thyself away gratis, and i thank thee for thee.
prithee, peace.
(giving a coin)
now, have you left pursuit?
you were kneeled to and importuned otherwise weighed between loathness and obedience, at which end o' th' beam should bow. we have lost your son, i fear, forever. milan and naples have more widows in them of this business' making the fault's your own.
but that it would be double-dealing, sir, i would you could make it another.
retreat is made and execution stayed.
so is the dearest o' th' loss.
o, you give me ill counsel.
send colevile with his confederates blunt, lead him hence, and see you guard him sure.
my lord sebastian, the truth you speak doth lack some gentleness and time to speak it in. you rub the sore
put your grace in your pocket, sir, for this once, and let your flesh and blood obey it.
and now dispatch we toward the court, my lords. i hear the king my father is sore sick. our news shall go before us to his majesty, him, and we with sober speed will follow you.
very well.
well, i will be so much a sinner, to be a double-dealer. there's another. (giving a coin)
my lord, i beseech you give me leave to go through gloucestershire, and, when you come to court, stand my good lord, pray, in your good report.
and most chirurgeonly.
primo, secundo, tertio is a good play, and the old saying is, the third pays for all. the triplex, sir, is a good tripping measure, or the bells of saint bennet, sir, may put you in mind, one, two, three.
shall better speak of you than you deserve.
(to alonso) it is foul weather in us all, good sir, when you are cloudy.
you can fool no more money out of me at this throw. if you will let your lady know i am here to speak with her, and bring her along with you, it may awake my bounty further.
i would you had but the wit; 'twere better than your dukedom. good faith, this same young sober-blooded boy doth not love me, nor a man cannot make him laugh. but these demure boys come to any proof, for thin drink doth so overcool their blood, and making many fish meals, that they fall into a kind of male green-sickness, and then, when they marry, they get wenches. they are generally fools and inflammation.
foul weather?
marry, sir, lullaby to your bounty till i come again. i go, sir, but i would not have you to think that my desire of having is the sin of covetousness. but, as you say, sir, let your bounty take a nap, i will awake it anon.
a good sherris sack hath a two-fold operation in it. it ascends me into the brain, dries me there all the foolish and dull and crury vapors which environ it, makes it delectable shapes, which, delivered o'er to the voice, the tongue, which is the birth, becomes excellent wit. the second property of your excellent sherris is the warming of the blood, which, before cold and settled, left the liver white but the sherris warms it and makes it course from the inwards to the parts' extremes. it illumineth the face, which as a beacon gives warning to all the rest of this little kingdom, man, to arm; and then the vital commoners and who, great and puffed up with this retinue, doth any deed of courage, and this valor comes of sherris. so that skill in the weapon is nothing without sack, for that sets it a-work; and learning a mere hoard of gold kept by a devil till sack prince harry is valiant, for the cold blood he did naturally inherit of his father he hath, like lean, sterile, and bare land, manured, husbanded, and tilled with excellent endeavor of drinking good and good store of fertile sherris, that he is first human principle i would teach them should be to forswear thin potations and to addict themselves to sack.
very foul.
here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me.
how now, bardolph?
had i plantation of this isle, my lord, 
yet, when i saw it last, it was besmeared as black as vulcan in the smoke of war. a baubling vessel was he captain of, for shallow draught and bulk unprizable, with the most noble bottom of our fleet, that very envy and the tongue of loss cried fame and honor on him., what's the matter?
the army is discharged all and gone.
he'd sow 't with nettle seed.
orsino, this is that antonio and this is he that did the tiger board when your young nephew titus lost his leg. here in the streets, desperate of shame and state, in private brabble did we apprehend him.
visit master robert shallow, esquire. i have him already temp'ring between my finger and my thumb, and shortly will i seal with him. come away.
or docks, or mallows.
but in conclusion put strange speech upon me. i know not what 'twas but distraction.
now, lords, if god doth give successful end to this debate that bleedeth at our doors, we will our youth lead on to higher fields and draw no swords but what are sanctified. our substitutes in absence well invested, and everything lies level to our wish. only we want a little personal strength; and pause us till these rebels now afoot
and were the king on 't, what would i do?
notable pirate! thou saltwater thief, what foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies, hast made thine enemies?
both which we doubt not but your majesty shall soon enjoy.
'scape being drunk for want of wine.
orsino, noble sir, be pleased that i shake off these names you give me. antonio never yet was thief or pirate, though, i confess, on base and ground enough, that most ingrateful boy there by your side from the rude sea's enraged and foamy mouth did i redeem. a wreck past hope he was. his life i gave him and did thereto add all his in dedication. for his sake did i expose myself, pure for his love, into the danger of this adverse town, drew to defend him when he was beset, (not meaning to partake with me in danger) taught him to face me out of his acquaintance, and grew a twenty-years-removed thing while one would wink, denied me mine own purse, not half an hour before.
humphrey, my son of gloucester, where is the prince your brother?
i' th' commonwealth i would by contraries execute all things. for no kind of traffic letters should not be known. riches, poverty, and use of service, none. contract, succession, bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none. no use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil. and women too, but innocent and pure. no sovereignty, 
how can this be?
i think he's gone to hunt, my lord, at windsor.
yet he would be king on 't.
(to antonio) when came he to this town?
and how accompanied?
the latter end of his commonwealth forgets the beginning.
today, my lord, and for three months before, both day and night did we keep company.
i do not know, my lord.
all things in common nature should produce sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine, would i not have. but nature should bring forth of its own kind all foison, all abundance, to feed my innocent people.
here comes the countess. now heaven walks on earth. but for thee, fellow. fellow, thy words are madness: three months this youth hath tended upon me;
is not his brother thomas of clarence with him?
no marrying 'mong his subjects?
what would my lord, but that he may not have, wherein olivia may seem serviceable? cesario, you do not keep promise with me.
no, my good lord, he is in presence here.
none, man. all idle. whores and knaves.
madam?
what would my lord and father?
i would with such perfection govern, sir, t' excel the golden age.
gracious olivia, 
nothing but well to thee, thomas of clarence. he loves thee, and thou dost neglect him, thomas. thou hast a better place in his affection than all thy brothers. cherish it, my boy, and noble offices thou mayst effect between his greatness and thy other brethren. therefore omit him not; blunt not his love, nor lose the good advantage of his grace by seeming cold or careless of his will. he hath a tear for pity and a hand open as day for melting charity; yet notwithstanding, being incensed he is flint, as humorous as winter, and as sudden his temper therefore must be well observed. chide him for faults, and do it reverently, when thou perceive his blood inclined to mirth; but, being moody, give him time and scope confound themselves with working. learn this, thomas, and thou shalt prove a shelter to thy friends, a hoop of gold to bind thy brothers in, that the united vessel of their blood, (as, force perforce, the age will pour it in), shall never leak, though it do work as strong as aconitum or rash gunpowder.
'save his majesty!
what do you say, cesario?, good my lord, 
i shall observe him with all care and love.
long live gonzalo!
my lord would speak. my duty hushes me.
why art thou not at windsor with him, thomas?
(to alonso) and, do you mark me, sir?
if it be aught to the old tune, my lord, it is as fat and fulsome to mine ear
he is not there today; he dines in london.
prithee, no more. thou dost talk nothing to me.
still so cruel?
and how accompanied? canst thou tell that?
i do well believe your highness, and did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen, who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that they always use to laugh at nothing.
still so constant, lord.
with poins and other his continual followers.
'twas you we laughed at.
what, to perverseness? you, uncivil lady, to whose ingrate and unauspicious altars that e'er devotion tendered, what shall i do?
most subject is the fattest soil to weeds, is overspread with them; therefore my grief stretches itself beyond the hour of death. the blood weeps from my heart when i do shape, in forms imaginary, th' unguided days when i am sleeping with my ancestors. for when his headstrong riot hath no curb, when rage and hot blood are his counsellors, when means and lavish manners meet together, towards fronting peril and opposed decay!
who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing to you. so you may continue and laugh at nothing still.
even what it please my lord that shall become him.
my gracious lord, you look beyond him quite. the prince but studies his companions like a strange tongue, wherein, to gain the language, be looked upon and learned; which, once attained, your highness knows, comes to no further use but to be known and hated. so, like gross terms, the prince will, in the perfectness of time, shall as a pattern or a measure live, by which his grace must mete the lives of others, turning past evils to advantages.
what a blow was there given!
why should i not, had i the heart to do it, like to the egyptian thief at point of death, that sometimes savors nobly. but hear me this: since you to nonregardance cast my faith, and that i partly know the instrument that screws me from my true place in your favor, but this your minion, whom i know you love, and whom, by heaven i swear, i tender dearly, him will i tear out of that cruel eye where he sits crowned in his master's spite. i'll sacrifice the lamb that i do love to spite a raven's heart within a dove.
'tis seldom when the bee doth leave her comb
an it had not fallen flat-long.
and i, most jocund, apt, and willingly, to do you rest, a thousand deaths would die.
who's here? westmoreland?
you are gentlemen of brave mettle. you would lift the moon out of her sphere if she would continue in it five weeks without changing.
where goes cesario?
health to my sovereign, and new happiness added to that that i am to deliver. prince john your son doth kiss your grace's hand. mowbray, the bishop scroop, hastings, and all there is not now a rebel's sword unsheathed but peace puts forth her olive everywhere. the manner how this action hath been borne here at more leisure may your highness read
we would so, and then go a-batfowling.
after him i love more than i love these eyes, more than my life, more, by all mores, than e'er i shall love wife. if i do feign, you witnesses above, punish my life for tainting of my love!
o westmoreland, thou art a summer bird, which ever in the haunch of winter sings the lifting up of day.
(to gonzalo) nay, good my lord, be not angry.
ay me, detested! how am i beguiled!
here comes more news.
no, i warrant you. i will not adventure my discretion so weakly. will you laugh me asleep, for i am very heavy?
who does beguile you? who does do you wrong?
and when they stand against you, may they fall as those that i am come to tell you of. the earl northumberland and the lord bardolph, with a great power of english and of scots, the manner and true order of the fight this packet, please it you, contains at large.
go sleep, and hear us.
hast thou forgot thyself? is it so long?, call forth the holy father.
and wherefore should these good news make me sick? will fortune never come with both hands full, she either gives a stomach and no food, 
what, all so soon asleep? i wish mine eyes would with themselves shut up my thoughts. i find they are inclined to do so.
(to viola) come, away!
such are the poor, in health, or else a feast and takes away the stomach, such are the rich, that have abundance and enjoy it not. and now my sight fails, and my brain is giddy. o, me! come near me, now i am much ill.
please you, sir, it seldom visits sorrow. when it doth, it is a comforter.
whither, my lord?, cesario, husband, stay.
comfort, your majesty.
we two, my lord, will guard your person while you take your rest and watch your safety.
husband?
o, my royal father!
thank you. wondrous heavy.
ay, husband. can he that deny?
my sovereign lord, cheer up yourself, look up.
what a strange drowsiness possesses them!
her husband, sirrah?
are with his highness very ordinary. stand from him, give him air. he'll straight be well.
it is the quality o' th' climate.
no, my lord, not i.
no, no, he cannot long hold out these pangs. th' incessant care and labor of his mind so thin that life looks through and will break out.
why doth it not then our eyelids sink? i find not myself disposed to sleep.
alas, it is the baseness of thy fear that makes thee strangle thy propriety. be that thou know'st thou art, and then thou art as great as that thou fear'st.
the people fear me, for they do observe unfathered heirs and loathly births of nature. the seasons change their manners, as the year
nor i. my spirits are nimble. they fell together all, as by consent. worthy sebastian, o, what might, ? no more., and yet methinks i see it in thy face, what thou shouldst be. th' occasion speaks thee, and my strong imagination sees a crown
o, welcome, father! father, i charge thee, by thy reverence, here to unfold (though lately we intended reveals before 'tis ripe) what thou dost know hath newly passed between this youth and me.
the river hath thrice flowed, no ebb between, and the old folk, time's doting chronicles, say it did so a little time before that our great-grandsire, edward, sicked and died.
what, art thou waking?
a contract of eternal bond of love, confirmed by mutual joinder of your hands, strengthened by interchangement of your rings, and all the ceremony of this compact sealed in my function, by my testimony, since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave
speak lower, princes, for the king recovers.
do you not hear me speak?
o thou dissembling cub! what wilt thou be when time hath sowed a grizzle on thy case? or will not else thy craft so quickly grow that thine own trip shall be thine overthrow? where thou and i henceforth may never meet.
this apoplexy will certain be his end.
i do, and surely it is a sleepy language, and thou speak'st out of thy sleep. what is it thou didst say? this is a strange repose, to be asleep and yet so fast asleep.
my lord, i do protest, 
i pray you, take me up and bear me hence into some other chamber. softly, pray.
noble sebastian, thou let'st thy fortune sleep, die, rather, wink'st whiles thou art waking.
o, do not swear! hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear.
let there be no noise made, my gentle friends, will whisper music to my weary spirit.
thou dost snore distinctly. there's meaning in thy snores.
for the love of god, a surgeon! send one presently to sir
call for the music in the other room.
must be so too if heed me, which to do trebles thee o'er.
what's the matter?
set me the crown upon my pillow here.
well, i am standing water.
he has broke my head across and has given sir toby a bloody coxcomb too. for the love of god, your help! i had rather than forty pound i were at home.
his eye is hollow, and he changes much.
i'll teach you how to flow.
who has done this, sir andrew?
less noise, less noise.
do so. to ebb hereditary sloth instructs me.
the count's gentleman, one cesario. we took him for a coward, but he's the very devil incardinate.
who saw the duke of clarence?
oh, whiles thus you mock it! how, in stripping it, you more invest it! ebbing men indeed most often do so near the bottom run by their own fear or sloth.
my gentleman, cesario?
i am here, brother, full of heaviness.
prithee, say on. a matter from thee, and a birth indeed which throes thee much to yield.
'od's lifelings, here he is!, you broke my head for nothing, and that that i did, i was set on to do 't by sir toby.
how now! rain within doors, and none abroad? how doth the king?
thus, sir: although this lord of weak remembrance, this, who shall be of as little memory (for he's a spirit of persuasion only, professes to persuade) the king his son's alive, 'tis as impossible that he's undrowned and he that sleeps here swims.
why do you speak to me? i never hurt you. you drew your sword upon me without cause, but i bespoke you fair and hurt you not.
exceeding ill.
i have no hope
if a bloody coxcomb be a hurt, you have hurt me. i think you set nothing by a bloody coxcomb.
heard he the good news yet? tell it him.
oh, out of that "no hope" what great hope have you! no hope that way is another way so high a hope that even ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond, but doubt discovery there. will you grant with me
here comes sir toby halting. you shall hear more. but if he had not been in drink, he would have tickled you othergates than he did.
he altered much upon the hearing it.
he's gone.
how now, gentleman? how is 't with you?
if he be sick with joy, he'll recover without physic.
then, tell me, who's the next heir of naples?
fool) sot, didst see dick surgeon, sot?
not so much noise, my lords., sweet prince, speak low. the king your father is disposed to sleep.
claribel.
oh, he's drunk, sir toby, an hour agone. his eyes were set at eight i' the morning.
let us withdraw into the other room.
she that is queen of tunis; she that dwells ten leagues beyond man's life; she that from naples can have no note, unless the sun were post, be rough and razorable; she that from whom we all were sea-swallowed, though some cast again, and by that destiny to perform an act whereof what's past is prologue, what to come
then he's a rogue, and a passy-measures pavin. i hate a drunken rogue.
will 't please your grace to go along with us?
what stuff is this? how say you? 'tis true, my brother's daughter's queen of tunis, so is she heir of naples, 'twixt which regions there is some space.
away with him! who hath made this havoc with them?
no, i will sit and watch here by the king.
a space whose every cubit seems to cry out, "how shall that claribel
i'll help you, sir toby, because we'll be dressed together.
why doth the crown lie there upon his pillow, being so troublesome a bedfellow? o polished perturbation, golden care, to many a watchful night! sleep with it now; yet not so sound and half so deeply sweet as he whose brow with homely biggen bound snores out the watch of night. o majesty, like a rich armor worn in heat of day, that scald'st with safety. by his gates of breath there lies a downy feather which stirs not; did he suspire, that light and weightless down this sleep is sound indeed. this is a sleep that from this golden rigol hath divorced so many english kings. thy due from me is tears and heavy sorrows of the blood, shall, o dear father, pay thee plenteously. my due from thee is this imperial crown, which, as immediate as thy place and blood,
and let sebastian wake." say this were death that now hath seized them. why, they were no worse than now they are. there be that can rule naples as well as he that sleeps, lords that can prate as this gonzalo. i myself could make a chough of as deep chat. oh, that you bore the mind that i do, what a sleep were this for your advancement! do you understand me?
will you help?, an ass-head, and a coxcomb, and a knave, a thin-faced knave, a gull!
derives itself to me. (he puts the crown on his head) lo, where it sits, into one giant arm, it shall not force this lineal honor from me. this from thee will i to mine leave, as 'tis left to me.
methinks i do.
get him to bed, and let his hurt be looked to.
(waking) warwick! gloucester! clarence!
and how does your content tender your own good fortune?
i am sorry, madam, i have hurt your kinsman, but, had it been the brother of my blood, i must have done no less with wit and safety. you throw a strange regard upon me, and by that pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows we made each other but so late ago.
doth the king call?
i remember you did supplant your brother prospero.
one face, one voice, one habit, and two persons! a natural perspective, that is and is not!
what would your majesty? how fares your grace?
true. and look how well my garments sit upon me, much feater than before. my brother's servants
how have the hours racked and tortured me since i have lost thee!
why did you leave me here alone, my lords?
but, for your conscience?
sebastian are you?
we left the prince my brother here, my liege, who undertook to sit and watch by you.
ay, sir. where lies that? if 'twere a kibe, 'twould put me to my slipper. but i feel not this deity in my bosom. twenty consciences, and melt ere they molest! here lies your brother, no better than the earth he lies upon, if he were that which now he's like, that's dead, whom i, with this obedient steel, three inches of it, to the perpetual wink for aye might put this ancient morsel, this sir prudence, who
fear'st thou that, antonio?
the prince of wales? where is he? let me see him.
should not upbraid our course. for all the rest, they'll take suggestion as a cat laps milk. we say befits the hour.
an apple, cleft in two, is not more twin than these two creatures. which is sebastian?
this door is open. he is gone this way.
thy case, dear friend, shall be my precedent. as thou got'st milan, i'll come by naples. draw thy sword. one stroke shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest.
most wonderful!
he came not through the chamber where we stayed.
draw together. and when i rear my hand, do you the like, to fall it on gonzalo.
(looking at viola) do i stand there? i never had a brother; of here and everywhere. i had a sister, whom the blind waves and surges have devoured. of charity, what kin are you to me? what countryman? what name? what parentage?
where is the crown? who took it from my pillow?
o, but one word. (speaks quietly to antonio)
such a sebastian was my brother too, so went he suited to his watery tomb. if spirits can assume both form and suit you come to fright us.
when we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.
(to gonzalo) my master through his art foresees the danger for else his project dies, to keep them living. (sings in gonzalo 's ear) while you here do snoring lie, open-eyed conspiracy his time doth take. if of life you keep a care, shake off slumber and beware. awake, awake!
a spirit i am indeed, which from the womb i did participate. were you a woman, as the rest goes even, i should my tears let fall upon your cheek and say "thrice-welcome, drownèd viola!"
is he so hasty that he doth suppose my sleep my death? find him, my lord of warwick. chide him hither.
then let us both be sudden.
my father had a mole upon his brow.
this part of his conjoins with my disease and helps to end me. see, sons, what things you are, when gold becomes her object! for this the foolish overcareful fathers have broke their sleep with thoughts, their brains with care, their bones with industry. the canker'd heaps of strange-achievèd gold. for this they have been thoughtful to invest their sons with arts and martial exercises, when, like the bee, tolling from every flower our thighs packed with wax, our mouths with honey, we bring it to the hive and, like the bees, are murdered for our pains. this bitter taste yield his engrossments to the ending father.
(waking and seeing them)
and so had mine.
till his friend sickness hath determined me?
(waking) why, how now? ho, awake!
and died that day when viola from her birth had numbered thirteen years.
my lord, i found the prince in the next room, washing with kindly tears his gentle cheeks, with such a deep demeanor in great sorrow would, by beholding him, have washed his knife with gentle eyedrops. he is coming hither.
why are you drawn? wherefore this ghastly looking?
oh, that record is lively in my soul! that day that made my sister thirteen years.
but wherefore did he take away the crown?
what's the matter?
if nothing lets to make us happy both but this my masculine usurped attire, do not embrace me till each circumstance that i am viola. which to confirm, i'll bring you to a captain in this town, where lie my maiden weeds, by whose gentle help i was preserved to serve this noble count. hath been between this lady and this lord.
lo where he comes., come hither to me, harry., 
whiles we stood here securing your repose, like bulls, or rather lions. did 't not wake you? it struck mine ear most terribly.
(to olivia) so comes it, lady, you have been mistook. but nature to her bias drew in that. you would have been contracted to a maid; you are betrothed both to a maid and man.
i never thought to hear you speak again.
i heard nothing.
(to olivia) be not amazed. right noble is his blood. if this be so, as yet the glass seems true, i shall have share in this most happy wreck. thou never shouldst love woman like to me.
thy wish was father, harry, to that thought. i stay too long by thee; i weary thee. dost thou so hunger for mine empty chair before thy hour be ripe? o foolish youth, thou seek'st the greatness that will overwhelm thee. stay but a little, for my cloud of dignity is held from falling with so weak a wind thou hast stol'n that which after some few hours were thine without offense, and at my death thou hast sealed up my expectation. thy life did manifest thou loved'st me not, thou hid'st a thousand daggers in thy thoughts, which thou hast whetted on thy stony heart to stab at half an hour of my life. what, canst thou not forbear me half an hour? and bid the merry bells ring to thine ear that thou art crownèd, not that i am dead. let all the tears that should bedew my hearse be drops of balm to sanctify thy head; give that which gave thee life unto the worms. pluck down my officers, break my decrees,
oh, 'twas a din to fright a monster's ear, to make an earthquake! sure, it was the roar
and all those sayings will i overswear; and those swearings keep as true in soul as doth that orbèd continent the fire
for now a time is come to mock at form. harry the fifth is crowned. up, vanity, and to the english court assemble now, from every region, apes of idleness. now, neighbor confines, purge you of your scum. have you a ruffian that will swear, drink, dance, the oldest sins the newest kind of ways? be happy, he will trouble you no more. england shall double gild his treble guilt. england shall give him office, honor, might, the muzzle of restraint, and the wild dog shall flesh his tooth on every innocent. o my poor kingdom, sick with civil blows! when that my care could not withhold thy riots, o, thou wilt be a wilderness again, peopled with wolves, thy old inhabitants.
heard you this, gonzalo?
give me thy hand, and let me see thee in thy woman's weeds.
o pardon me, my liege! but for my tears, the moist impediments unto my speech, ere you with grief had spoke and i had heard the course of it so far. there is your crown, and he that wears the crown immortally long guard it yours. if i affect it more let me no more from this obedience rise, which my most inward true and duteous spirit teacheth this prostrate and exterior bending. god witness with me, when i here came in how cold it struck my heart! if i do feign, o, let me in my present wildness die
upon mine honor, sir, i heard a humming, and that a strange one too, which did awake me. i shaked you, sir, and cried. as mine eyes opened, i saw their weapons drawn. there was a noise, or that we quit this place. let's draw our weapons.
the captain that did bring me first on shore hath my maid's garments. he, upon some action, is now in durance at malvolio's suit,
and never live to show th' incredulous world the noble change that i have purposèd. and dead almost, my liege, to think you were, i spake unto this crown as having sense, and thus upbraided it: "the care on thee depending hath fed upon the body of my father; other, less fine in carat, is more precious, preserving life in med'cine potable; but thou, most fine, most honored, most renowned, hast eat thy bearer up." thus, my most royal liege, to try with it, as with an enemy that had before my face murdered my father, the quarrel of a true inheritor. but if it did infect my blood with joy if any rebel or vain spirit of mine did with the least affection of a welcome give entertainment to the might of it, let god forever keep it from my head that doth with awe and terror kneel to it.
lead off this ground, and let's make further search for my poor son.
he shall enlarge him.
o my son, god put it in thy mind to take it hence that thou mightst win the more thy father's love, come hither, harry, sit thou by my bed and hear, i think, the very latest counsel that ever i shall breathe. god knows, my son, by what bypaths and indirect crook'd ways how troublesome it sat upon my head. to thee it shall descend with better quiet,
heavens keep him from these beasts! for he is, sure, i' th' island.
fetch malvolio hither: and yet, alas, now i remember me, they say, poor gentleman, he's much distract. from my remembrance clearly banished his. (to fool) how does he, sirrah?
better opinion, better confirmation, for all the soil of the achievement goes but as an honor snatched with boist'rous hand, and i had many living to upbraid my gain of it by their assistances, which daily grew to quarrel and to bloodshed, thou see'st with peril i have answerèd, for all my reign hath been but as a scene acting that argument. and now my death changes the mood, for what in me was purchased so thou the garland wear'st successively. yet though thou stand'st more sure than i could do, thou art not firm enough, since griefs are green, and all my friends, which thou must make thy friends, by whose fell working i was first advanced and by whose power i well might lodge a fear to be again displaced; which to avoid, i cut them off and had a purpose now lest rest and lying still might make them look too near unto my state. therefore, my harry, be it thy course to busy giddy minds with foreign quarrels; that action, hence borne out, more would i, but my lungs are wasted so that strength of speech is utterly denied me. how i came by the crown, o god forgive, and grant it may with thee in true peace live.
lead away.
truly, madam, he holds beelzebub at the staves' end as well as a man in his case may do. has here writ a letter to you. i should have given 't you today morning, but as a madman's epistles are no gospels, so it skills not much when they are delivered.
you won it, wore it, kept it, gave it me.
so, king, go safely on to seek thy son.
open 't, and read it.
then plain and right must my possession be, which i with more than with a common pain 'gainst all the world will rightfully maintain.
all the infections that the sun sucks up from bogs, fens, flats, on prosper fall and make him by inchmeal a disease! his spirits hear me and yet i needs must curse. but they'll nor pinch, nor lead me like a firebrand in the dark out of my way, unless he bid 'em. but for every trifle are they set upon me, sometime like apes that mow and chatter at me, lie tumbling in my barefoot way and mount their pricks at my footfall. sometime am i all wound with adders who with cloven tongues do hiss me into madness.
look then to be well edified when the fool delivers the madman. (reads) "by the lord, madam,", 
look, look, here comes my john of lancaster.
lo, now, lo! for bringing wood in slowly. i'll fall flat. perchance he will not mind me. (lies down, covered by his gaberdine)
how now? art thou mad?
health, peace, and happiness to my royal father.
here's neither bush nor shrub to bear off any weather at all.
no, madam, i do but read madness. an your ladyship will have it as it ought to be, you must allow vox.
thou bring'st me happiness and peace, son john, but health, alack, with youthful wings is flown from this bare withered trunk. upon thy sight where is my lord of warwick?
what have we here? a man or a fish? dead or alive? a fish. he smells like a fish, a very ancient and fish-like smell, a kind of not-of-the-newest poor-john. a strange fish! were i in england now, as once i was, and had but this fish painted, not a holiday fool there but would give a piece of silver. there would this monster make a man. any strange beast there makes a man. when they will not give a doit to relieve a lame beggar, they will lay out ten to see a dead indian. legged like a man and his fins like arms! warm, o' my troth. i do now let loose my opinion, hold it no longer: this is no fish, but an islander that hath lately suffered by a thunderbolt.
prithee, read i' thy right wits.
my lord of warwick.
alas, the storm is come again! my best way is to creep under his gaberdine. there is no other shelter hereabouts. misery acquaints a man with strange bedfellows. i will here shroud till the dregs of the storm be past. (crawls under gaberdine)
therefore perpend, my princess, and give ear.
doth any name particular belong unto the lodging where i first did swoon?
(sings) i shall no more to sea, to sea, here shall i die ashore, well, here's my comfort. (drinks, sings) the master, the swabber, the boatswain, and i, the gunner and his mate loved mall, meg, and marian, and margery, but none of us cared for kate. for she had a tongue with a tang,
(giving the letter to fabian) read it you, sirrah.
'tis called jerusalem, my noble lord.
would cry to a sailor, "go hang!" she loved not the savor of tar nor of pitch, yet a tailor might scratch her where'er she did itch. then to sea, boys, and let her go hang! this is a scurvy tune too. but here's my comfort.
(reads) "by the lord, madam, you wrong me, and the world shall know it. though you have put me into darkness and given your drunken cousin rule over me, yet have i the benefit of my senses as well as your ladyship. i have your own letter that induced me to the semblance i put on, with the which i doubt not but to do myself much right or you much shame. think of me as you please. i leave my duty a little unthought of and speak out of my injury. the madly used malvolio."
laud be to god! even there my life must end. it hath been prophesied to me many years, i should not die but in jerusalem, which vainly i supposed the holy land. in that jerusalem shall harry die.
do not torment me. oh!
did he write this?
by cock and pie, sir, you shall not away tonight., what, davy, i say!
what's the matter? have we devils here? do you put tricks upon 's with savages and men of ind, ha? i have not 'scaped drowning to be afeard now of your four legs. or it hath been said, "as proper a man as ever went on four legs cannot make him give ground," and it shall be said so again while stephano breathes at' nostrils.
ay, madam.
you must excuse me, master robert shallow.
the spirit torments me. oh!
this savors not much of distraction.
i will not excuse you. you shall not be excused. excuses shall not be excused., why, davy!
this is some monster of the isle with four legs who hath got, as i take it, an ague. where the devil should he learn our language? i will give him some relief if it be but for that. if i can recover him and keep him tame and get to naples with him, he's a present for any emperor that ever trod on neat's leather.
see him delivered, fabian; bring him hither.
here, sir.
do not torment me, prithee. i'll bring my wood home faster.
my lord so please you, these things further thought on, to think me as well a sister as a wife, one day shall crown the alliance on 't, so please you,
davy, davy, davy, davy, let me see, davy, let me see, davy, let me see. yea, marry, william cook, bid him come
he's in his fit now and does not talk after the wisest. he shall taste of my bottle. if he have never drunk wine afore, it will go near to remove his fit. if i can recover him and keep him tame, i will not take too much for him. he shall pay for him that hath him, and that soundly.
madam, i am most apt to embrace your offer. (to viola) your master quits you, and for your service done him, so much against the mettle of your sex, and since you called me "master" for so long, here is my hand. you shall from this time be your master's mistress.
marry, sir, thus: those precepts cannot be served. and again, sir, shall we sow the hade land with wheat?
thou dost me yet but little hurt. thou wilt anon, i know it by thy trembling. now prosper works upon thee.
(to viola) a sister! you are she.
with red wheat, davy. but for william cook, are there no young pigeons?
come on your ways. open your mouth. here is that which will give language to you, cat. open your mouth. this will shake your shaking, i can tell you, and that soundly. you cannot tell who's your friend. open your chaps again.
is this the madman?
irons.
i should know that voice. it should be, but he is drowned, and these are devils. oh, defend me!
ay, my lord, this same. how now, malvolio!
let it be cast and paid., sir john, you shall not be excused.
four legs and two voices, a most delicate monster. his forward voice now is to speak well of his friend. his backward voice is to utter foul speeches and to detract. if all the wine in my bottle will recover him, i will help his ague. come. caliban drinks
madam, you have done me wrong, notorious wrong.
now, sir, a new link to the bucket must needs be had. and, sir, do you mean to stop any of william's wages about the
stephano!
have i, malvolio? no.
he shall answer it. some pigeons, davy, a couple of short- legged hens, a joint of mutton, and any pretty little tiny kickshaws, tell william cook.
doth thy other mouth call me? mercy, mercy! this is a devil, and no monster. i will leave him. i have no long spoon.
(handing a paper) lady, you have. pray you, peruse that letter. write from it if you can, in hand or phrase; or say 'tis not your seal, not your invention: you can say none of this. well, grant it then and tell me, in the modesty of honor, bade me come smiling and cross-gartered to you, to put on yellow stockings, and to frown upon sir toby and the lighter people?
doth the man of war stay all night, sir?
stephano! if thou beest stephano, touch me and speak to me. for i am trinculo, be not afeard, thy good friend trinculo.
and, acting this in an obedient hope, kept in a dark house, visited by the priest, and made the most notorious geck and gull that e'er invention played on? tell me why.
yea, davy. i will use him well. a friend i' th' court is better arrant knaves and will backbite.
if thou beest trinculo, come forth. i'll pull thee by the lesser legs. if any be trinculo's legs, these are they. (pulls trinculo out from under the gaberdine)
alas, malvolio, this is not my writing, but out of question, 'tis maria's hand. and now i do bethink me, it was she first told me thou wast mad, then camest in smiling, and in such forms which here were presupposed this practice hath most shrewdly passed upon thee; but when we know the grounds and authors of it, thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge of thine own cause.
no worse than they are back-bitten, sir, for they have marvellous foul linen.
thou art very trinculo indeed! how camest thou to be the siege of this mooncalf? can he vent trinculos?
good madam, hear me speak, taint the condition of this present hour, which i have wonder'd at. in hope it shall not, most freely i confess, myself and toby set this device against malvolio here, we had conceived against him. maria writ the letter at sir toby's great importance, in recompense whereof he hath married her. how with a sportful malice it was followed, if that the injuries be justly weighed that have on both sides passed.
well-conceited, davy. about thy business, davy.
i took him to be killed with a thunderstroke. but art thou not drowned, stephano? i hope now thou art not drowned. is the storm overblown? i hid me under the dead mooncalf's gaberdine for fear of the storm. and art thou living, stephano? o stephano, two neapolitans 'scaped! (dances stephano about)
(to malvolio) alas, poor fool, how have they baffled thee!
against clement perkes o' th' hill.
prithee, do not turn me about. my stomach is not constant.
why, "some are born great, some achieve greatness, and some have greatness thrown upon them." i was one, sir, in this interlude, one sir topas, sir, but that's all one. (imitates malvolio) "by the lord, fool, i am not mad.", but do you remember? "madam, why laugh you at such a barren rascal; an you smile not, he's gagged?" and thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges.
there is many complaints, davy, against that visor. that visor is an arrant knave, on my knowledge.
(aside) these be fine things, an if they be not sprites. that's a brave god and bears celestial liquor. i will kneel to him.
i'll be revenged on the whole pack of you.
i grant your worship that he is a knave, sir, but yet, god friend's request. an honest man, sir, is able to speak for himself when a knave is not. i have served your worship truly, sir, this eight years; an if i cannot once or twice in a quarter bear out a knave against an honest man, i have
(to trinculo) how didst thou 'scape? how camest thou hither? swear by this bottle how thou camest hither. i escaped upon a butt of sack which the sailors heaved o'erboard, by this bottle, which i made of the bark of a tree with mine own hands since i was cast ashore.
he hath been most notoriously abused.
honest friend, sir; therefore i beseech you let him be countenanced.
(to stephano) i'll swear upon that bottle to be thy true subject, for the liquor is not earthly.
pursue him and entreat him to a peace.
go to, i say he shall have no wrong. look about, davy.
(to trinculo) here. swear then how thou escapedst.
he hath not told us of the captain yet. a solemn combination shall be made of our dear souls., meantime, sweet sister, we will not part from hence. cesario, come, for so you shall be, while you are a man. orsino's mistress and his fancy's queen.
where are you, sir john? come, come, come, off with your
swum ashore, man, like a duck. i can swim like a duck, i'll be sworn.
(sings) when that i was and a little tiny boy, with hey, ho, the wind and the rain, for the rain it raineth every day. but when i came to man's estate, with hey, ho, the wind and the rain, 'gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate, but when i came, alas! to wive, with hey, ho, the wind and the rain, by swaggering could i never thrive, for the rain it raineth every day. with hey, ho, the wind and the rain, with toss-pots still had drunken heads, for the rain it raineth every day. a great while ago the world begun, but that's all one, our play is done, and we'll strive to please you every day.
i am glad to see your worship.
here, kiss the book. though thou canst swim like a duck, thou art made like a goose.
i thank thee with all my heart, kind master bardolph, (to the page) and welcome, my tall fellow., come, sir john.
o stephano, hast any more of this?
tush! never tell me. i take it much unkindly that thou, iago, who hast had my purse as if the strings were thine, shouldst know of this.
i'll follow you, good master robert shallow.
the whole butt, man. my cellar is in a rock by th' seaside where my wine is hid., how now, mooncalf? how does thine ague?
'sblood, but you'll not hear me! if ever i did dream of such a matter, abhor me.
bardolph, look to our horses.
hast thou not dropped from heaven?
thou told'st me thou didst hold him in thy hate.
if i were sawed into quantities, i should make four dozen of such bearded hermits' staves as master shallow. it is a wonderful thing to see the semblable coherence of his men's spirits and his. they, by observing of him, do bear them, is turned into a justice-like servingman. their spirits are so married in conjunction with the participation of society that they flock together in consent like so many wild geese. if i had a suit to master shallow, i would humor his men, i would curry with master shallow that no man could better command his servants. it is certain that either wise bearing or ignorant carriage is caught, as men take diseases, one of another. therefore let men take heed of their
out o' th' moon, i do assure thee. i was the man i' the moon when time was.
despise me if i do not. three great ones of the city off-capped to him, and by the faith of man i know my price, i am worth no worse a place. but he (as loving his own pride and purposes) evades them with a bombast circumstance and in conclusion nonsuits my mediators. for "certes," says he, "i have already chose my officer." and what was he? one michael cassio, a florentine (a fellow almost damned in a fair wife) that never set a squadron in the field, nor the division of a battle knows
keep prince harry in continual laughter the wearing out of six fashions, which is four terms, or two actions, and a' shall laugh without intervallums. o, it is much that a lie with a slight oath and a jest with a sad brow will do with a fellow that never had the ache in his shoulders. o, you shall see him laugh till his face be like a wet cloak ill laid up.
i have seen thee in her and i do adore thee. my mistress showed me thee and thy dog and thy bush.
wherein the toged consuls can propose as masterly as he. mere prattle without practice is all his soldiership. but he, sir, had th' election and i, of whom his eyes had seen the proof christian and heathen, must be belee'd and calmed by debitor and creditor. this counter-caster he (in good time) must his lieutenant be and i, bless the mark, his moorship's ancient.
(within) sir john.
come, swear to that, kiss the book. i will furnish it anon with new contents, swear.
by heaven, i rather would have been his hangman.
i come, master shallow; i come, master shallow.
by this good light, this is a very shallow monster. i afeard of him! a very weak monster. the man i' th' moon! a most poor credulous monster., well drawn, monster, in good sooth!
why, there's no remedy. 'tis the curse of service. preferment goes by letter and affection, and not by old gradation, where each second stood heir to th' first. now sir, be judge yourself, to love the moor.
how now, my lord chief justice, whither away?
(to stephano) i'll show thee every fertile inch o' th' island. and i will kiss thy foot. i prithee, be my god.
i would not follow him then.
how doth the king?
by this light, a most perfidious and drunken monster. when 's god's asleep, he'll rob his bottle.
o sir, content you. i follow him to serve my turn upon him. cannot be truly followed. you shall mark many a duteous and knee-crooking knave that (doting on his own obsequious bondage) wears out his time much like his master's ass whip me such honest knaves. others there are who, trimmed in forms and visages of duty, keep yet their hearts attending on themselves and, throwing but shows of service on their lords, do themselves homage. these fellows have some soul,
exceeding well. his cares are now all ended.
(to stephano) i'll kiss thy foot. i'll swear myself thy subject.
and such a one do i profess myself. for, sir, it is as sure as you are roderigo, were i the moor, i would not be iago. heaven is my judge, not i for love and duty, but seeming so, for my peculiar end. for when my outward action doth demonstrate the native act and figure of my heart but i will wear my heart upon my sleeve for daws to peck at. i am not what i am.
i hope, not dead.
come on then. down, and swear.
what a full fortune does the thick-lips owe if he can carry't thus!
he's walked the way of nature,
i shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed monster. a most scurvy monster. i could find in my heart to beat him, 
call up her father. proclaim him in the streets. incense her kinsmen, and, though he in a fertile climate dwell, plague him with flies. though that his joy be joy yet throw such changes of vexation on't,
i would his majesty had called me with him. the service that i truly did his life hath left me open to all injuries.
(to caliban) come, kiss.
here is her father's house, i'll call aloud.
indeed, i think the young king loves you not.
but that the poor monster's in drink. an abominable monster!
do, with like timorous accent and dire yell as when, by night and negligence, the fire is spied in populous cities.
to welcome the condition of the time, which cannot look more hideously upon me than i have drawn it in my fantasy.
i'll show thee the best springs. i'll pluck thee berries. i'll fish for thee and get thee wood enough. a plague upon the tyrant that i serve! i'll bear him no more sticks, but follow thee,
what, ho, brabantio! signior brabantio, ho!
here come the heavy issue of dead harry. of he the worst of these three gentlemen! how many nobles then should hold their places that must strike sail to spirits of vile sort!
a most ridiculous monster, to make a wonder of a poor drunkard.
awake! what, ho, brabantio! thieves! thieves! look to your house, your daughter, and your bags! thieves! thieves!
o god, i fear all will be overturned.
(to stephano) i prithee, let me bring thee where crabs grow. and i with my long nails will dig thee pignuts, show thee a jay's nest, and instruct thee how to clustering filberts, and sometimes i'll get thee young scamels from the rock. wilt thou go with me?
what is the reason of this terrible summons?
good morrow, cousin warwick, good morrow.
i prithee now, lead the way without any more talking., trinculo, the king and all our company else being drowned, we will inherit here., here, bear my bottle., fellow trinculo, we'll fill him by and by again.
signior, is all your family within?
good morrow, cousin.
(sings drunkenly) farewell, master! farewell, farewell.
are your doors locked?
we meet like men that had forgot to speak.
a howling monster, a drunken monster.
why, wherefore ask you this?
we do remember, but our argument is all too heavy to admit much talk.
 no more dams i'll make for fish, nor fetch in firing at requiring, nor scrape trencher, nor wash dish. 'ban, 'ban, ca-caliban has a new master. get a new man. freedom, high-day, high-day, freedom, freedom, high-day, freedom!
zounds, sir, you're robbed! for shame, put on your gown. your heart is burst, you have lost half your soul. is tupping your white ewe. arise, arise, awake the snorting citizens with the bell or else the devil will make a grandsire of you. arise, i say!
well, peace be with him that hath made us heavy.
o brave monster! lead the way.
what, have you lost your wits?
peace be with us, lest we be heavier.
there be some sports are painful, and their labor delight in them sets off. some kinds of baseness are nobly undergone. and most poor matters point to rich ends. this my mean task the mistress which i serve quickens what's dead and makes my labors pleasures. oh, she is ten times more gentle than her father's crabbed, and he's composed of harshness. i must remove upon a sore injunction. my sweet mistress weeps when she sees me work, and says such baseness had never like executor. i forget, but these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labors,
most reverend signior, do you know my voice?
o, good my lord, you have lost a friend indeed, and i dare swear you borrow not that face of seeming sorrow; it is sure your own.
alas now, pray you, work not so hard. i would the lightning had burnt up those logs that you are enjoined to pile! pray, set it down and rest you. when this burns, 'twill weep for having wearied you. my father he's safe for these three hours.
not i. what are you?
you stand in coldest expectation. i am the sorrier; would 'twere otherwise.
o most dear mistress, the sun will set before i shall discharge what i must strive to do.
my name is roderigo.
well, you must now speak sir john falstaff fair, which swims against your stream of quality.
if you'll sit down, i'll bear your logs the while. pray, give me that.
the worser welcome. i have charged thee not to haunt about my doors. my daughter is not for thee. and now in madness, being full of supper and distempering drafts, upon malicious knavery dost thou come to start my quiet?
led by th' impartial conduct of my soul; and never shall you see that i will beg a ragged and forestalled remission. if truth and upright innocency fail me, and tell him who hath sent me after him.
no, precious creature. i had rather crack my sinews, break my back, than you should such dishonor undergo while i sit lazy by.
sir, sir, sir, 
here comes the prince.
it would become me as well as it does you, and i should do it and yours it is against.
but thou must needs be sure my spirits and my place have in their power to make this bitter to thee.
good morrow, and god save your majesty.
(aside) poor worm, thou art infected! this visitation shows it.
patience, good sir.
this new and gorgeous garment majesty brothers, you mix your sadness with some fear. this is the english, not the turkish court; not amurath an amurath succeeds, but harry harry. yet be sad, good brothers, sorrow so royally in you appears that i will deeply put the fashion on and wear it in my heart. why then, be sad. but entertain no more of it, good brothers, for me, by heaven, i bid you be assured, i'll be your father and your brother too. let me but bear your love, i 'll bear your cares. yet weep that harry's dead, and so will i, by number into hours of happiness.
you look wearily.
what tell'st thou me of robbing? this is venice,
we hope no otherwise from your majesty.
no, noble mistress. 'tis fresh morning with me when you are by at night. i do beseech you, what is your name?
most grave brabantio, in simple and pure soul i come to you, 
you all look strangely on me. (to the chief justice) and you most. you are, i think, assured i love you not.
miranda., o my father, i have broke your hest to say so!
zounds, sir, you are one of those that will not serve god, if the devil bid you. because we come to do you service and you think we are ruffians, you'll have your daughter covered with a barbary horse. you'll have your nephews neigh to you. you'll have coursers for cousins and gennets for germans.
your majesty hath no just cause to hate me.
admired miranda! indeed the top of admiration, worth what's dearest to th' world! full many a lady
what profane wretch art thou?
no? how might a prince of my great hopes forget so great indignities you laid upon me? th' immediate heir of england? was this easy? may this be washed in lethe and forgotten?
th' harmony of their tongues hath into bondage brought my too diligent ear. for several virtues have i liked several women. never any with so full soul but some defect in her and put it to the foil. but you, o you, so perfect and so peerless, are created of every creature's best.
i am one, sir, that comes to tell you your daughter and the moor are now making the beast with two backs.
i then did use the person of your father; the image of his power lay then in me. whiles i was busy for the commonwealth, your highness pleasèd to forget my place, the majesty and power of law and justice, the image of the king whom i presented, whereon, as an offender to your father, i gave bold way to my authority and did commit you. if the deed were ill, be you contented, wearing now the garland, to pluck down justice from your awful bench? to trip the course of law and blunt the sword that guards the peace and safety of your person? nay more, to spurn at your most royal image question your royal thoughts, make the case yours; be now the father and propose a son, hear your own dignity so much profaned, see your most dreadful laws so loosely slighted, and then imagine me taking your part and in your power soft silencing your son. after this cold considerance, sentence me, and, as you are a king, speak in your state
i do not know one of my sex, no woman's face remember, more that i may call men than you, good friend, and my dear father. how features are abroad i am skill-less of, but, by my modesty, the jewel in my dower, i would not wish nor can imagination form a shape besides yourself to like of. but i prattle something too wildly, and my father's precepts i therein do forget.
thou art a villain!
my person, or my liege's sovereignty.
i am in my condition i would, not so!, and would no more endure this wooden slavery than to suffer the flesh-fly blow my mouth. hear my soul speak. the very instant that i saw you did to make me slave to it, and for your sake am i this patient log-man.
you are a senator!
you are right, justice, and you weigh this well. therefore still bear the balance and the sword. and i do wish your honors may increase offend you and obey you as i did. so shall i live to speak my father's words: "happy am i that have a man so bold that dares do justice on my proper son; that would deliver up his greatness so into the hands of justice." you did commit me, for which i do commit into your hand th' unstainèd sword that you have used to bear, with the like bold, just, and impartial spirit as you have done 'gainst me. there is my hand. you shall be as a father to my youth, my voice shall sound as you do prompt mine ear, to your well-practiced wise directions., and, princes all, believe me, i beseech you: my father is gone wild into his grave, for in his tomb lie my affections, to mock the expectation of the world, to frustrate prophecies, and to raze out rotten opinion, who hath writ me down after my seeming. the tide of blood in me now doth it turn and ebb back to the sea, where it shall mingle with the state of floods and flow henceforth in formal majesty. now call we our high court of parliament,
do you love me?
this thou shalt answer. i know thee, roderigo.
that the great body of our state may go in equal rank with the best governed nation; that war, or peace, or both at once, may be as things acquainted and familiar to us, our coronation done, we will accite, as i before remembered, all our state. and, god consigning to my good intents, no prince nor peer shall have just cause to say
o heaven, o earth, bear witness to this sound and crown what i profess with kind event
sir, i will answer any thing. but, i beseech you, if't be your pleasure and most wise consent at this odd-even and dull watch o' th' night
nay, you shall see my orchard, where, in an arbor, we will eat a last year's pippin of my own graffing, with a dish of caraways, and so forth., come, cousin silence., and then to bed.
what best is boded me to mischief! i beyond all limit of what else i' th' world do love, prize, honor you.
transported with no worse nor better guard but with a knave of common hire, a gondolier, to the gross clasps of a lascivious moor, we then have done you bold and saucy wrongs. but if you know not this my manners tell me we have your wrong rebuke. do not believe that, from the sense of all civility, your daughter (if you have not given her leave) i say again, hath made a gross revolt, tying her duty, beauty, wit, and fortunes in an extravagant and wheeling stranger if she be in her chamber or your house, let loose on me the justice of the state for thus deluding you.
fore god, you have here a goodly dwelling and a rich.
i am a fool to weep at what i am glad of.
strike on the tinder, ho! give me a taper, call up all my people! belief of it oppresses me already. light, i say, light!
barren, barren, barren, beggars all, beggars all, sir john. marry, good air., spread, davy, spread, davy. well said, davy.
(aside) fair encounter on that which breeds between 'em!
(to roderigo) farewell, for i must leave you. it seems not meet, nor wholesome to my place, against the moor. for i do know the state (however this may gall him with some check) cannot with safety cast him, for he's embarked with such loud reason to the cyprus wars another of his fathom they have none to lead their business. in which regard,
this davy serves you for good uses. he is your servingman
wherefore weep you?
though i do hate him as i do hell pains, yet for necessity of present life (which is indeed but sign). that you shall surely find him, lead to the sagittary the raisèd search, and there will i be with him. so farewell.
a good varlet, a good varlet, a very good varlet, sir john. by the mass, i have drunk too much sack at supper. a good varlet. now sit down, now sit down., come, cousin.
at mine unworthiness, that dare not offer what i desire to give, and much less take and all the more it seeks to hide itself the bigger bulk it shows. hence, bashful cunning, and prompt me, plain and holy innocence! i am your wife if you will marry me. you may deny me, but i'll be your servant whether you will or no.
it is too true an evil. gone she is. is naught but bitterness. now, roderigo, where didst thou see her?, oh, unhappy girl!, with the moor, say'st thou?, who would be a father?, how didst thou know 'twas she?, oh, she deceives me raise all my kindred. are they married, think you?
ah, sirrah, quoth he, we shall (sings) and praise god for the merry year, when flesh is cheap and females dear, and lusty lads roam here and there so merrily,
my mistress, dearest, and i thus humble ever.
truly, i think they are.
there's a merry heart!, good master silence, i'll give you a health for that anon.
my husband, then?
oh, heaven, how got she out? oh, treason of the blood! fathers, from hence trust not your daughters' minds by which the property of youth and maidhood may be abused? have you not read, roderigo, of some such thing?
give master bardolph some wine, davy.
as bondage e'er of freedom. here's my hand.
yes, sir, i have indeed.
sweet sir, sit. i'll be with you anon. most sweet sir, sit. in meat, we'll have in drink, but you must bear. the heart's all.
and mine, with my heart in 't. and now farewell till half an hour hence.
call up my brother, oh, would you had had her! where we may apprehend her and the moor?
be merry, master bardolph. , and, my little soldier there, be merry.
a thousand thousand!
i think i can discover him, if you please to get good guard and go along with me.
for women are shrews, both short and tall. 'tis merry in hall when beards wag all, and welcome merry shrovetide. be merry, be merry.
who are surprised withal. but my rejoicing at nothing can be more. i'll to my book, for yet ere supper-time must i perform much business appertaining.
pray you lead on. at every house i'll call. and raise some special officers of might., on, good roderigo. i will deserve your pains.
i did not think master silence had been a man of this mettle.
tell not me. when the butt is out, we will drink water. not a drop before. therefore bear up and board 'em., servant- monster, drink to me.
though in the trade of war i have slain men, yet do i hold it very stuff o' th' conscience to do no contrived murder. i lack iniquity sometimes to do me service. nine or ten times
who, i? i have been merry twice and once ere now.
"servant-monster"? the folly of this island. they say there's but five upon this isle. we are three of them. if th' other two be brained like us, the state totters.
'tis better as it is.
(to bardolph) there's a dish of leather-coats for you.
drink, servant-monster, when i bid thee. thy eyes are almost set in thy head.
nay, but he prated and spoke such scurvy and provoking terms against your honor that, with the little godliness i have, are you fast married? be assured of this: that the magnifico is much beloved and hath in his effect a voice potential as double as the duke's. he will divorce you, the law (with all his might to enforce it on) will give him cable.
davy!
where should they be set else? he were a brave monster indeed, if they were set in his tail.
let him do his spite. my services which i have done the signiory shall out-tongue his complaints. 'tis yet to know, i shall promulgate. i fetch my life and being from men of royal siege, and my demerits may speak unbonneted to as proud a fortune as this that i have reached. for know, iago, i would not my unhousèd free condition put into circumscription and confine for the sea's worth. but look, what lights come yond?
your worship, i'll be with you straight., 
my man-monster hath drowned his tongue in sack. for my part, the sea cannot drown me. i swam, ere i could recover the shore, five and thirty leagues off and on. by this light, thou shalt be my lieutenant, monster, or my standard.
those are the raisèd father and his friends.
(sings) a cup of wine that's brisk and fine, and drink unto thee, leman mine, and a merry heart lives long-a.
your lieutenant, if you list. he's no standard.
not i, i must be found. my parts, my title, and my perfect soul shall manifest me rightly. is it they?
well said, master silence.
we'll not run, monsieur monster.
by janus, i think no.
and we shall be merry; now comes in the sweet o' th' night.
nor go neither. but you'll lie like dogs, and yet say nothing neither.
the servants of the duke and my lieutenant? what is the news?
health and long life to you, master silence.
mooncalf, speak once in thy life, if thou beest a good mooncalf.
the duke does greet you, general, and he requires your haste-post-haste appearance, even on the instant.
(sings) fill the cup, and let it come, i'll pledge you a mile to th' bottom.
how does thy honor? let me lick thy shoe. (indicates trinculo) i'll not serve him. he's not valiant.
what's the matter, think you?
honest bardolph, welcome. if thou wantest anything and wilt not call, beshrew thy heart., indeed too. i'll drink to master bardolph, and to all the cabileros about london.
(to caliban) thou liest, most ignorant monster. i am in case to justle a constable. why, thou deboshed fish, thou, was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much sack as i today? wilt thou tell a monstrous lie, being but half a fish and half a monster?
something from cyprus as i may divine. have sent a dozen sequent messengers this very night at one another's heels, and many of the consuls, raised and met, are at the duke's already. you have been hotly called for. the senate hath sent about three several guests to search you out.
i hope to see london once ere i die.
(to stephano)
'tis well i am found by you. i will but spend a word here in the house and go with you.
an i might see you there, davy!
"lord," quoth he? that a monster should be such a natural!
ancient, what makes he here?
master bardolph?
(to stephano) lo, lo, again! bite him to death, i prithee.
if it prove lawful prize, he's made for ever.
yea, sir, in a pottle-pot.
trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head. if you prove a mutineer, the next tree. the poor monster's my subject and he shall not suffer indignity.
i do not understand.
by god's liggens, i thank thee. the knave will stick by thee, i can assure thee that. he will not out, he. 'tis true bred!
i thank my noble lord. wilt thou be pleased to hearken once again to the suit i made to thee?
he's married.
and i'll stick by him, sir.
marry, will i. kneel and repeat it. i will stand, and so shall
to who?
why, there spoke a king. lack nothing, be merry. one knocks at the door within look who's at door there, ho. who knocks?
(kneeling) as i told thee before, i am subject to a tyrant, a sorcerer that by his cunning hath cheated me of the island.
marry, to, 
(to silence) why, now you have done me right.
thou liest.
come, captain, will you go?
and dub me knight, samingo. is 't not so?
(to trinculo) thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou! i would my valiant master would destroy thee. i do not lie.
have with you.
'tis so.
trinculo, if you trouble him any more in 's tale, by this hand, i will supplant some of your teeth.
here comes another troop to seek for you.
is 't so? why then, say an old man can do somewhat.
why, i said nothing.
it is brabantio. general, be advised, he comes to bad intent.
an 't please your worship, there's one pistol come from the court with news.
mum, then, and no more. proceed.
holla! stand there!
from the court? let him come in.
i say, by sorcery he got this isle. from me he got it. if thy greatness will revenge it on him, for i know thou darest, but this thing dare not, 
signior, it is the moor.
how now, pistol?
that's most certain.
down with him, thief!
sir john, god save you.
thou shalt be lord of it and i'll serve thee.
you, roderigo! come, sir, i am for you.
what wind blew you hither, pistol?
how now shall this be compassed? canst thou bring me to th' party?
keep up your bright swords, for the dew will rust them. good signior, you shall more command with years than with your weapons.
not the ill wind which blows no man to good. sweet knight, thou art now one of the greatest men in this realm.
yea, yea, my lord. i'll yield him thee asleep,
o thou foul thief, where hast thou stowed my daughter? for i'll refer me to all things of sense, if she in chains of magic were not bound, whether a maid so tender, fair, and happy, so opposite to marriage that she shunned would ever have, t' incur a general mock, run from her guardage to the sooty bosom of such a thing as thou, to fear, not to delight. judge me the world if 'tis not gross in sense abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals that weakens motion. i'll have 't disputed on. 'tis probable and palpable to thinking. i therefore apprehend and do attach thee of arts inhibited and out of warrant., lay hold upon him. if he do resist, subdue him at his peril!
by 'r lady, i think he be, but goodman puff of barson.
thou liest. thou canst not.
hold your hands, both you of my inclining and the rest. without a prompter. whither will you that i go to answer this your charge?
puff? sir john, i am thy pistol and thy friend, and helter-skelter have i rode to thee, and tidings do i bring, and lucky joys, and golden times, and happy news of price.
what a pied ninny's this!, thou scurvy patch!, i do beseech thy greatness, give him blows and take his bottle from him. when that's gone, where the quick freshes are.
to prison, till fit time of law and course of direct session call thee to answer.
i pray thee now, deliver them like a man of this world.
trinculo, run into no further danger. interrupt the monster one word further, and, by this hand, i'll turn my mercy out o' doors and make a stockfish of thee.
what if i do obey? whose messengers are here about my side upon some present business of the state to bring me to him?
a foutre for the world and worldlings base! i speak of africa and golden joys.
why, what did i? i did nothing. i'll go farther off.
'tis true, most worthy signior. the duke's in council and your noble self,
o base assyrian knight, what is thy news? let king cophetua know the truth thereof.
didst thou not say he lied?
how? the duke in council? in this time of the night? bring him away. mine's not an idle cause. the duke himself, or any of my brothers of the state, cannot but feel this wrong as 'twere their own. bond-slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be.
(sings) and robin hood, scarlet, and john.
thou liest.
there's no composition in this news that gives them credit.
shall dunghill curs confront the helicons, and shall good news be baffled? then, pistol, lay thy head in furies' lap.
(to trinculo) do i so? take thou that. (beats trinculo)
indeed, they are disproportioned. my letters say a hundred and seven galleys.
honest gentleman, i know not your breeding.
i did not give the lie. out o' your wits and hearing too? a pox o' your bottle! this can sack and drinking do. a murrain on your monster, and the devil take your fingers!
and mine a hundred and forty.
why then, lament therefor.
ha, ha, ha!
and mine, two hundred. but though they jump not on a just account, as in these cases, where the aim reports 'tis oft with difference, yet do they all confirm a turkish fleet, and bearing up to cyprus.
give me pardon, sir. if, sir, you come with news from the court, i take it there's but two ways, either to utter them, or to conceal them. i am, sir, under the king in some authority.
now, forward with your tale., prithee, stand farther off.
i do not so secure me in the error, but the main article i do approve in fearful sense.
under which king, besonian? speak or die.
beat him enough. after a little time, i'll beat him too.
(within) what, ho, what, ho, what, ho!
under king harry.
stand farther., come, proceed.
a messenger from the galleys.
harry the fourth, or fifth?
why, as i told thee, 'tis a custom with him, having first seized his books; or with a log batter his skull; or paunch him with a stake; or cut his weasand with thy knife. remember first to possess his books, for without them one spirit to command. they all do hate him as rootedly as i. burn but his books. he has brave utensils, for so he calls them, which when he has a house, he'll deck withal. the beauty of his daughter. he himself calls her a nonpareil. i never saw a woman, but only sycorax my dam and she. but she as far surpasseth sycorax
now, what's the business?
harry the fourth.
is it so brave a lass?
the turkish preparation makes for rhodes, so was i bid report here to the state by signior angelo.
a foutre for thine office!, sir john, thy tender lambkin now is king. when pistol lies, do this (he makes an obscene gesture) and fig me, like the bragging spaniard.
ay, lord. she will become thy bed, i warrant. and bring thee forth brave brood.
how say you by this change?
what, is the old king dead?
monster, i will kill this man. his daughter and i will be king and queen, save our graces!, and trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys., dost thou like the plot, trinculo?
this cannot be, by no assay of reason. 'tis a pageant, to keep us in false gaze. when we consider th' importancy of cyprus to the turk, and let ourselves again but understand so may he with more facile question bear it, for that it stands not in such warlike brace but altogether lacks th' abilities that rhodes is dressed in. if we make thought of this to leave that latest which concerns him first, neglecting an attempt of ease and gain to wake and wage a danger profitless.
as nail in door. the things i speak are just.
excellent.
nay, in all confidence, he's not for rhodes.
shallow, choose what office thou wilt in the land, 'tis thine. pistol, i will double-charge thee with dignities.
give me thy hand. i am sorry i beat thee. but while thou livest, keep a good tongue in thy head.
here is more news.
o joyful day! i would not take a knighthood for my fortune.
within this half hour will he be asleep. wilt thou destroy him then?
the ottomites, reverend and gracious, steering with due course toward the isle of rhodes, have there injointed them with an after fleet.
what, i do bring good news!
ay, on mine honor.
ay, so i thought. how many, as you guess?
shallow, be what thou wilt. i am fortune's steward. get on
(aside) this will i tell my master.
their backward course, bearing with frank appearance their purposes toward cyprus. signior montano, your trusty and most valiant servitor, with his free duty recommends you thus,
thy boots. we'll ride all night., o sweet pistol!, away, bardolph!
thou makest me merry. i am full of pleasure. you taught me but whilere?
'tis certain then for cyprus. marcus luccicos, is not he in town?
come, pistol, utter more to me, and withal devise something young king is sick for me. let us take any man's horses. the laws of england are at my commandment. blessed are they that have been my friends, and woe to my lord chief justice!
at thy request, monster, i will do reason, any reason., come on, trinculo, let us sing. (sings) flout 'em and scout 'em, and scout 'em and flout 'em. thought is free.
he's now in florence.
"where is the life that late i led?" say they. why, here it is. welcome these pleasant days.
that's not the tune.
write from us to him. post-post-haste, dispatch.
no, thou arrant knave. i would to god that i might die, that i might have thee hanged. thou hast drawn my shoulder out of joint.
what is this same?
here comes brabantio and the valiant moor.
the constables have delivered her over to me, and she shall a man or two lately killed about her.
this is the tune of our catch, played by the picture of nobody.
against the general enemy ottoman, (to brabantio) i did not see you. welcome, gentle signior. we lacked your counsel and your help tonight.
nut-hook, nut-hook, you lie! come on, i 'll tell thee what, thou damned tripe-visaged rascal: an the child i now go with do miscarry, thou wert better thou hadst struck thy mother,
if thou beest a man, show thyself in thy likeness. if thou beest a devil, take 't as thou list.
so did i yours. good your grace, pardon me. hath raised me from my bed, nor doth the general care take hold on me, for my particular grief is of so flood-gate and o'erbearing nature that it engluts and swallows other sorrows
o the lord, that sir john were come! i would make this a bloody day to somebody. but i pray god the fruit of her womb might miscarry.
o, forgive me my sins!
why, what's the matter?
if it do, you shall have a dozen of cushions again; you have man is dead that you and pistol beat amongst you.
he that dies pays all debts., i defy thee!, mercy upon us!
my daughter! oh, my daughter!
i'll tell you what, you thin man in a censer, i will have you as soundly swinged for this, you bluebottle rogue, you filthy famished correctioner. if you be not swinged, i'll forswear
art thou afeard?
dead?
come, come, you she knight-errant, come.
no, monster, not i.
ay, to me. she is abused, stol'n from me, and corrupted by spells and medicines bought of mountebanks.
o god, that right should thus overcome might! well, of sufferance comes ease.
be not afeard. the isle is full of noises, sometimes a thousand twangling instruments will hum about mine ears, and sometime voices that, if i then had waked after long sleep, will make me sleep again. and then, in dreaming, ready to drop upon me, that when i waked i cried to dream again.
being not deficient, blind, or lame of sense, sans witchcraft could not.
come, you rogue, come, bring me to a justice.
this will prove a brave kingdom to me, where i shall have my music for nothing.
whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself you shall yourself read in the bitter letter, after your own sense, yea, though our proper son stood in your action.
ay, come, you starved bloodhound.
when prospero is destroyed.
humbly i thank your grace. here is the man, this moor, whom now it seems, hath hither brought.
goodman death, goodman bones!
that shall be by and by. i remember the story.
we are very sorry for't.
thou atomy, thou!
the sound is going away. let's follow it, and after do our work.
(to othello)what, in your own part, can you say to this?
come, you thin thing, come, you rascal.
lead, monster; we'll follow. i would i could see this taborer. he lays it on.
nothing, but this is so.
very well.
wilt come? i'll follow, stephano.
most potent, grave, and reverend signiors, that i have ta'en away this old man's daughter, it is most true. true, i have married her. the very head and front of my offending hath this extent, no more. rude am i in my speech, for since these arms of mine had seven years' pith till now some nine moons wasted, they have used their dearest action in the tented field, and little of this great world can i speak,
more rushes, more rushes.
(to alonso) by 'r lakin, i can go no further, sir. my old bones ache. here's a maze trod indeed through forthrights and meanders. by your patience, i needs must rest me.
and therefore little shall i grace my cause in speaking for myself. yet, by your gracious patience, i will a round unvarnished tale deliver of my whole course of love. what drugs, what charms, for such proceeding i am charged withal, i won his daughter.
the trumpets have sounded twice.
old lord, i cannot blame thee, to th' dulling of my spirits. sit down and rest. even here i will put off my hope and keep it no longer for my flatterer. he is drowned whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks
a maiden never bold, of spirit so still and quiet that her motion blushed at herself. and she, in spite of nature, to fall in love with what she feared to look on? it is a judgment maimed and most imperfect that will confess perfection so could err. against all rules of nature, and must be driven why this should be. i therefore vouch again that with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood or with some dram, conjured to this effect, he wrought upon her.
'twill be two o'clock ere they come from the coronation. dispatch, dispatch.
(aside to sebastian) i am right glad that he's so out of hope. do not for one repulse forego the purpose that you resolved t' effect.
to vouch this is no proof, than these thin habits and poor likelihoods of modern seeming do prefer against him.
king do you grace. i will leer upon him as he comes by, and do but mark the countenance that he will give me.
(aside to antonio) the next advantage
but, othello, speak. did you by indirect and forcèd courses or came it by request and such fair question as soul to soul affordeth?
god bless thy lungs, good knight!
(aside to sebastian) let it be tonight, for now they are oppressed with travel. they will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance as when they are fresh.
i do beseech you, send for the lady to the sagittary,
come here, pistol, stand behind me., (to shallow) o, if i bestowed the thousand pound i borrowed of you. but 'tis no matter. this poor show doth better. this doth infer the zeal i had to see him.
(aside to antonio) i say, tonight. no more.
and let her speak of me before her father. the trust, the office i do hold of you, not only take away, but let your sentence even fall upon my life.
it doth so.
what harmony is this? my good friends, hark!
fetch desdemona hither.
it shows my earnestness of affection, 
marvelous sweet music!
ancient, conduct them. you best know the place.
it doth so.
give us kind keepers, heavens! what were these?
i do confess the vices of my blood so justly to your grave ears i'll present how i did thrive in this fair lady's love and she in mine.
my devotion, 
a living drollery. now i will believe there is one tree, the phoenix' throne, one phoenix at this hour reigning there.
say it, othello.
it doth, it doth, it doth.
i'll believe both and what does else want credit, come to me, and i'll be sworn 'tis true. travelers ne'er did lie,
still questioned me the story of my life from year to year, the battles, sieges, fortunes, that i have passed. i ran it through, even from my boyish days, wherein i spoke of most disastrous chances, of moving accidents by flood and field, of hair-breadth 'scapes i' th' imminent deadly breach, of being taken by the insolent foe and portance in my traveler's history. wherein of antres vast and deserts idle, rough quarries, rocks, hills whose heads touch heaven it was my hint to speak, such was my process, 
as it were, to ride day and night, and not to deliberate, not
if in naples i should report this now, would they believe me? if i should say, i saw such islanders, for, certes, these are people of the island, who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet note, our human generation you shall find many, nay, almost any.
the anthropophagi, and men whose heads grew beneath their shoulders. these things to hear would desdemona seriously incline. but still the house affairs would draw her hence, she'd come again, and with a greedy ear devour up my discourse, which i, observing, took once a pliant hour and found good means to draw from her a prayer of earnest heart whereof by parcels she had something heard but not intentively. i did consent, and often did beguile her of her tears when i did speak of some distressful stroke she gave me for my pains a world of sighs. she swore, in faith, 'twas strange, 'twas passing strange, 'twas pitiful, 'twas wondrous pitiful. she wished she had not heard it, yet she wished and bade me, if i had a friend that loved her, i should but teach him how to tell my story and that would woo her. upon this hint i spake. she loved me for the dangers i had passed, this only is the witchcraft i have used. here comes the lady. let her witness it.
it is best, certain.
(aside) honest lord, thou hast said well, for some of you there present are worse than devils.
i think this tale would win my daughter too. good brabantio. take up this mangled matter at the best. than their bare hands.
but to stand stained with travel and sweating with desire to see him, thinking of nothing else, putting all affairs else in oblivion, as if there were nothing else to be done but to see
i cannot too much muse although they want the use of tongue, a kind of excellent dumb discourse.
i pray you, hear her speak. if she confess that she was half the wooer, destruction on my head if my bad blame light on the man., come hither, gentle mistress. where most you owe obedience?
'tis semper idem, for obsque hoc nihil est; 'tis all in every part.
(aside) praise in departing.
my noble father, i do perceive here a divided duty. to you i am bound for life and education. my life and education both do learn me i am hitherto your daughter. but here's my husband. and so much duty as my mother showed to you, preferring you before her father, so much i challenge that i may profess
'tis so indeed.
they vanished strangely.
god be with you. i have done. please it your grace, on to the state affairs. i had rather to adopt a child than get it., come hither, moor. i here do give thee that with all my heart i would keep from thee. for your sake, jewel, i am glad at soul i have no other child. for thy escape would teach me tyranny, to hang clogs on them., i have done, my lord.
my knight, i will inflame thy noble liver, and make thee durance and contagious prison, haled thither by most mechanical and dirty hand. rouse up revenge from ebon den with fell alecto's snake, for doll is in. pistol speaks nought but truth.
no matter, since they have left their viands behind, for we have stomachs.
which, as a grise or step, may help these lovers. when remedies are past, the griefs are ended by seeing the worst, which late on hopes depended.
i will deliver her.
not i.
to mourn a mischief that is past and gone what cannot be preserved when fortune takes, patience her injury a mock'ry makes. the robbed that smiles steals something from the thief, he robs himself that spends a bootless grief.
there roared the sea, and trumpet-clangor sounds.
faith, sir, you need not fear. when we were boys, who would believe that there were mountaineers dewlapped like bulls, whose throats had hanging at 'em whose heads stood in their breasts?, which now we find each putter-out of five for one will bring us good warrant of.
we lose it not, so long as we can smile. he bears the sentence well that nothing bears but the free comfort which from thence he hears. but he bears both the sentence and the sorrow these sentences to sugar or to gall, being strong on both sides, are equivocal. but words are words. i never yet did hear that the bruised heart was piercèd through the ears.
god save thy grace, king hal, my royal hal.
i will stand to and feed, although my last. no matter, since i feel stand to and do as we.
the turk with a most mighty preparation makes for cyprus. othello, the fortitude of the place is best known to you, and though we have there a substitute of most allowed sufficiency, yet opinion, a sovereign mistress of effects, throws a more safer voice on you. you must therefore be content to slubber the gloss of your new fortunes with this more stubborn and boist'rous expedition.
the heavens thee guard and keep, most royal imp of fame!
(to alonso, antonio, and sebastian ) you are three men of sin, whom destiny, that hath to instrument this lower world hath caused to belch up you, and on this island where man doth not inhabit, you 'mongst men being most unfit to live. i have made you mad, and even with suchlike valor men hang and drown you fools, i and my fellows are ministers of fate. the elements of whom your swords are tempered may as well wound the loud winds or with bemocked-at stabs kill the still-closing waters as diminish are like invulnerable. if you could hurt, your swords are now too massy for your strengths and will not be uplifted. but remember, for that's my business to you, that you three exposed unto the sea, which hath requit it, him and his innocent child. for which foul deed the powers, delaying, not forgetting, have incensed the seas and shores, yea, all the creatures, they have bereft, and do pronounce by me lingering perdition, worse than any death can be at once, shall step by step attend you and your ways; whose wraths to guard you from, upon your heads, is nothing but hearts' sorrow and a clear life ensuing.
the tyrant custom, most grave senators, hath made the flinty and steel couch of war my thrice-driven bed of down. i do agnize i find in hardness, and do undertake these present wars against the ottomites. most humbly therefore bending to your state,
god save thee, my sweet boy!
(aside) bravely the figure of this harpy hast thou performed, my ariel. a grace it had, devouring. in what thou hadst to say., so with good life and observation strange, my meaner ministers their several kinds have done. my high charms work and these mine enemies are all knit up and in these fits i leave them while i visit young ferdinand, whom they suppose is drowned, and his and mine loved darling.
i crave fit disposition for my wife. with such accommodation and besort as levels with her breeding.
my lord chief justice, speak to that vain man.
(to alonso) i' th' name of something holy, sir, why stand you
why, at her father's.
(to falstaff) have you your wits? know you what 'tis to speak?
oh, it is monstrous, monstrous. methought the billows spoke and told me of it, the winds did sing it to me, and the thunder, that deep and dreadful organ pipe, pronounced the name of prosper. it did bass my trespass. i'll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded and with him there lie mudded.
i'll not have it so.
my king, my jove, i speak to thee, my heart!
but one fiend at a time, i'll fight their legions o'er.
nor i.
i know thee not, old man. fall to thy prayers. how ill white hairs become a fool and jester. so surfeit-swelled, so old, and so profane; but being awaked, i do despise my dream. make less thy body hence, and more thy grace; leave gormandizing. know the grave doth gape reply not to me with a fool-born jest. presume not that i am the thing i was, for god doth know, so shall the world perceive, that i have turned away my former self. when thou dost hear i am as i have been, approach me, and thou shalt be as thou wast, the tutor and the feeder of my riots. till then i banish thee, on pain of death,
i'll be thy second.
nor would i there reside, to put my father in impatient thoughts by being in his eye. most gracious duke, to my unfolding lend your prosperous ear t' assist my simpleness.
not to come near our person by ten mile. for competence of life i will allow you, that lack of means enforce you not to evils. and, as we hear you do reform yourselves, give you advancement. (to chief justice) be it your charge, my lord, to see performed the tenor of my word., set on.
all three of them are desperate. their great guilt, now 'gins to bite the spirits. i do beseech you that are of suppler joints, follow them swiftly and hinder them from what this ecstasy may now provoke them to.
what would you, desdemona?
master shallow, i owe you a thousand pound.
follow, i pray you.
that i did love the moor to live with him, my downright violence and storm of fortunes even to the very quality of my lord. i saw othello's visage in his mind, and to his honors and his valiant parts did i my soul and fortunes consecrate. a moth of peace and he go to the war, the rites for which i love him are bereft me, and i a heavy interim shall support by his dear absence. let me go with him.
home with me.
(to ferdinand) if i have too austerely punished you, your compensation makes amends, for i have given you here a third of mine own life, or that for which i live, who once again were but my trials of thy love and thou hast strangely stood the test. here, afore heaven, i ratify this my rich gift. o ferdinand, do not smile at me that i boast of her, and make it halt behind her.
vouch with me, heaven, i therefore beg it not to please the palate of my appetite,
that can hardly be, master shallow. do not you grieve at this. i shall be sent for in private to him. look you, he must seem thus to the world. fear not your advancements. i will
 i do believe it against an oracle.
nor to comply with heat the young affects in my defunct and proper satisfaction, and heaven defend your good souls, that you think i will your serious and great business scant when she is with me. no, when light-winged toys of feathered cupid seel with wanton dullness that my disports corrupt and taint my business, let housewives make a skillet of my helm and all indign and base adversities make head against my estimation.
i cannot well perceive how, unless you should give me your doublet and stuff me out with straw. i beseech you, good sir john, let me have five hundred of my thousand.
then as my gift and thine own acquisition worthily purchased, take my daughter. but all sanctimonious ceremonies may with full and holy rite be ministered, no sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall to make this contract grow, but barren hate, the union of your bed with weeds so loathly that you shall hate it both. therefore take heed, as hymen's lamps shall light you.
either for her stay or going. th' affair cries haste and speed must answer it.
sir, i will be as good as my word. this that you heard was
as i hope for quiet days, fair issue, and long life, the most opportune place, the strong'st suggestion, our worser genius can shall never melt mine honor into lust to take away the edge of that day's celebration or night kept chained below.
you must away tonight.
a color that i fear you will die in, sir john.
fairly spoke. sit then and talk with her. she is thine own., what, ariel! my industrious servant, ariel!
with all my heart.
fear no colors. go with me to dinner., come, lieutenant pistol., come, bardolph., i shall be sent for soon at night.
what would my potent master? here i am.
at nine i' th' morning here we'll meet again. and he shall our commission bring to you, and such things else of quality and respect as doth import you.
go, carry sir john falstaff to the fleet.
did worthily perform, and i must use you in such another trick. go bring the rabble, o'er whom i give thee power, here to this place. incite them to quick motion, for i must some vanity of mine art. it is my promise, and they expect it from me.
so please your grace, my ancient. a man he is of honesty and trust. with what else needful your good grace shall think to be sent after me.
my lord, my lord, 
presently?
let it be so. good night to every one., (to brabantio) and, noble signior, your son-in-law is far more fair than black.
i cannot now speak. i will hear you soon., take them away.
ay, with a twink.
adieu, brave moor. use desdemona well.
si fortune me tormenta, spero me contenta.
before you can say "come" and "go," each one, tripping on his toe,
look to her, moor, if thou hast eyes to see. she has deceived her father, and may thee.
he hath intent his wonted followers shall all be very well provided for, but all are banished till their conversations appear more wise and modest to the world.
will be here with mop and mow. do you love me, master, no?
my desdemona must i leave to thee. i prithee, let thy wife attend on her, and bring them after in the best advantage. come, desdemona, i have but an hour to spend with thee. we must obey the time.
and so they are.
dearly my delicate ariel. do not approach
iago.
the king hath called his parliament, my lord.
well, i conceive.
what say'st thou, noble heart?
he hath.
(to ferdinand) look thou be true. do not give dalliance too much the rein. the strongest oaths are straw to th' fire i' th' blood. be more abstemious, or else, goodnight your vow.
what will i do, think'st thou?
i will lay odds that, ere this year expire, we bear our civil swords and native fire whose music, to my thinking, pleased the king. come, will you hence?
i warrant you, sir, abates the ardor of my liver.
why, go to bed, and sleep.
first my fear; then my curtsy, last my speech. my fear is your displeasure my curtsy my duty; and my speech, to beg your for what i have to say is of mine own making, and what indeed i should say will, i doubt, prove mine own marring. but to the purpose, and so to the venture. be it known to you, as it is very well, i was lately here in the end of a displeasing i meant indeed to pay you with this, which, if like an ill venture it come unluckily home, i break, and you, my gentle creditors, lose. here i promised you i would be, and here i commit my body to your mercies. bate me some, and i will infinitely. and so i kneel down before you, but, indeed, to pray for the queen. if my tongue cannot entreat you to acquit me, will you command me to use my legs? and yet that were but light will make any possible satisfaction, and so would i. all the gentlewomen here have forgiven me; if the gentlemen will not, then the gentlemen do not agree with the gentlewomen, which was never seen before in such an assembly. cloyed with fat meat, our humble author will continue the story, with sir john in it, and make you merry with fair katherine of france, where, for anything i know, falstaff shall die of a sweat, unless already he be killed with your the man. my tongue is weary; when my legs are too, i will bid you good night.
well., now come, my ariel! bring a corollary, rather than want a spirit. appear and pertly!, 
i will incontinently drown myself.
no tongue. all eyes! be silent.
if thou dost i shall never love thee after. why, thou silly gentleman!
now is the winter of our discontent made glorious summer by this son of york, and all the clouds that loured upon our house in the deep bosom of the ocean buried. our bruisèd arms hung up for monuments, our stern alarums changed to merry meetings, our dreadful marches to delightful measures. grim-visaged war hath smoothed his wrinkled front; to fright the souls of fearful adversaries, he capers nimbly in a lady's chamber to the lascivious pleasing of a lute. but i, that am not shaped for sportive tricks, i, that am rudely stamped and want love's majesty to strut before a wanton ambling nymph; i, that am curtailed of this fair proportion, cheated of feature by dissembling nature, into this breathing world, scarce half made up, and that so lamely and unfashionable that dogs bark at me as i halt by them, why, i, in this weak piping time of peace, unless to see my shadow in the sun and descant on mine own deformity.
of wheat, rye, barley, vetches, oats, and peas; thy turfy mountains, where live nibbling sheep, and flat meads thatched with stover, them to keep; thy banks with pionèd and twillèd brims,
it is silliness to live when to live is torment, and then have we a prescription to die when death is our physician.
and therefore, since i cannot prove a lover to entertain these fair well-spoken days, and hate the idle pleasures of these days. plots have i laid, inductions dangerous, by drunken prophecies, libels and dreams, to set my brother clarence and the king and if king edward be as true and just as i am subtle, false, and treacherous, this day should clarence closely be mewed up about a prophecy which says that "g" dive, thoughts, down to my soul. here clarence comes.
to make cold nymphs chaste crowns; and thy broom groves, whose shadow the dismissèd bachelor loves, being lass-lorn; thy pole-clipped vineyard; and thy sea-marge, sterile and rocky hard, whose watery arch and messenger am i, bids thee leave these, and with her sovereign grace,
oh, villainous! i have looked upon the world for four times seven years, and since i could distinguish betwixt a benefit and an injury i never found man that knew how to love himself. ere i would say i would drown myself for the love of a guinea hen, i would change my humanity with a baboon.
brother, good day. what means this armèd guard that waits upon your grace?
here on this grass plot, in this very place, to come and sport. her peacocks fly amain.
what should i do? i confess it is my shame to be so fond, but it is not in my virtue to amend it.
his majesty, tend'ring my person's safety, hath appointed
hail, many-colored messenger, that ne'er dost disobey the wife of jupiter; who with thy saffron wings upon my flowers diffusest honey drops, refreshing showers; my bosky acres and my unshrubbed down, rich scarf to my proud earth. why hath thy queen summoned me hither to this short-grassed green?
virtue? a fig! 'tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus. our bodies are our gardens, to the which our wills are gardeners. so that if we will plant nettles or sow lettuce, set hyssop and weed up thyme, supply it with one gender of herbs or distract it with many, either to have it sterile with idleness, or manured with industry, why, the power and corrigible authority of this lies in our wills. if the balance of our lives had not one scale of reason to poise another of sensuality, the blood and baseness of our natures would conduct us to most prepost'rous conclusions. but we have reason to cool our raging motions, our carnal stings, our unbitted lusts. whereof i take this that you call love to be a sect or scion.
upon what cause?
a contract of true love to celebrate, on the blessed lovers.
it cannot be.
because my name is george.
tell me, heavenly bow, if venus or her son, as thou dost know, do now attend the queen? since they did plot the means that dusky dis my daughter got, i have forsworn.
it is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the will. come, be a man. drown thyself? drown cats and blind puppies! i have professed me thy friend, and i confess me knit to thy deserving with cables of perdurable toughness.
alack, my lord, that fault is none of yours. he should, for that, commit your godfathers. o, belike his majesty hath some intent but what's the matter, clarence? may i know?
of her society be not afraid. i met her deity cutting the clouds towards paphos, and her son dove-drawn with her. here thought they to have done whose vows are that no bed-right shall be paid till hymen's torch be lighted, but in vain. mars's hot minion is returned again. her waspish-headed son has broke his arrows, and be a boy right out.
i could never better stead thee than now. put money in thy purse. follow thou the wars, defeat thy favor with an usurped beard. i say, put money in thy purse. it cannot be long that desdemona should continue her love to the moor, put money in thy purse, nor he his to her. it was a violent commencement in her, and thou shalt see an answerable sequestration, put but money in thy purse. these moors are changeable in their wills, fill thy purse with money. the food that to him now is as luscious as locusts shall be to him shortly as bitter as coloquintida. she must change for youth. when she is sated with his body she will find the errors of her choice. therefore, put money in thy purse. if thou wilt needs damn thyself, do it a more delicate way than drowning. make all the money thou canst. if sanctimony and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian and supersubtle venetian be not too hard for my wits and all the tribe of hell, thou shalt enjoy her. therefore make money. a pox of drowning thyself! 'tis clean out of the way. seek thou rather to be hanged in compassing thy joy than to be drowned and go without her.
yea, richard, when i know, for i protest as yet i do not. but, as i can learn, he hearkens after prophecies and dreams, and says a wizard told him that by "g" his issue disinherited should be. and for my name of george begins with g, it follows in his thought that i am he. have moved his highness to commit me now.
highest queen of state, great juno, comes. i know her by her gait.
wilt thou be fast to my hopes, if i depend on the issue?
why, this it is when men are ruled by women. 'tis not the king that sends you to the tower. my lady grey his wife, clarence, 'tis she was it not she and that good man of worship, anthony woodeville, her brother there, that made him send lord hastings to the tower, from whence this present day he is delivered?
how does my bounteous sister? go with me to bless this twain that they may prosperous be,
thou art sure of me. go, make money. i have told thee often, and i re-tell thee again and again, i hate the moor. my cause is hearted. thine hath no less reason. let us be conjunctive in our revenge against him. if thou canst cuckold him, thou dost thyself a pleasure, me a sport. there are many events in the womb of time which will be delivered. traverse, go, provide thy money. we will have more of this tomorrow. adieu.
by heaven, i think there is no man is secure but the queen's kindred and night-walking heralds that trudge betwixt the king and mistress shore. heard ye not what an humble suppliant
(sings) honor, riches, marriage, blessing, long continuance, and increasing, hourly joys be still upon you. juno sings her blessings on you.
where shall we meet i' th' morning?
humbly complaining to her deity got my lord chamberlain his liberty. i'll tell you what: i think it is our way, if we will keep in favor with the king, the jealous o'erworn widow and herself, since that our brother dubbed them gentlewomen, are mighty gossips in this monarchy.
(sings) earth's increase, foison plenty, barns and garners never empty, vines and clustering bunches growing, plants with goodly burden bowing, spring come to you at the farthest in the very end of harvest. scarcity and want shall shun you. ceres' blessing so is on you.
at my lodging.
i beseech your graces both to pardon me. that no man shall have private conference, of what degree soever, with his brother.
this is a most majestic vision, and harmonious charmingly. may i be bold
i'll be with thee betimes.
even so. an please your worship, brakenbury, you may partake of anything we say. is wise and virtuous, and his noble queen well struck in years, fair, and not jealous. we say that shore's wife hath a pretty foot, a cherry lip, a bonny eye, a passing pleasing tongue, how say you, sir? can you deny all this?
spirits, which by mine art i have from their confines called to enact my present fancies.
go to, farewell. do you hear, roderigo?
with this, my lord, myself have naught to do.
let me live here ever. so rare a wondered father and a wife makes this place paradise.
what say you?
naught to do with mistress shore? i tell thee, fellow, he that doth naught with her, excepting one,
sweet now, silence. there's something else to do. hush and be mute, or else our spell is marred.
no more of drowning, do you hear?
what one, my lord?
you nymphs, called naiads of the windring brooks, with your sedged crowns and ever-harmless looks, answer your summons, juno does command.
i am changed.
her husband, knave. wouldst thou betray me?
come, temperate nymphs, and help to celebrate a contract of true love. be not too late.
go to, farewell. put money enough in your purse.
i do beseech your grace to pardon me, and withal forbear your conference with the noble duke.
you sunburnt sicklemen of august weary, make holiday. your rye-straw hats put on, and these fresh nymphs encounter every one in country footing.
i'll sell all my land.
we know thy charge, brakenbury, and will obey.
i had forgot that foul conspiracy against my life. the minute of their plot is almost come., well done. avoid, no more!
for i mine own gained knowledge should profane if i would time expend with such a snipe but for my sport and profit. i hate the moor, and it is thought abroad that 'twixt my sheets but i, for mere suspicion in that kind, will do as if for surety. he holds me well. the better shall my purpose work on him. cassio's a proper man. let me see now,
we are the queen's abjects and must obey., brother, farewell. i will unto the king, and whatsoe'er you will employ me in, were it to call king edward's widow "sister," meantime, this deep disgrace in brotherhood touches me deeper than you can imagine.
(to miranda) this is strange. your father's in some passion that works him strongly.
in double knavery. how? how? let's see. after some time, to abuse othello's ear that he is too familiar with his wife. he hath a person and a smooth dispose the moor is of a free and open nature that thinks men honest that but seem to be so, and will as tenderly be led by th' nose as asses are. must bring this monstrous birth to the world's light.
i know it pleaseth neither of us well.
never till this day
what from the cape can you discern at sea?
well, your imprisonment shall not be long. meantime, have patience.
(to ferdinand) you do look, my son, in a moved sort, as if you were dismayed. be cheerful, sir. our revels now are ended. these our actors, as i foretold you, were all spirits and
nothing at all. it is a high-wrought flood. i cannot 'twixt the heaven and the main descry a sail.
i must perforce. farewell.
and like the baseless fabric of this vision, the cloud-capped towers, the gorgeous palaces, the solemn temples, the great globe itself, yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve, leave not a rack behind. we are such stuff as dreams are made on, and our little life is rounded with a sleep. sir, i am vexed. bear with my weakness. my old brain is troubled. if you be pleased, retire into my cell and there repose. a turn or two i'll walk to still my beating mind.
a fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements. if it hath ruffianed so upon the sea what ribs of oak, when mountains melt on them, can hold the mortise? what shall we hear of this?
go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return. simple, plain clarence, i do love thee so if heaven will take the present at our hands. but who comes here? the new-delivered hastings?
we wish your peace.
for do but stand upon the foaming shore, the chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds, the wind-shaked surge, with high and monstrous mane, seems to cast water on the burning bear, i never did like molestation view on the enchafèd flood.
good time of day unto my gracious lord.
come with a thought. i thank thee, ariel. come.
if that the turkish fleet be not ensheltered and embayed, they are drowned.
as much unto my good lord chamberlain. how hath your lordship brooked imprisonment?
thy thoughts i cleave to. what's thy pleasure?
news, lads, our wars are done! the desperate tempest hath so banged the turks, that their designment halts. a noble ship of venice hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance
with patience, noble lord, as prisoners must. but i shall live, my lord, to give them thanks that were the cause of my imprisonment.
spirit, we must prepare to meet with caliban.
how? is this true?
for they that were your enemies are his and have prevailed as much on him as you.
ay, my commander. when i presented ceres, i thought to have told thee of it, but i feared
the ship is here put in, a veronesa. michael cassio, lieutenant to the warlike moor othello, is come on shore. the moor himself at sea
more pity that the eagle should be mewed while kites and buzzards prey at liberty.
say again, where didst thou leave these varlets?
i am glad on 't. 'tis a worthy governor.
what news abroad?
i told you, sir, they were red-hot with drinking, so full of valor that they smote the air for breathing in their faces, beat the ground towards their project. then i beat my tabor, at which, like unbacked colts, they pricked their ears, advanced their eyelids, lifted up their noses as they smelt music. so i charmed their ears toothed briers, sharp furzes, pricking gorse, and thorns, which entered their frail shins. at last i left them i' th' filthy-mantled pool beyond your cell, there dancing up to th' chins, that the foul lake
but this same cassio, though he speak of comfort touching the turkish loss, yet he looks sadly and prays the moor be safe. for they were parted
no news so bad abroad as this at home: the king is sickly, weak and melancholy, and his physicians fear him mightily.
this was well done, my bird. thy shape invisible retain thou still. the trumpery in my house, go bring it hither for stale to catch these thieves.
pray heavens he be, for i have served him, and the man commands like a full soldier. let's to the seaside, ho! as well to see the vessel that's come in as to throw out our eyes for brave othello, an indistinct regard.
now, by saint paul, that news is bad indeed. and overmuch consumed his royal person. 'tis very grievous to be thought upon. where is he, in his bed?
i go, i go.
come, let's do so. for every minute is expectancy of more arrivance.
he is.
a devil, a born devil on whose nature humanely taken, all, all lost, quite lost. and as with age his body uglier grows, so his mind cankers. i will plague them all, even to roaring.
thanks, you the valiant of this warlike isle give him defense against the elements, for i have lost him on a dangerous sea.
go you before, and i will follow you.
come, hang them on this line.
is he well shipped?
he cannot live, i hope, and must not die till george be packed with post-horse up to heaven. i'll in to urge his hatred more to clarence with lies well steeled with weighty arguments, clarence hath not another day to live; which done, god take king edward to his mercy, and leave the world for me to bustle in. for then i'll marry warwick's youngest daughter. the readiest way to make the wench amends is to become her husband and her father; the which will i, not all so much for love as for another secret close intent but yet i run before my horse to market. clarence still breathes; edward still lives and reigns. when they are gone, then must i count my gains.
pray you, tread softly, that the blind mole may not hear a foot fall. we now are near his cell.
his bark is stoutly timbered and his pilot therefore my hopes, not surfeited to death, stand in bold cure.
set down, set down your honorable load, if honor may be shrouded in a hearse, whilst i awhile obsequiously lament th' untimely fall of virtuous lancaster.
monster, your fairy, which you say is a harmless fairy, has done little better than played the jack with us.
(within) a sail, a sail, a sail!
pale ashes of the house of lancaster, thou bloodless remnant of that royal blood, be it lawful that i invocate thy ghost to hear the lamentations of poor anne, stabbed by the selfsame hand that made these wounds. lo, in these windows that let forth thy life i pour the helpless balm of my poor eyes. o, cursèd be the hand that made these holes; cursèd the blood that let this blood from hence. more direful hap betide that hated wretch that makes us wretched by the death of thee than i can wish to wolves, to spiders, toads, if ever he have child, abortive be it, prodigious, and untimely brought to light, whose ugly and unnatural aspect may fright the hopeful mother at the view,
monster, i do smell all horse piss, at which my nose is in great indignation.
what noise?
if ever he have wife, let her be made more miserable by the death of him than i am made by my poor lord and thee., come now towards chertsey with your holy load,
so is mine., do you hear, monster? if i should take a displeasure against you, look you, 
stand ranks of people, and they cry "a sail!"
and still, as you are weary of this weight, rest you, whiles i lament king henry's corse.
thou wert but a lost monster.
my hopes do shape him for the governor.
stay, you that bear the corse, and set it down.
be patient, for the prize i'll bring thee to shall hoodwink this mischance. therefore speak softly. all's hushed as midnight yet.
they do discharge their shot of courtesy. our friends at least.
what black magician conjures up this fiend
ay, but to lose our bottles in the pool, 
and give us truth who 'tis that is arrived.
villains, set down the corse or, by saint paul, i'll make a corse of him that disobeys.
there is not only disgrace and dishonor in that, monster, but an infinite loss.
i shall.
my lord, stand back and let the coffin pass.
that's more to me than my wetting. yet this is your harmless fairy, monster.
but good lieutenant, is your general wived?
unmannered dog, stand thou when i command!, or by saint paul i'll strike thee to my foot and spurn upon thee, beggar, for thy boldness.
i will fetch off my bottle, though i be o'er ears for my labor.
most fortunately. he hath achieved a maid one that excels the quirks of blazoning pens, and in th' essential vesture of creation does tire the ingener.
(to gentlemen and halberds) what, do you tremble? are you all afraid? and mortal eyes cannot endure the devil., avaunt, thou dreadful minister of hell. thou hadst but power over his mortal body; his soul thou canst not have. therefore begone.
this is the mouth o' th' cell. no noise, and enter. do that good mischief which may make this island thine own for ever, and i, thy caliban, for aye thy foot-licker.
how now? who has put in?
sweet saint, for charity, be not so curst.
give me thy hand. i do begin to have bloody thoughts.
'tis one iago, ancient to the general.
foul devil, for god's sake, hence, and trouble us not, for thou hast made the happy earth thy hell, filled it with cursing cries and deep exclaims. if thou delight to view thy heinous deeds,
(seeing the apparel) o king stephano! o peer, o worthy stephano, look what a wardrobe here is for thee!
he's had most favorable and happy speed. tempests themselves, high seas, and howling winds, the guttered rocks and congregated sands, traitors ensteeped to enclog the guiltless keel, their mortal natures, letting go safely by the divine desdemona.
o, gentlemen, see, see dead henry's wounds open their congealed mouths and bleed afresh!, blush, blush, thou lump of foul deformity, for 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood thy deeds, inhuman and unnatural, provokes this deluge most unnatural., o god, which this blood mad'st, revenge his death! o earth, which this blood drink'st revenge his death! or earth gape open wide and eat him quick, as thou dost swallow up this good king's blood, which his hell-governed arm hath butcherèd!
let it alone, thou fool. it is but trash.
what is she?
lady, you know no rules of charity,
(puts on a gown) o king stephano!
she that i spake of, our great captain's captain, whose footing here anticipates our thoughts a se'nnight's speed. great jove, othello guard, and swell his sail with thine own powerful breath, that he may bless this bay with his tall ship, give renewed fire to our extincted spirits and bring all cyprus comfort!
villain, thou know'st not law of god nor man. no beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity.
put off that gown, trinculo. by this hand, i'll have that gown.
oh, behold, the riches of the ship is come on shore! you men of cyprus, let her have your knees. before, behind thee, and on every hand, enwheel thee round!
but i know none, and therefore am no beast.
thy grace shall have it.
i thank you, valiant cassio. what tidings can you tell me of my lord?
o, wonderful, when devils tell the truth!
to dote thus on such luggage? let's alone, and do the murder first. if he awake, from toe to crown he'll fill our skins with pinches, make us strange stuff.
but that he's well and will be shortly here.
vouchsafe, divine perfection of a woman, of these supposèd crimes to give me leave by circumstance but to acquit myself.
be you quiet, monster., mistress line, is not this my jerkin? now is the jerkin under the line., now, jerkin, you are like to lose your hair and prove a bald jerkin.
oh, but i fear. how lost you company?
vouchsafe, defused infection of a man, by circumstance to curse thy cursèd self.
do, do. we steal by line and level, an 't like your grace.
the great contention of the sea and skies parted our fellowship, 
fairer than tongue can name thee, let me have some patient leisure to excuse myself.
i thank thee for that jest. here's a garment for 't. wit shall not go unrewarded while i am king of this country. "steal by line and level" is an excellent pass of pate. there's another garment for 't.
(within) a sail, a sail!
fouler than heart can think thee, thou canst make
monster, come, put some lime upon your fingers, and away with the rest.
but, hark! a sail.
by such despair i should accuse myself.
and all be turned to barnacles or to apes with foreheads villainous low.
they give this greeting to the citadel. this likewise is a friend.
and by despairing shalt thou stand excused for doing worthy vengeance on thyself that didst unworthy slaughter upon others.
monster, lay to your fingers. help to bear this away where my hogshead of wine is, or i'll turn you out of my kingdom. go to, carry this.
see for the news.
say that i slew them not.
and this.
good ancient, you are welcome., welcome, mistress. let it not gall your patience, good iago, that i extend my manners. 'tis my breeding that gives me this bold show of courtesy.
then say they were not slain. but dead they are, and devilish slave, by thee.
ay, and this.
sir, would she give you so much of her lips you'll have enough.
i did not kill your husband.
hey, mountain, hey!
alas, she has no speech!
why then, he is alive.
silver. there it goes, silver!
in faith, too much. i find it still, when i have leave to sleep. she puts her tongue a little in her heart and chides with thinking.
nay, he is dead, and slain by edward's hands.
fury, fury!, there, tyrant, there. hark, hark!
you have little cause to say so.
in thy foul throat thou liest. queen margaret saw thy murd'rous falchion smoking in his blood, the which thou once didst bend against her breast, but that thy brothers beat aside the point.
with dry convulsions, shorten up their sinews with agèd cramps, and more pinch-spotted make them than pard or cat o' mountain.
come on, come on. you are pictures out of door, bells in your parlors, wild-cats in your kitchens, saints in your injuries, devils being offended, players in your housewifery, and housewives in your beds.
that laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders.
hark, they roar.
oh, fie upon thee, slanderer!
thou wast provokèd by thy bloody mind, that never dream'st on aught but butcheries. didst thou not kill this king?
let them be hunted soundly. at this hour shortly shall all my labors end, and thou shalt have the air at freedom. for a little follow, and do me service.
you rise to play and go to bed to work.
i grant you.
now does my project gather to a head. my charms crack not, my spirits obey, and time goes upright with his carriage. how's the day?
you shall not write my praise.
dost grant me, hedgehog? then, god grant me too thou mayst be damnèd for that wicked deed. o, he was gentle, mild, and virtuous.
on the sixth hour, at which time, my lord,
no, let me not.
the better for the king of heaven that hath him.
i did say so when first i raised the tempest. say, my spirit, how fares the king and 's followers?
what wouldst thou write of me, if thou should'st praise me?
he is in heaven, where thou shalt never come.
confined together in the same fashion as you gave in charge, just as you left them, all prisoners, sir, they cannot budge till your release. the king, his brother, and yours, abide all three distracted, and the remainder mourning over them, brimful of sorrow and dismay. but chiefly his tears run down his beard like winter's drops from eaves of reeds. your charm so strongly works 'em that if you now beheld them, your affections would become tender.
o gentle lady, do not put me to 't,
let him thank me, that holp to send him thither, for he was fitter for that place than earth.
dost thou think so, spirit?
come on, assay. there's one gone to the harbor?
and thou unfit for any place but hell.
mine would, sir, were i human.
ay, madam.
yes, one place else, if you will hear me name it.
and mine shall. hast thou, which art but air, a touch, a feeling of their afflictions, and shall not myself, one of their kind, that relish all as sharply passion as they, be kindlier moved than thou art? yet with my nobler reason 'gainst my fury do i take part. the rarer action is in virtue than in vengeance. they being penitent, the sole drift of my purpose doth extend my charms i'll break, their senses i'll restore, and they shall be themselves.
i am not merry, but i do beguile the thing i am by seeming otherwise.
some dungeon.
i'll fetch them, sir.
i am about it, but indeed my invention comes from my pate as birdlime does from frieze, it plucks out brains and all. but my muse labors and thus she is delivered: the one's for use, the other useth it.
your bedchamber.
(tracing a circle on the ground) ye elves of hills, brooks, standing lakes, and groves, do chase the ebbing neptune and do fly him when he comes back; you demi-puppets that by moonshine do the green sour ringlets make, whereof the ewe not bites; and you whose pastime to hear the solemn curfew; by whose aid, weak masters though ye be, i have bedimmed the noontide sun, called forth the mutinous winds, and 'twixt the green sea and the azured vault have i given fire, and rifted jove's stout oak
well praised! how if she be black and witty?
ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest!
with his own bolt; the strong-based promontory have i made shake, and by the spurs plucked up the pine and cedar; graves at my command by my so potent art. but this rough magic i here abjure, and when i have required some heavenly music, which even now i do, to work mine end upon their senses that bury it certain fathoms in the earth, and deeper than did ever plummet sound i'll drown my book.
if she be black, and thereto have a wit, she'll find a white that shall her blackness fit.
so will it, madam till i lie with you.
a solemn air and the best comforter now useless, boiled within thy skull., there stand, for you are spell-stopped., (to gonzalo) holy gonzalo, honorable man, mine eyes, ev'n sociable to the show of thine, (aside) the charm dissolves apace, and as the morning steals upon the night, melting the darkness, so their rising senses begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle their clearer reason., my true preserver and a loyal sir
worse and worse!
i hope so.
to him you follow'st, i will pay thy graces home both in word and deed., (to alonso) most cruelly thy brother was a furtherer in the act., (to sebastian) thou art pinched for 't now, sebastian., (to antonio)flesh and blood, you brother mine, that entertained ambition, whose inward pinches therefore are most strong, would here have killed your king, i do forgive thee, unnatural though thou art. (aside) their understanding begins to swell, and the approaching tide that now lies foul and muddy. not one of them that yet looks on me, or would know me., (to ariel) ariel, fetch me the hat and rapier in my cell. as i was sometime milan. quickly, spirit. thou shalt ere long be free.
how if fair and foolish?
i know so. but, gentle lady anne, and fall something into a slower method, is not the causer of the timeless deaths of these plantagenets, henry and edward, as blameful as the executioner?
(sings and helps to attire prospero) where the bee sucks, there suck i. in a cowslip's bell i lie. there i couch when owls do cry. on the bat's back i do fly after summer merrily. merrily, merrily shall i live now under the blossom that hangs on the bough.
she never yet was foolish that was fair, for even her folly helped her to an heir.
thou wast the cause and most accursed effect.
why, that's my dainty ariel. i shall miss thee, to the king's ship, invisible as thou art. there shalt thou find the mariners asleep
these are old fond paradoxes to make fools laugh i' th' alehouse. what miserable praise hast thou for her that's foul and foolish?
your beauty was the cause of that effect, your beauty, that did haunt me in my sleep to undertake the death of all the world, so i might live one hour in your sweet bosom.
under the hatches. the master and the boatswain being awake, enforce them to this place,
but does foul pranks which fair and wise ones do.
these nails should rend that beauty from my cheeks.
i drink the air before me, and return or ere your pulse twice beat.
oh, heavy ignorance! thou praisest the worst best. but what praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed, one that in the authority of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very malice itself?
these eyes could never endure that beauty's wrack. you should not blemish it, if i stood by. as all the world is cheerèd by the sun,
all torment, trouble, wonder, and amazement inhabits here. some heavenly power guide us
she that was ever fair and never proud, had tongue at will and yet was never loud, fled from her wish and yet said "now i may," she that being angered, her revenge being nigh, bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly, she that in wisdom never was so frail she that could think and ne'er disclose her mind, see suitors following and not look behind, she was a wight, if ever such wights were, 
black night o'ershade thy day, and death thy life.
(to alonso) behold, sir king, the wrongèd duke of milan, prospero. for more assurance that a living prince does now speak to thee, i embrace thy body. a hearty welcome. (embraces alonso)
to do what?
curse not thyself, fair creature; thou art both.
whe'er thou beest he or no, or some enchanted trifle to abuse me, as late i have been, i not know. thy pulse beats as of flesh and blood. and since i saw thee, i fear a madness held me. this must crave, an if this be at all, a most strange story. thy dukedom i resign and do entreat thou pardon me my wrongs. but how should prospero
to suckle fools and chronicle small beer.
i would i were, to be revenged on thee.
(to gonzalo) first, noble friend, let me embrace thine age, whose honor cannot be measured or confined.
oh, most lame and impotent conclusion! do not learn of him, emilia, though he be thy husband. how say you, cassio? is he not a most profane and liberal counselor?
it is a quarrel most unnatural
whether this be or be not, i'll not swear.
he speaks home, madam. you may relish him more in the soldier than in the scholar.
it is a quarrel just and reasonable to be revenged on him that killed my husband.
you do yet taste believe things certain. welcome, my friends all. (aside to sebastian and antonio) but you, my brace of lords, were i so minded, i here could pluck his highness' frown upon you i will tell no tales.
(aside) he takes her by the palm. ay, well said, whisper! with as little a web as this will i ensnare as great a fly as cassio. ay, smile upon her, do, i will gyve thee in thine own courtship. you say true, 'tis so, indeed.
he that bereft thee, lady, of thy husband did it to help thee to a better husband.
the devil speaks in him.
if such tricks as these strip you out of your lieutenantry, it had been better you had not kissed your three fingers so oft, which now again you are most apt to play the sir in. very good, well kissed, and excellent courtesy! 'tis so, indeed. yet again your fingers to your lips? would they were clyster-pipes for your sake!, 
his better doth not breathe upon the earth.
no., (to antonio) for you, most wicked sir, whom to call brother would even infect my mouth, i do forgive thy rankest fault, all of them, and require thou must restore.
the moor! i know his trumpet.
he lives that loves thee better than he could.
if thou beest prospero, give us particulars of thy preservation, how thou hast met us here, whom three hours since were wracked upon this shore, where i have lost, my dear son ferdinand.
'tis truly so.
name him.
i am woe for 't, sir.
let's meet him and receive him.
plantagenet.
irreparable is the loss, and patience says it is past her cure.
lo, where he comes!
why, that was he.
i rather think you have not sought her help, of whose soft grace and rest myself content.
oh my fair warrior!
the selfsame name, but one of better nature.
you the like loss?
my dear othello!
where is he?
as great to me as late. and supportable to make the dear loss have i means much weaker than you may call to comfort you, for i
it gives me wonder great as my content to see you here before me. oh, my soul's joy! may the winds blow till they have wakened death, and let the laboring bark climb hills of seas olympus-high, and duck again as low as hell's from heaven! if it were now to die, my soul hath her content so absolute that not another comfort like to this succeeds in unknown fate.
here.
a daughter? o heavens, that they were living both in naples, the king and queen there! that they were, i wish myself were mudded in that oozy bed where my son lies., when did you lose your daughter?
the heavens forbid but that our loves and comforts should increase,
why dost thou spit at me?
at this encounter do so much admire that they devour their reason and scarce think their eyes do offices of truth, their words are natural breath., but howsoev'r you have that i am prospero and that very duke which was thrust forth of milan, who most strangely upon this shore where you were wracked, was landed, to be the lord on 't.
amen to that, sweet powers! i cannot speak enough of this content. it stops me here, it is too much of joy. and this, and this, the greatest discords be (kissing her) that e'er our hearts shall make!
would it were mortal poison for thy sake.
no more yet of this, not a relation for a breakfast, nor befitting this first meeting. (to alonso) welcome, sir. this cell's my court. here have i few attendants my dukedom since you have given me again, i will requite you with as good a thing, at least bring forth a wonder to content ye as much as me my dukedom.
oh, you are well tuned now, but i'll set down the pegs that make this music, as honest as i am.
never came poison from so sweet a place.
(to ferdinand) sweet lord, you play me false.
come, let us to the castle. news, friends! our wars are done, the turks are drowned. how does my old acquaintance of this isle?, i have found great love amongst them. o my sweet, i prattle out of fashion, and i dote in mine own comforts., i prithee, good iago, go to the bay and disembark my coffers. he is a good one, and his worthiness does challenge much respect., come, desdemona, once more, well met at cyprus.
never hung poison on a fouler toad. out of my sight! thou dost infect mine eyes.
no, my dearest love, i would not for the world.
do thou meet me presently at the harbor., come hither. if thou be'st valiant, as they say base men being in love have then a nobility in their natures more than is native to them, list me. the lieutenant tonight watches on the court of guard. first, i must tell thee this: desdemona is directly in love with him.
thine eyes, sweet lady, have infected mine.
yes, for a score of kingdoms you should wrangle, and i would call it fair play.
with him? why, 'tis not possible.
would they were basilisks to strike thee dead.
if this prove shall i twice lose.
lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed. mark me with what violence she first loved the moor, but for bragging and telling her fantastical lies. to love him still for prating? let not thy discreet heart think it. her eye must be fed, and what delight shall she have to look on the devil? when the blood is made dull with the act of sport, there should be a game to inflame it and to give satiety a fresh appetite, loveliness in favor, sympathy in years, manners and beauties. all which the moor is defective in. now for want of these required conveniences, her delicate tenderness will find itself abused, begin to heave the gorge, disrelish and abhor the moor. very nature will instruct her in it and compel her to some second choice. now sir, this granted, as it is a most pregnant and unforced position, who stands so eminent in the degree of this fortune as cassio does? a knave very voluble, no further conscionable than in putting on the mere form of civil and humane seeming, for the better compassing of his salt and most hidden loose affection. why, none, why, none! a slipper and subtle knave, a finder of occasions that has an eye, can stamp and counterfeit advantages, though true advantage never present itself. a devilish knave. besides, the knave is handsome, young, and hath all those requisites in him that folly and green minds look after. a pestilent complete knave, and the woman hath found him already.
i would they were, that i might die at once, for now they kill me with a living death. those eyes of thine from mine have drawn salt tears, shamed their aspect with store of childish drops. no, when my father york and edward wept to hear the piteous moan that rutland made when black-faced clifford shook his sword at him; nor when thy warlike father, like a child, and twenty times made pause to sob and weep, that all the standers-by had wet their cheeks like trees bedashed with rain, in that sad time, my manly eyes did scorn an humble tear; thy beauty hath, and made them blind with weeping. i never sued to friend, nor enemy; my tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word. but now thy beauty is proposed my fee,
a most high miracle!
i cannot believe that in her. she's full of most blessed condition.
teach not thy lip such scorn, for it were made for kissing, lady, not for such contempt. if thy revengeful heart cannot forgive, lo, here i lend thee this sharp-pointed sword, and let the soul forth that adoreth thee, i lay it naked to the deadly stroke and humbly beg the death upon my knee.
(seeing alonso and kneeling) though the seas threaten, they are merciful. i have cursed them without cause.
blessed fig's-end! the wine she drinks is made of grapes. if she had been blessed, she would never have loved the moor. blessed pudding! didst thou not see her paddle with the palm of his hand? didst not mark that?
nay, do not pause; for i did kill king henry, nay, now dispatch; 'twas i that stabbed young edward, but 'twas thy heavenly face that set me on.
now all the blessings arise, and say how thou camest here.
yes, that i did, but that was but courtesy.
take up the sword again, or take up me.
oh, wonder! how many goodly creatures are there here! how beauteous mankind is! o brave new world, that has such people in 't!
lechery, by this hand, an index and obscure prologue to the history of lust and foul thoughts. they met so near with their lips that their breaths embraced together. villainous thoughts, roderigo! when these mutabilities so marshal the way, hard at hand comes the master and main exercise, th' incorporate conclusion. pish! but, sir, be you ruled by me. i have brought you from venice. watch you tonight for the command, i'll lay 't upon you. cassio knows you not. i'll not be far from you. do you find some occasion to anger cassio, either by speaking too loud, or tainting his discipline, or from what other course you please, which the time shall more favorably minister.
arise, dissembler. though i wish thy death,
'tis new to thee.
well.
(rising) then bid me kill myself, and i will do it.
what is this maid with whom thou wast at play? your eld'st acquaintance cannot be three hours. is she the goddess that hath severed us and brought us thus together?
sir, he's rash and very sudden in choler, and haply may strike at you. provoke him that he may. for even out of that will i cause these of cyprus to mutiny, whose qualification shall come into no true taste again but by the displanting of cassio. so shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by the means i shall then have to prefer them, and the impediment most profitably removed, without the which there were no expectation of our prosperity.
i have already.
sir, she is mortal. i chose her when i could not ask my father for his advice, nor thought i had one. she is daughter to this famous duke of milan, of whom so often i have heard renown received a second life. and second father this lady makes him to me.
i will do this, if you can bring it to any opportunity.
that was in thy rage. speak it again and, even with the word, this hand, which for thy love did kill thy love, to both their deaths shalt thou be accessory.
i am hers. but oh, how oddly will it sound that i must ask my child forgiveness!
i warrant thee. meet me by and by at the citadel. i must fetch his necessaries ashore. farewell.
i would i knew thy heart.
there, sir, stop. a heaviness that's gone.
adieu.
'tis figured in my tongue.
i have inly wept, or should have spoke ere this. look down, you gods, and on this couple drop a blessèd crown, for it is you that have chalked forth the way
that cassio loves her, i do well believe 't. that she loves him, 'tis apt and of great credit. the moor, howbeit that i endure him not, is of a constant, loving, noble nature, a most dear husband. now, i do love her too, not out of absolute lust, though peradventure i stand accountant for as great a sin, but partly led to diet my revenge, hath leaped into my seat. the thought whereof doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards, and nothing can or shall content my soul till i am evened with him, wife for wife. at least into a jealousy so strong that judgment cannot cure. which thing to do, if this poor trash of venice, whom i trace for his quick hunting, stand the putting on, abuse him to the moor in the right garb (for i fear cassio with my night-cape too) make the moor thank me, love me, and reward me for making him egregiously an ass even to madness. 'tis here, but yet confused. knavery's plain face is never seen till used.
i fear me both are false.
i say amen, gonzalo.
it is othello's pleasure, our noble and valiant general, that, upon certain tidings now arrived, importing the mere perdition of the turkish fleet, every man put himself into triumph: some to dance, some to make bonfires, each man to what sport and revels his addiction leads him. for besides these beneficial news, it is the celebration of his nuptial. so much was his pleasure should be proclaimed. all offices are open, and there is full liberty of feasting from this present hour of five till the bell have told eleven. bless the isle of cyprus and our noble general othello!
then never man was man true.
was milan thrust from milan, that his issue should become kings of naples? o, rejoice beyond a common joy, and set it down with gold on lasting pillars. in one voyage and ferdinand, her brother, found a wife where he himself was lost; prospero, his dukedom in a poor isle; and all of us, ourselves when no man was his own.
good michael, look you to the guard tonight. let's teach ourselves that honorable stop not to outsport discretion.
well, well, put up your sword.
let grief and sorrow still embrace his heart that doth not wish you joy.
iago hath direction what to do, will i look to 't.
say then my peace is made.
be it so. amen.
iago is most honest. michael, good night. tomorrow with your earliest let me have speech with you., come, my dear love, that profit's yet to come 'tween me and you. good night.
that shall you know hereafter.
oh, look, sir, look, sir! here is more of us. i prophesied if a gallows were on land, (to boatswain) now, blasphemy, that swear'st grace o'erboard, not an oath on shore? hast thou no mouth by land? what is the news?
welcome, iago. we must to the watch.
but shall i live in hope?
the best news is that we have safely found which, but three glasses since, we gave out split, is tight and yare and bravely rigged as when we first put out to sea.
not this hour, lieutenant, 'tis not yet ten o' the clock. our general cast us thus early for the love of his desdemona, who let us not therefore blame. he hath not yet made wanton the night with her, and she is sport for jove.
all men i hope live so.
(aside to prospero) sir, all this service
she's a most exquisite lady.
vouchsafe to wear this ring.
(aside to ariel) my tricksy spirit!
and, i'll warrant her, full of game.
to take is not to give.
these are not natural events. they strengthen from strange to stranger., (to boatswain) say, how came you hither?
indeed she's a most fresh and delicate creature.
look, how this ring encompasseth finger; even so thy breast encloseth my poor heart. and if thy poor devoted servant may but beg one favor at thy gracious hand, thou dost confirm his happiness forever.
i'd strive to tell you. we were dead of sleep and, how, we know not, all clapped under hatches, where but even now with strange and several noises of roaring, shrieking, howling, jingling chains, we were awaked, straightway at liberty, where we, in all her trim, freshly beheld our royal, good, and gallant ship, our master capering to eye her. on a trice, so please you, and were brought moping hither.
what an eye she has! methinks it sounds a parley to provocation.
what is it?
(aside to prospero) was 't well done?
an inviting eye, and yet methinks right modest.
to him that hath more cause to be a mourner, and presently repair to crosby house, where, after i have solemnly interred at chertsey monast'ry this noble king i will with all expedient duty see you. for divers unknown reasons, i beseech you, grant me this boon.
(aside to ariel) bravely, my diligence. thou shalt be free.
and when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?
with all my heart, and much it joys me too tressel and berkeley, go along with me.
this is as strange a maze as e'er men trod, was ever conduct of. some oracle must rectify our knowledge.
she is indeed perfection.
bid me farewell.
sir, my liege, do not infest your mind with beating on the strangeness of this business. at picked leisure which to you shall seem probable, of every these happened accidents. till when, be cheerful and think of each thing well. (aside to ariel) come hither, spirit. untie the spell.
well, happiness to their sheets! come, lieutenant, i have a stoup of wine, and here without are a brace of cyprus gallants that would fain have a measure to the health of black othello.
'tis more than you deserve; but since you teach me how to flatter you,
how fares my gracious sir? there are yet missing of your company some few odd lads that you remember not.
not tonight, good iago. i have very poor and unhappy brains for drinking. i could well wish courtesy would invent some other custom of entertainment.
sirs, take up the corse.
every man shift for all the rest and let no man take care for himself, for all is but fortune. coraggio, bully-monster, coraggio!
oh, they are our friends. but one cup. i'll drink for you.
towards chertsey, noble lord?
if these be true spies which i wear in my head, here's a goodly sight.
i have drunk but one cup tonight, and that was craftily qualified too, and behold what innovation it makes here. i am unfortunate in the infirmity, and dare not task my weakness with any more.
no, to whitefriars. there attend my coming.
o setebos, these be brave spirits indeed! he will chastise me.
what, man, 'tis a night of revels! the gallants desire it.
was ever woman in this humor wooed? i'll have her, but i will not keep her long. what, i that killed her husband and his father, to take her in her heart's extremest hate, with curses in her mouth, tears in her eyes, having god, her conscience, and these bars against me, and i no friends to back my suit at all but the plain devil and dissembling looks? and yet to win her, all the world to nothing! hath she forgot already that brave prince, edward, her lord, whom i some three months since stabbed in my angry mood at tewkesbury? a sweeter and a lovellier gentleman, young, valiant, wise, and, no doubt, right royal, the spacious world cannot again afford.
ha, ha! what things are these, my lord antonio? will money buy 'em?
where are they?
and will she yet abase her eyes on me, that cropped the golden prime of this sweet prince on me, whose all not equals edward's moiety? on me, that halts and am misshapen thus? my dukedom to a beggarly denier, i do mistake my person all this while! myself to be a marv'lous proper man. i'll be at charges for a looking glass and entertain a score or two of tailors to study fashions to adorn my body. i will maintain it with some little cost. but first i'll turn yon fellow in his grave and then return lamenting to my love. shine out, fair sun, till i have bought a glass,
very like. one of them is a plain fish, and no doubt marketable.
here at the door. i pray you call them in.
have patience, madam. there's no doubt his majesty will soon recover his accustomed health.
then say if they be true. (indicates caliban) this misshapen knave, his mother was a witch, and one so strong that could control the moon, make flows and ebbs, these three have robbed me, and this demi-devil, for he's a bastard one, had plotted with them to take my life. two of these fellows you must know and own. this thing of darkness i
i'll do 't, but it dislikes me.
in that you brook it ill, it makes him worse. therefore, for god's sake, entertain good comfort
i shall be pinched to death.
with that which he hath drunk tonight already, he'll be as full of quarrel and offense as my young mistress' dog. now my sick fool roderigo, whom love hath turned almost the wrong side out, potations pottle-deep, and he's to watch. three lads of cyprus, noble swelling spirits (that hold their honors in a wary distance, the very elements of this warlike isle) and they watch too. now 'mongst this flock of drunkards am i to put our cassio in some action that may offend the isle. but here they come. if consequence do but approve my dream
if he were dead, what would betide on me?
is not this stephano, my drunken butler?
'fore heaven, they have given me a rouse already.
no other harm but loss of such a lord.
he is drunk now. where had he wine?
good faith, a little one, not past a pint, as i am a soldier.
the loss of such a lord includes all harms.
and trinculo is reeling ripe. where should they how camest thou in this pickle?
some wine, ho! (sings) and let me the cannikin clink, clink, a soldier's a man, a life's but a span, why then let a soldier drink. some wine, boys!
the heavens have blessed you with a goodly son
i have been in such a pickle since i saw you last that, i fear me, will never out of my bones. i shall not fear flyblowing.
fore heaven, an excellent song.
ah, he is young, and his minority is put unto the trust of richard gloucester, a man that loves not me nor none of you.
why, how now, stephano?
i learned it in england where indeed they are most potent in potting. your dane, your german, and your swag-bellied hollander, drink, ho!, are nothing to your english.
is it concluded that he shall be protector?
o, touch me not. i am not stephano, but a cramp.
is your englishman so expert in his drinking?
but so it must be if the king miscarry.
you'd be king o' th' isle, sirrah?
why, he drinks you with facility your dane dead drunk; he sweats not to overthrow your almain. he gives your hollander a vomit ere the next pottle can be filled.
here comes the lord of buckingham, and derby.
i should have been a sore one then.
to the health of our general!
(to queen elizabeth) good time of day unto your royal grace.
(indicating caliban) this is a strange thing as e'er i looked on.
i am for it, lieutenant, and i'll do you justice.
god make your majesty joyful, as you have been.
as in his shape., (to caliban) go, sirrah, to my cell. take with you your companions. as you look to have my pardon, trim it handsomely.
oh, sweet england! (sings) king stephen was a worthy peer, his breeches cost him but a crown, with that he called the tailor lown. he was a wight of high renown, and thou art but of low degree, 'tis pride that pulls the country down, some wine, ho!
the countess richmond, good my lord of derby, to your good prayer will scarcely say amen. yet, derby, notwithstanding she's your wife and loves not me, be you, good lord, assured
ay, that i will. and i'll be wise hereafter was i, to take this drunkard for a god and worship this dull fool!
why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.
i do beseech you either not believe the envious slanders of her false accusers, or if she be accused in true report, bear with her weakness, which i think proceeds
go to, away.
will you hear 't again?
saw you the king today, my lord of derby?
(to stephano and trinculo) hence, and bestow your luggage where you found it.
no, for i hold him to be unworthy of his place that does those things. well, heaven's above all, and there be souls must be saved, and there be souls must not be saved.
but now the duke of buckingham and i are come from visiting his majesty.
or stole it, rather.
it's true, good lieutenant.
what likelihood of his amendment, lords?
sir, i invite your highness and your train to my poor cell, where you shall take your rest for this one night, which, part of it, i'll waste with such discourse as, i not doubt, shall make it and the particular accidents gone by since i came to this isle. and in the morn i'll bring you to your ship and so to naples, where i have hope to see the nuptial and thence retire me to my milan, where every third thought shall be my grave.
for mine own part, no offence to the general nor any man of quality, i hope to be saved.
madam, good hope. his grace speaks cheerfully.
i long to hear the story of your life, which must take the ear strangely.
and so do i too, lieutenant.
god grant him health. did you confer with him?
i'll deliver all, and sail so expeditious that shall catch your royal fleet far off., (aside to ariel) my ariel, chick, that is thy charge. then to the elements be free, and fare thou well!, please you, draw near.
ay, but (by your leave) not before me. the lieutenant is to be saved before the ancient. let's have no more of this, let's to our affairs., forgive us our sins!, gentlemen, let's look to our business. do not think, gentlemen, i am drunk. this is my ancient, this is my right hand, and this is my left. i am not drunk now. i can stand well enough, and i speak well enough.
ay, madam. he desires to make atonement betwixt the duke of gloucester and your brothers, and betwixt them and my lord chamberlain,
now my charms are all o'erthrown, and what strength i have's mine own, which is most faint. now, 'tis true, i must be here confined by you, since i have my dukedom got and pardoned the deceiver, dwell in this bare island by your spell, but release me from my bands gentle breath of yours my sails must fill, or else my project fails, which was to please. now i want spirits to enforce, art to enchant, unless i be relieved by prayer, which pierces so that it assaults mercy itself and frees all faults. as you from crimes would pardoned be,
excellent well!
would all were well, but that will never be. i fear our happiness is at the height.
why, very well then. you must not think then that i am drunk.
they do me wrong, and i will not endure it! who is it that complains unto the king by holy paul, they love his grace but lightly that fill his ears with such dissentious rumors. because i cannot flatter and look fair, smile in men's faces, smooth, deceive and cog, i must be held a rancorous enemy. cannot a plain man live and think no harm, but thus his simple truth must be abused with silken, sly, insinuating jacks?
old john of gaunt, time-honour'd lancaster, hast thou, according to thy oath and band, brought hither henry hereford thy bold son, here to make good the boisterous late appeal, against the duke of norfolk, thomas mowbray?
to th' platform, masters. come, let's set the watch.
to whom in all this presence speaks your grace?
i have, my liege.
you see this fellow that is gone before, he is a soldier fit to stand by caesar and give direction. and do but see his vice, the one as long as th' other. 'tis pity of him. i fear the trust othello puts him in on some odd time of his infirmity will shake this island.
to thee, that hast nor honesty nor grace. when have i injured thee? when done thee wrong?, or thee?, or thee? or any of your faction? a plague upon you all! his royal grace, cannot be quiet scarce a breathing while but you must trouble him with lewd complaints.
tell me, moreover, hast thou sounded him, if he appeal the duke on ancient malice; on some known ground of treachery in him?
but is he often thus?
brother of gloucester, you mistake the matter. the king, on his own royal disposition, aiming belike at your interior hatred that in your outward actions shows itself against my children, brothers, and myself, makes him to send, that he may learn the ground.
as near as i could sift him on that argument, on some apparent danger seen in him aim'd at your highness, no inveterate malice.
he'll watch the horologe a double set if drink rock not his cradle.
that wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch. since every jack became a gentleman, there's many a gentle person made a jack.
and frowning brow to brow, ourselves will hear the accuser and the accused freely speak: high-stomach'd are they both, and full of ire, in rage deaf as the sea, hasty as fire.
it were well the general were put in mind of it. perhaps he sees it not, or his good nature and looks not on his evils. is not this true?
come, come, we know your meaning, brother gloucester. god grant we never may have need of you.
my gracious sovereign, my most loving liege!
(aside) how now, roderigo? i pray you, after the lieutenant, go!
meantime god grants that we have need of you. our brother is imprisoned by your means, myself disgraced, and the nobility are daily given to ennoble those that scarce some two days since were worth a noble.
each day still better other's happiness; until the heavens, envying earth's good hap, add an immortal title to your crown!
and 'tis great pity that the noble moor with one of an ingraft infirmity. it were an honest action to say so to the moor.
by him that raised me to this careful height from that contented hap which i enjoyed, against the duke of clarence, but have been an earnest advocate to plead for him. my lord, you do me shameful injury falsely to draw me in these vile suspects.
as well appeareth by the cause you come; namely to appeal each other of high treason. cousin of hereford, what dost thou object against the duke of norfolk, thomas mowbray?
not i, for this fair island. i do love cassio well, and would do much
of my lord hastings' late imprisonment.
in the devotion of a subject's love, tendering the precious safety of my prince, and free from other misbegotten hate, come i appellant to this princely presence. and mark my greeting well; for what i speak my body shall make good upon this earth, or my divine soul answer it in heaven. thou art a traitor and a miscreant, since the more fair and crystal is the sky, the uglier seem the clouds that in it fly. once more, the more to aggravate the note, with a foul traitor's name stuff i thy throat; what my tongue speaks my right drawn sword may prove.
but, hark! what noise?
she may, my lord, for, 
let not my cold words here accuse my zeal: tis not the trial of a woman's war, the bitter clamour of two eager tongues, the blood is hot that must be cool'd for this: yet can i not of such tame patience boast as to be hush'd and nought at all to say: first, the fair reverence of your highness curbs me which else would post until it had return'd these terms of treason doubled down his throat. setting aside his high blood's royalty, and let him be no kinsman to my liege, call him a slanderous coward and a villain: which to maintain i would allow him odds, and meet him, were i tied to run afoot even to the frozen ridges of the alps, where ever englishman durst set his foot. mean time let this defend my loyalty, by all my hopes, most falsely doth he lie.
zounds! you rogue! you rascal!
she may, lord rivers. why, who knows not so? she may do more, sir, than denying that. and then deny her aiding hand therein, and lay those honors on your high desert. what may she not? she may, ay, marry, may she, 
pale trembling coward, there i throw my gage, and lay aside my high blood's royalty, which fear, not reverence, makes thee to except. if guilty dread have left thee so much strength as to take up mine honour's pawn, then stoop: will i make good against thee, arm to arm, what i have spoke, or thou canst worse devise.
what's the matter, lieutenant?
what, marry, may she?
i take it up; and by that sword i swear which gently laid my knighthood on my shoulder, or chivalrous design of knightly trial: and when i mount, alive may i not light, if i be traitor or unjustly fight!
a knave teach me my duty?
a bachelor, a handsome stripling too. i wis, your grandam had a worser match.
what doth our cousin lay to mowbray's charge? so much as of a thought of ill in him.
beat me?
my lord of gloucester, i have too long borne your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs. with those gross taunts that oft i have endured. i had rather be a country servant-maid than a great queen with this condition, to be so baited, scorned, and stormèd at.
look, what i speak, my life shall prove it true; that mowbray hath received eight thousand nobles in name of lendings for your highness' soldiers, like a false traitor and injurious villain. besides i say and will in battle prove, or here or elsewhere to the furthest verge that ever was survey'd by english eye, complotted and contrived in this land fetch from false mowbray their first head and spring. further i say and further will maintain upon his bad life to make all this good, suggest his soon-believing adversaries, and consequently, like a traitor coward, sluiced out his innocent soul through streams of blood: which blood, like sacrificing abel's, cries, to me for justice and rough chastisement; and, by the glorious worth of my descent, this arm shall do it, or this life be spent.
dost thou prate, rogue? (strikes him)
small joy have i in being england's queen.
how high a pitch his resolution soars!
nay, good lieutenant! i pray you, sir, hold your hand. (stays him)
(aside) and lessened be that small, god i beseech him! thy honor, state, and seat is due to me.
o, let my sovereign turn away his face and bid his ears a little while be deaf, till i have told this slander of his blood, how god and good men hate so foul a liar.
let me go, sir, or i'll knock you o'er the mazzard.
(to queen elizabeth) what, threat you me with telling of the king? tell him, and spare not. look, what i have said, i dare adventure to be sent to th' tower. 'tis time to speak. my pains are quite forgot.
were he my brother, nay, my kingdom's heir, as he is but my father's brother's son, now, by my sceptre's awe, i make a vow, such neighbour nearness to our sacred blood the unstooping firmness of my upright soul: he is our subject, mowbray; so art thou: free speech and fearless i to thee allow.
come, come, you're drunk.
(aside) out, devil! i do remember them too well: thou killed'st my husband henry in the tower,
then, bolingbroke, as low as to thy heart, three parts of that receipt i had for calais disbursed i duly to his highness' soldiers; the other part reserved i by consent, for that my sovereign liege was in my debt since last i went to france to fetch his queen: now swallow down that lie. for gloucester's death, i slew him not; but to my own disgrace neglected my sworn duty in that case. the honourable father to my foe once did i lay an ambush for your life, a trespass that doth vex my grieved soul but ere i last received the sacrament your grace's pardon, and i hope i had it. this is my fault: as for the rest appeall'd, it issues from the rancour of a villain, a recreant and most degenerate traitor and interchangeably hurl down my gage upon this overweening traitor's foot, to prove myself a loyal gentleman even in the best blood chamber'd in his bosom. your highness to assign our trial day.
drunk?
(to queen elizabeth) ere you were queen, ay, or your husband king, i was a packhorse in his great affairs, a weeder-out of his proud adversaries, a liberal rewarder of his friends.
wrath-kindled gentlemen, be ruled by me; let's purge this choler without letting blood: this we prescribe, though no physician; forget, forgive; conclude and be agreed; our doctors say this is no month to bleed. good uncle, let this end where it begun; we'll calm the duke of norfolk, you your son.
(aside to roderigo) away, i say, go out, and cry a mutiny., 
(aside) ay, and much better blood than his or thine.
throw down, my son, the duke of norfolk's gage.
nay, good lieutenant! alas, gentlemen, help, masters!, here's a goodly watch indeed!
(to queen elizabeth) in all which time, you and your husband grey were factious for the house of lancaster., and, rivers, so were you. , was not your husband let me put in your minds, if you forget, what you have been ere this, and what you are; withal, what i have been, and what i am.
and, norfolk, throw down his.
who's that which rings the bell?, diablo, ho! the town will rise. fie, fie, lieutenant, you'll be ashamed for ever.
(aside) a murd'rous villain, and so still thou art.
when, harry, when? obedience bids i should not bid again.
what is the matter here?
ay, and forswore himself, which jesu pardon!, 
norfolk, throw down, we bid; there is no boot.
i bleed still, i am hurt to the death. he dies!
(aside) which god revenge!
myself i throw, dread sovereign, at thy foot. my life thou shalt command, but not my shame: the one my duty owes; but my fair name, despite of death that lives upon my grave, i am disgraced, impeach'd and baffled here, pierced to the soul with slander's venom'd spear, the which no balm can cure but his heart-blood which breathed this poison.
hold, for your lives!
to fight on edward's party for the crown; and for his meed, poor lord, he is mewed up. or edward's soft and pitiful, like mine. i am too childish-foolish for this world.
give me his gage: lions make leopards tame.
hold, ho! lieutenant, sir, montano, gentlemen, hold! the general speaks to you. hold, for shame!
(aside) hie thee to hell for shame, and leave the world, thou cacodemon! there thy kingdom is.
yea, but not change his spots: take but my shame. and i resign my gage. my dear dear lord, the purest treasure mortal times afford men are but gilded loam or painted clay. a jewel in a ten-times-barr'd-up chest is a bold spirit in a loyal breast. mine honour is my life; both grow in one: then, dear my liege, mine honour let me try; in that i live and for that will i die.
why, how now, ho! from whence ariseth this? are we turned turks? and to ourselves do that which heaven hath forbid the ottomites? he that stirs next to carve for his own rage holds his soul light, he dies upon his motion. silence that dreadful bell, it frights the isle from her propriety. what is the matter, masters?, speak, who began this? on thy love, i charge thee.
which here you urge to prove us enemies, we followed then our lord, our sovereign king. so should we you, if you should be our king.
cousin, throw up your gage; do you begin.
i do not know. friends all but now, even now, in quarter, and in terms like bride and groom divesting them for bed. and then, but now,
if i should be? i had rather be a peddler.
o, god defend my soul from such deep sin! or with pale beggar-fear impeach my height before this out-dared dastard? ere my tongue shall wound my honour with such feeble wrong, or sound so base a parle, my teeth shall tear and spit it bleeding in his high disgrace, where shame doth harbour, even in mowbray's face.
swords out, and tilting one at other's breasts in opposition bloody. i cannot speak any beginning to this peevish odds, and would in action glorious i had lost
as little joy, my lord, as you suppose you should enjoy were you this country's king, as little joy may you suppose in me that i enjoy, being the queen thereof.
we were not born to sue, but to command; which since we cannot do to make you friends, at coventry, upon saint lambert's day: there shall your swords and lances arbitrate the swelling difference of your settled hate: since we can not atone you, we shall see lord marshal, command our officers at arms be ready to direct these home alarms.
how comes it, michael, you are thus forgot?
for i am she, and altogether joyless. i can no longer hold me patient.
alas, the part i had in woodstock's blood doth more solicit me than your exclaims, to stir against the butchers of his life! but since correction lieth in those hands put we our quarrel to the will of heaven; who, when they see the hours ripe on earth, will rain hot vengeance on offenders' heads.
i pray you pardon me, i cannot speak.
hear me, you wrangling pirates, that fall out in sharing that which you have pilled from me! if not, that i am queen, you bow like subjects, yet that, by you deposed, you quake like rebels., ah, gentle villain, do not turn away.
finds brotherhood in thee no sharper spur? edward's seven sons, whereof thyself art one, were as seven vials of his sacred blood, or seven fair branches springing from one root: some of those seven are dried by nature's course, but thomas, my dear lord, my life, my gloucester, one vial full of edward's sacred blood, one flourishing branch of his most royal root, is crack'd, and all the precious liquor spilt, by envy's hand and murder's bloody axe. ah, gaunt, his blood was thine! that bed, that womb, that metal, that self-mould, that fashion'd thee made him a man; and though thou livest and breathest, in some large measure to thy father's death, in that thou seest thy wretched brother die, who was the model of thy father's life. call it not patience, gaunt; it is despair: thou showest the naked pathway to thy life, teaching stern murder how to butcher thee: that which in mean men we intitle patience is pale cold cowardice in noble breasts. the best way is to venge my gloucester's death.
worthy montano, you were wont be civil. the gravity and stillness of your youth in mouths of wisest censure. what's the matter that you unlace your reputation thus and spend your rich opinion for the name of a night-brawler? give me answer to it.
foul, wrinkled witch, what mak'st thou in my sight?
god's is the quarrel; for god's substitute, his deputy anointed in his sight, hath caused his death: the which if wrongfully, an angry arm against his minister.
your officer iago can inform you, while i spare speech, which something now offends me, of all that i do know. nor know i aught by me that's said or done amiss this night, and to defend ourselves it be a sin when violence assails us.
that will i make before i let thee go.
where then, alas, may i complain myself?
now, by heaven, my blood begins my safer guides to rule, and passion, having my best judgment collied,
wert thou not banishèd on pain of death?
to god, the widow's champion and defence.
or do but lift this arm, the best of you shall sink in my rebuke. give me to know how this foul rout began, who set it on, and he that is approved in this offence, shall lose me. what, in a town of war yet wild, the people's hearts brimful of fear, to manage private and domestic quarrel? in night, and on the court and guard of safety?
i was, but i do find more pain in banishment than death can yield me here by my abode. (to queen elizabeth) and thou a kingdom; , all of you, allegiance. the sorrow that i have by right is yours, and all the pleasures you usurp are mine.
why, then, i will. farewell, old gaunt. our cousin hereford and fell mowbray fight: o, sit my husband's wrongs on hereford's spear, that it may enter butcher mowbray's breast! or, if misfortune miss the first career, they may break his foaming courser's back, and throw the rider headlong in the lists, a caitiff recreant to my cousin hereford! farewell, old gaunt: thy sometimes brother's wife
if partially affined or leagued in office thou dost deliver more or less than truth thou art no soldier.
when thou didst crown his warlike brows with paper, and with thy scorns drew'st rivers from his eyes, and then, to dry them, gav'st the duke a clout steeped in the faultless blood of pretty rutland, denounced against thee, are all fall'n upon thee, and god, not we, hath plagued thy bloody deed.
sister, farewell; i must to coventry: as much good stay with thee as go with me!
touch me not so near. i had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth yet i persuade myself to speak the truth shall nothing wrong him. this it is, general: montano and myself being in speech, there comes a fellow crying out for help to execute upon him. sir, this gentleman steps in to cassio and entreats his pause, myself the crying fellow did pursue, lest by his clamor, as it so fell out, outran my purpose, and i returned then rather for that i heard the clink and fall of swords and cassio high in oath, which till tonight i ne'er might say before. when i came back, at blow and thrust, even as again they were when you yourself did part them. more of this matter cannot i report.
so just is god to right the innocent.
yet one word more: grief boundeth where it falls, not with the empty hollowness, but weight: for sorrow ends not when it seemeth done. commend me to thy brother, edmund york. lo, this is all:, nay, yet depart not so; though this be all, do not so quickly go; with all good speed at plashy visit me. alack, and what shall good old york there see but empty lodgings and unfurnish'd walls, unpeopled offices, untrodden stones? therefore commend me; let him not come there, to seek out sorrow that dwells every where. desolate, desolate, will i hence and die: the last leave of thee takes my weeping eye.
but men are men, the best sometimes forget. as men in rage strike those that wish them best, yet surely cassio, i believe, received from him that fled some strange indignity which patience could not pass.
o, 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe,
my lord aumerle, is harry hereford arm'd?
i know, iago, making it light to cassio. cassio, i love thee but never more be officer of mine., 
tyrants themselves wept when it was reported.
yea, at all points; and longs to enter in.
look, if my gentle love be not raised up! i'll make thee an example.
no man but prophesied revenge for it.
the duke of norfolk, sprightfully and bold, stays but the summons of the appellant's trumpet.
what's the matter, dear?
northumberland, then present, wept to see it.
for nothing but his majesty's approach.
all's well, sweeting, come away to bed., (to montano) sir, for your hurts myself will be your surgeon. lead him off.
what, were you snarling all before i came, and turn you all your hatred now on me? did york's dread curse prevail so much with heaven that henry's death, my lovelly edward's death, their kingdom's loss, my woeful banishment, can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven? why then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses! though not by war, by surfeit die your king, as ours by murder to make him a king.
marshal, demand of yonder champion the cause of his arrival here in arms: ask him his name and orderly proceed
iago, look with care about the town come, desdemona, 'tis the soldiers' life to have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.
edward thy son, that now is prince of wales, for edward our son, that was prince of wales, die in his youth by like untimely violence. thyself a queen, for me that was a queen, long mayst thou live to wail thy children's death and see another, as i see thee now, decked in thy rights, as thou art stalled in mine. long die thy happy days before thy death, die neither mother, wife, nor england's queen., rivers and dorset, you were standers-by, and so wast thou, lord hastings, when my son was stabbed with bloody daggers. god i pray him but by some unlooked accident cut off.
in god's name and the king's, say who thou art and why thou comest thus knightly clad in arms, against what man thou comest, and what thy quarrel: speak truly, on thy knighthood and thy oath;
what, are you hurt, lieutenant?
have done thy charm, thou hateful, withered hag.
my name is thomas mowbray, duke of norfolk; who hither come engaged by my oath, which god defend a knight should violate!, both to defend my loyalty and truth against the duke of hereford that appeals me and, by the grace of god and this mine arm, to prove him, in defending of myself, a traitor to my god, my king, and me:
ay, past all surgery.
and leave out thee? stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me. if heaven have any grievous plague in store o, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe and then hurl down their indignation on thee, the troubler of the poor world's peace. the worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul. and take deep traitors for thy dearest friends. no sleep close up that deadly eye of thine, unless it be while some tormenting dream affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils.
marshal, ask yonder knight in arms, both who he is and why he cometh hither thus plated in habiliments of war, and formally, according to our law,
marry, heaven forbid!
thou that wast sealed in thy nativity the slave of nature and the son of hell, thou slander of thy heavy mother's womb, thou loathèd issue of thy father's loins,
what is thy name? and wherefore comest thou hither, before king richard in his royal lists? against whom comest thou? and what's thy quarrel? speak like a true knight, so defend thee heaven!
reputation, reputation, reputation! oh, i have lost my reputation! i have lost the immortal part of myself, and what remains is bestial. my reputation, iago, my reputation!
margaret.
am i; who ready here do stand in arms, to prove, by god's grace and my body's valour, in lists, on thomas mowbray, duke of norfolk, that he is a traitor, foul and dangerous, and as i truly fight, defend me heaven!
as i am an honest man, i thought you had received some bodily wound. there is more sense in that than in reputation. reputation is an idle and most false imposition, oft got without merit and lost without deserving. you have lost no reputation at all unless you repute yourself such a loser. what, man, there are ways to recover the general again. you are but now cast in his mood, a punishment more in policy than in malice, even so as one would beat his offenseless dog to affright an imperious lion. sue to him again and he's yours.
richard!
on pain of death, no person be so bold or daring-hardy as to touch the lists, except the marshal and such officers
i will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a commander with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an officer. drunk? and speak parrot? and squabble? swagger? swear? and discourse fustian with one's own shadow? o thou invisible spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be known by, let us call thee devil!
ha?
lord marshal, let me kiss my sovereign's hand, and bow my knee before his majesty: for mowbray and myself are like two men that vow a long and weary pilgrimage; and loving farewell of our several friends.
what was he that you followed with your sword? what had he done to you?
i call thee not.
the appellant in all duty greets your highness, and craves to kiss your hand and take his leave.
i know not.
i cry thee mercy, then, for i did think that thou hadst called me all these bitter names.
we will descend and fold him in our arms. so be thy fortune in this royal fight! farewell, my blood; which if to-day thou shed, lament we may, but not revenge thee dead.
is 't possible?
o, let me make the period to my curse!
o let no noble eye profane a tear as confident as is the falcon's flight against a bird, do i with mowbray fight. my loving lord, i take my leave of you; of you, my noble cousin, lord aumerle; but lusty, young, and cheerly drawing breath. lo, as at english feasts, so i regreet the daintiest last, to make the end most sweet: o thou, the earthly author of my blood, doth with a twofold vigour lift me up to reach at victory above my head, add proof unto mine armour with thy prayers; and with thy blessings steel my lance's point, and furbish new the name of john a gaunt, even in the lusty havior of his son.
i remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly. a quarrel, but nothing wherefore. oh, that men should put an enemy in their mouths to steal away their brains! that we should, with joy, pleasance revel and applause, transform ourselves into beasts!
'tis done by me, and ends in "margaret."
god in thy good cause make thee prosperous! be swift like lightning in the execution; fall like amazing thunder on the casque of thy adverse pernicious enemy: rouse up thy youthful blood, be valiant and live.
why, but you are now well enough. how came you thus recovered?
(to queen margaret) thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.
mine innocency and saint george to thrive!
it hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place to the devil wrath. one unperfectness shows me another, to make me frankly despise myself.
why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider, whose deadly web ensnareth thee about? fool, fool, thou whet'st a knife to kill thyself. the day will come that thou shalt wish for me
there lives or dies, true to king richard's throne, a loyal, just and upright gentleman: never did captive with a freer heart cast off his chains of bondage and embrace more than my dancing soul doth celebrate this feast of battle with mine adversary. most mighty liege, and my companion peers, take from my mouth the wish of happy years: go i to fight: truth hath a quiet breast.
come, you are too severe a moraler. as the time, the place, and the condition of this country stands, i could heartily wish this had not befallen. but since it is as it is, mend it for your own good.
false-boding woman, end thy frantic curse, lest to thy harm thou move our patience.
farewell, my lord: securely i espy virtue with valour couched in thine eye. order the trial, marshal, and begin.
i will ask him for my place again, he shall tell me i am a drunkard. had i as many mouths as hydra, such an answer would stop them all. to be now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and presently a beast! oh, strange! every inordinate cup is unblessed and the ingredient is a devil.
foul shame upon you, you have all moved mine.
receive thy lance; and god defend the right!
come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature, if it be well used. exclaim no more against it. and, good lieutenant, i think you think i love you.
were you well served, you would be taught your duty.
strong as a tower in hope, i cry amen.
i have well approved it, sir. i drunk!
teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects. o, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!
go bear this lance to thomas, duke of norfolk.
you or any man living may be drunk at a time, man. i tell you what you shall do. our general's wife is now the general. i may say so in this respect, for that he hath devoted and given up himself to the contemplation, mark, and denotement of her parts and graces. confess yourself freely to her, importune her help to put you in your place again. she is of so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition, she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more than she is requested. this broken joint between you and her husband entreat her to splinter, and, my fortunes against any lay worth naming, this crack of your love shall grow stronger than it was before.
(to rivers) dispute not with her; she is lunatic.
harry of hereford, lancaster and derby, on pain to be found false and recreant, to prove the duke of norfolk, thomas mowbray, a traitor to his god, his king and him; and dares him to set forward to the fight.
you advise me well.
peace, master marquess, you are malapert. o, that your young nobility could judge what 'twere to lose it and be miserable! they that stand high have many blasts to shake them, and if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.
on pain to be found false and recreant, both to defend himself and to approve henry of hereford, lancaster, and derby, to god, his sovereign and to him disloyal; attending but the signal to begin.
i protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.
good counsel, marry. , learn it, learn it, marquess.
sound, trumpets; and set forward, combatants.
i think it freely, and betimes in the morning i will beseech the virtuous desdemona to undertake for me. i am desperate of my fortunes if they check me.
it touches you, my lord, as much as me.
stay, the king hath thrown his warder down.
you are in the right. good night, lieutenant, i must to the watch.
ay, and much more; but i was born so high. our aerie buildeth in the cedar's top, and dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.
let them lay by their helmets and their spears, withdraw with us: and let the trumpets sound while we return these dukes what we decree.
good night, honest iago.
witness my son, now in the shade of death, whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath hath in eternal darkness folded up. your aerie buildeth in our aerie's nest. as it was won with blood, lost be it so.
draw near, and list what with our council we have done. with that dear blood which it hath fostered; and for our eyes do hate the dire aspect of civil wounds plough'd up with neighbours' sword; and for we think the eagle-winged pride with rival-hating envy, set on you to wake our peace, which in our country's cradle draws the sweet infant breath of gentle sleep; which so roused up with boisterous untuned drums, and grating shock of wrathful iron arms, might from our quiet confines fright fair peace and make us wade even in our kindred's blood, therefore, we banish you our territories: till twice five summers have enrich'd our fields shall not regreet our fair dominions, but tread the stranger paths of banishment.
when this advice is free i give and honest, probal to thinking and indeed the course to win the moor again? for 'tis most easy th' inclining desdemona to subdue as the free elements. and then for her to win the moor, were to renounce his baptism, all seals and symbols of redeemèd sin, his soul is so enfettered to her love, even as her appetite shall play the god with his weak function. how am i then a villain to counsel cassio to this parallel course, directly to his good? divinity of hell! they do suggest at first with heavenly shows as i do now. for whiles this honest fool plies desdemona to repair his fortune and she for him pleads strongly to the moor,
peace, peace, for shame, if not for charity.
your will be done: this must my comfort be, and those his golden beams to you here lent shall point on me and gild my banishment.
that she repeals him for her body's lust. and by how much she strives to do him good she shall undo her credit with the moor. so will i turn her virtue into pitch that shall enmesh them all.
urge neither charity nor shame to me. (addressing the others) and shamefully my hopes by you are butchered. my charity is outrage, life my shame, and in that shame still live my sorrows' rage.
norfolk, for thee remains a heavier doom, which i with some unwillingness pronounce: the dateless limit of thy dear exile; the hopeless word of 'never to return' breathe i against thee, upon pain of life.
how now, roderigo!
have done, have done.
a heavy sentence, my most sovereign liege, a dearer merit, not so deep a maim as to be cast forth in the common air, have i deserved at your highness' hands. the language i have learn'd these forty years, and now my tongue's use is to me no more than an unstringed viol or a harp, or like a cunning instrument cased up, or, being open, put into his hands within my mouth you have engaol'd my tongue, doubly portcullis'd with my teeth and lips; and dull unfeeling barren ignorance is made my gaoler to attend on me. too far in years to be a pupil now: what is thy sentence then but speechless death, which robs my tongue from breathing native breath?
i do follow here in the chase not like a hound that hunts, but one that fills up the cry. my money is almost spent, i have been tonight exceedingly well cudgeled, and i think the issue will be i shall have so much experience for my pains. and so, with no money at all and a little more wit, return again to venice.
in sign of league and amity with thee. now fair befall thee and thy noble house! thy garments are not spotted with our blood, nor thou within the compass of my curse.
it boots thee not to be compassionate:
how poor are they that have not patience! what wound did ever heal but by degrees? and wit depends on dilatory time. does't not go well? cassio hath beaten thee. and thou, by that small hurt, hath cashiered cassio. though other things grow fair against the sun, content thyself awhile. in troth, 'tis morning. pleasure and action make the hours seem short. retire thee, go where thou art billeted. away, i say, thou shalt know more hereafter.
the lips of those that breathe them in the air.
then thus i turn me from my country's light, to dwell in solemn shades of endless night.
two things are to be done: my wife must move for cassio to her mistress. i'll set her on. myself, the while, to draw the moor apart and bring him jump when he may cassio find dull not device by coldness and delay.
i will not think but they ascend the sky, and there awake god's gentle-sleeping peace. (aside to buckingham) look when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites, his venom tooth will rankle to the death. have not to do with him. beware of him. sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,
return again, and take an oath with thee. lay on our royal sword your banish'd hands; our part therein we banish with yourselves, to keep the oath that we administer: you never shall, so help you truth and god! embrace each other's love in banishment; nor never write, regreet, nor reconcile this louring tempest of your home-bred hate; nor never by advised purpose meet to plot, contrive, or complot any ill
masters, play here, i will content your pains. something that's brief, and bid "good morrow, general."
what doth she say, my lord of buckingham?
i swear.
why masters, have your instruments been in naples, that they speak i' th' nose thus?
nothing that i respect, my gracious lord.
and i, to keep all this.
how, sir? how?
what, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel, and soothe the devil that i warn thee from? when he shall split thy very heart with sorrow, and say poor margaret was a prophetess., live each of you the subjects to his hate, and he to yours, and all of you to god's.
norfolk, so far as to mine enemy:, by this time, had the king permitted us, banish'd this frail sepulchre of our flesh, as now our flesh is banish'd from this land: confess thy treasons ere thou fly the realm; since thou hast far to go, bear not along
are these, i pray you, wind instruments?
my hair doth stand an end to hear her curses.
no, bolingbroke: if ever i were traitor, my name be blotted from the book of life, and i from heaven banish'd as from hence! but what thou art, god, thou, and i do know; farewell, my liege. now no way can i stray; save back to england, all the world's my way.
ay, marry, are they, sir.
and so doth mine. i muse why she's at liberty.
uncle, even in the glasses of thine eyes i see thy grieved heart: thy sad aspect pluck'd four away.
oh, thereby hangs a tail.
i cannot blame her. by god's holy mother, she hath had too much wrong, and i repent my part thereof that i have done to her.
six frozen winter spent, return with welcome home from banishment.
whereby hangs a tale, sir?
i never did her any, to my knowledge.
how long a time lies in one little word! end in a word: such is the breath of kings.
marry sir, by many a wind instrument that i know. but, masters, here's money for you, and the general so likes your music that he desires you, for love's sake, to make no more noise with it.
yet you have all the vantage of her wrong. i was too hot to do somebody good that is too cold in thinking of it now. marry, as for clarence, he is well repaid; god pardon them that are the cause thereof.
i thank my liege, that in regard of me he shortens four years of my son's exile: but little vantage shall i reap thereby; can change their moons and bring their times about my oil-dried lamp and time-bewasted light shall be extinct with age and endless night; my inch of taper will be burnt and done,
well, sir, we will not.
a virtuous and a christian-like conclusion to pray for them that have done scathe to us.
why uncle, thou hast many years to live.
if you have any music that may not be heard, to 't again. but, as they say, to hear music the general does not greatly care.
so do i ever (aside) being well-advised,
but not a minute, king, that thou canst give: shorten my days thou canst with sullen sorrow, and pluck nights from me, but not lend a morrow; but stop no wrinkle in his pilgrimage; thy word is current with him for my death, but dead, thy kingdom cannot buy my breath.
we have none such, sir.
madam, his majesty doth call for you,, and for your grace, , and yours, my gracious lords.
thy son is banish'd upon good advice, why at our justice seem'st thou then to lour?
then put up your pipes in your bag, for i'll away. go, vanish into air, away!
catesby, i come. , lords, will you go with me?
things sweet to taste prove in digestion sour. you urged me as a judge; but i had rather you would have bid me argue like a father. to smooth his fault i should have been more mild: a partial slander sought i to avoid, and in the sentence my own life destroy'd. alas, i look'd when some of you should say, but you gave leave to my unwilling tongue against my will to do myself this wrong.
dost thou hear, my honest friend?
we wait upon your grace.
cousin, farewell; and, uncle, bid him so: six years we banish him, and he shall go.
no, i hear not your honest friend, i hear you.
the secret mischiefs that i set abroach i lay unto the grievous charge of others. clarence, whom i indeed have cast in darkness, i do beweep to many simple gulls, and tell them 'tis the queen and her allies that stir the king against the duke my brother. now they believe it and withal whet me to be revenged on rivers, dorset, grey; tell them that god bids us do good for evil; and thus i clothe my naked villainy with odd old ends stolen out of holy writ, and seem a saint when most i play the devil.
from where you do remain let paper show.
prithee, keep up thy quillets. there's a poor piece of gold for thee. if the gentlewoman that attends the general's wife be stirring, tell her there's one cassio entreats her a little favour of speech. wilt thou do this?
how now, my hardy, stout, resolvèd mates? are you now going to dispatch this thing?
my lord, no leave take i; for i will ride, as far as land will let me, by your side.
she is stirring, sir. if she will stir hither, i shall seem to notify unto her.
we are, my lord, and come to have the warrant that we may be admitted where he is.
o, to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,
in happy time, iago.
he gives a paper when you have done, repair to crosby place. but, sirs, be sudden in the execution, withal obdurate; do not hear him plead, may move your hearts to pity if you mark him.
i have too few to take my leave of you, when the tongue's office should be prodigal to breathe the abundant dolour of the heart.
you have not been abed, then?
tut, tut, my lord, we will not stand to prate. talkers are no good doers. be assured we go to use our hands and not our tongues.
thy grief is but thy absence for a time.
why, no. the day had broke before we parted. i have made bold, iago, is that she will to virtuous desdemona procure me some access.
i like you lads. about your business straight. go, go, dispatch.
joy absent, grief is present for that time.
i'll send her to you presently, and i'll devise a mean to draw the moor may be more free.
we will, my noble lord.
what is six winters? they are quickly gone.
i humbly thank you for't.
why looks your grace so heavily today?
to men in joy; but grief makes one hour ten.
i never knew a florentine more kind and honest.
o, i have passed a miserable night, so full of ugly dreams, of ugly sights, that, as i am a christian faithful man, though 'twere to buy a world of happy days, so full of dismal terror was the time.
call it a travel that thou takest for pleasure.
good morrow, good lieutenant. i am sorry the general and his wife are talking of it, and she speaks for you stoutly. the moor replies that he you hurt is of great fame in cyprus and great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom and needs no other suitor but his likings to take the safest occasion by the front to bring you in again.
what was your dream, my lord? i pray you tell me.
my heart will sigh when i miscall it so,
yet i beseech you, if you think fit, or that it may be done, with desdemona alone.
methoughts that i had broken from the tower and in my company my brother gloucester, who from my cabin tempted me to walk upon the hatches. thence we looked toward england and cited up a thousand fearful times, that had befall'n us. as we paced along upon the giddy footing of the hatches, methought that gloucester stumbled, and in falling struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard o lord, methought what pain it was to drown, what dreadful noise of waters in my ears, what sights of ugly death within my eyes. methoughts i saw a thousand fearful wracks, wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl, inestimable stones, unvalued jewels, all scattered in the bottom of the sea.
the sullen passage of thy weary steps esteem as foil wherein thou art to set the precious jewel of thy home return.
pray you come in. i will bestow you where you shall have time to speak your bosom freely.
some lay in dead men's skulls, and in the holes as 'twere in scorn of eyes, reflecting gems, that wooed the slimy bottom of the deep and mocked the dead bones that lay scattered by.
nay, rather, every tedious stride i make i wander from the jewels that i love. must i not serve a long apprenticehood to foreign passages, and in the end, having my freedom, boast of nothing else
i am much bound to you.
had you such leisure in the time of death
all places that the eye of heaven visits are to a wise man ports and happy havens. teach thy necessity to reason thus; there is no virtue like necessity. but thou the king. woe doth the heavier sit, where it perceives it is but faintly borne. go, say i sent thee forth to purchase honour and not the king exiled thee; or suppose and thou art flying to a fresher clime: look what thy soul holds dear, imagine it to lie that way thou go'st, not whence thou comest: suppose the singing birds musicians, the flowers fair ladies, and thy steps no more than a delightful measure or a dance; for gnarling sorrow hath less power to bite the man that mocks at it and sets it light.
these letters give, iago, to the pilot, and by him do my duties to the senate. that done, i will be walking on the works, repair there to me.
methought i had, and often did i strive to yield the ghost, but still the envious flood stopped in my soul and would not let it forth to find the empty, vast, and wand'ring air, who almost burst to belch it in the sea.
by thinking on the frosty caucasus? or cloy the hungry edge of appetite by bare imagination of a feast? or wallow naked in december snow o, no! the apprehension of the good gives but the greater feeling to the worse: fell sorrow's tooth doth never rankle more than when he bites, but lanceth not the sore.
well, my good lord, i'll do 't.
awaked you not in this sore agony?
had i thy youth and cause, i would not stay.
this fortification, gentlemen, shall we see 't?
no, no, my dream was lengthened after life. o, then began the tempest to my soul. with that sour ferryman which poets write of, unto the kingdom of perpetual night. the first that there did greet my stranger-soul was my great father-in-law, renownèd warwick, can this dark monarchy afford false clarence?" and so he vanished. then came wand'ring by a shadow like an angel, with bright hair dabbled in blood, and he shrieked out aloud
then, england's ground, farewell; sweet soil, adieu; my mother, and my nurse, that bears me yet! where'er i wander, boast of this i can,
we'll wait upon your lordship.
that stabbed me in the field by tewkesbury. seize on him, furies. take him unto torment." with that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends environed me and howlèd in mine ears i trembling waked, and for a season after could not believe but that i was in hell, such terrible impression made my dream.
we did observe. cousin aumerle, how far brought you high hereford on his way?
be thou assured, good cassio, i will do all my abilities in thy behalf.
no marvel, lord, though it affrighted you.
i brought high hereford, if you call him so, but to the next highway, and there i left him.
good madam, do. i warrant it grieves my husband as if the cause were his.
ah keeper, keeper, i have done those things, that now give evidence against my soul, for edward's sake, and see how he requites me., o god, if my deep prayers cannot appease thee, yet execute thy wrath in me alone! o, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!, keeper, i prithee sit by me awhile. my soul is heavy, and i fain would sleep.
and say, what store of parting tears were shed?
but i will have my lord and you again as friendly as you were.
i will, my lord. god give your grace good rest.
faith, none for me; except the north-east wind, which then blew bitterly against our faces, awaked the sleeping rheum, and so by chance did grace our hollow parting with a tear.
bounteous madam, whatever shall become of michael cassio, he's never anything but your true servant.
sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours, makes the night morning, and the noontide night. princes have but their titles for their glories, an outward honor for an inward toil,
what said our cousin when you parted with him?
you have known him long, and be you well assured he shall in strangeness stand no farther off than in a polite distance.
they often feel a world of restless cares, so that betwixt their titles and low name there's nothing differs but the outward fame.
'farewell:' and, for my heart disdained that my tongue should so profane the word, that taught me craft to counterfeit oppression of such grief marry, would the word 'farewell' have lengthen'd hours and added years to his short banishment, he should have had a volume of farewells; but since it would not, he had none of me.
ay, but, lady, that policy may either last so long, or breed itself so out of circumstances, that, i being absent and my place supplied, my general will forget my love and service.
ho, who's here?
when time shall call him home from banishment, whether our kinsman come to see his friends. ourself and bushy, bagot here and green observed his courtship to the common people; with humble and familiar courtesy, what reverence he did throw away on slaves, wooing poor craftsmen with the craft of smiles and patient underbearing of his fortune, off goes his bonnet to an oyster-wench; a brace of draymen bid god speed him well and had the tribute of his supple knee, with 'thanks, my countrymen, my loving friends;' and he our subjects' next degree in hope.
do not doubt that. before emilia here if i do vow a friendship, i'll perform it to the last article. my lord shall never rest, i'll watch him tame and talk him out of patience.
what wouldst thou, fellow? and how cam'st thou hither?
well, he is gone; and with him go these thoughts. now for the rebels which stand out in ireland, expedient manage must be made, my liege, for their advantage and your highness' loss.
his bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift, with cassio's suit. therefore be merry, cassio, for thy solicitor shall rather die than give thy cause away.
i would speak with clarence, and i came hither on my legs.
we will ourself in person to this war: and, for our coffers, with too great a court and liberal largess, are grown somewhat light, the revenue whereof shall furnish us for our affairs in hand: if that come short, our substitutes at home shall have blank charters; whereto, when they shall know what men are rich, and send them after to supply our wants; for we will make for ireland presently.
madam, here comes my lord.
what, so brief?
bushy, what news?
madam, i'll take my leave.
'tis better, sir, to be brief than tedious., let him see our commission, and talk no more.
old john of gaunt is grievous sick, my lord, to entreat your majesty to visit him.
why, stay and hear me speak.
the noble duke of clarence to your hands. i will not reason what is meant hereby because i will be guiltless from the meaning. there lies the duke asleep, and there the keys. i'll to the king and signify to him that thus i have resigned my charge to you.
where lies he?
unfit for mine own purposes.
you may, sir. 'tis a point of wisdom. fare you well.
at ely house.
well, do your discretion.
what, shall i stab him as he sleeps?
now put it, god, in the physician's mind the lining of his coffers shall make coats to deck our soldiers for these irish wars. come, gentlemen, let's all go visit him: pray god we may make haste, and come too late!
ha! i like not that.
no. he'll say 'twas done cowardly, when he wakes.
amen.
what dost thou say?
why, he shall never wake until the great judgment day.
will the king come, that i may breathe my last in wholesome counsel to his unstaid youth?
nothing, my lord, or if, i know not what.
why, then he'll say we stabbed him sleeping.
vex not yourself, nor strive not with your breath; for all in vain comes counsel to his ear.
was not that cassio parted from my wife?
the urging of that word "judgment" hath bred a kind of remorse in me.
enforce attention like deep harmony: where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in vain, for they breathe truth that breathe their words in pain. he that no more must say is listen'd more more are men's ends mark'd than their lives before: the setting sun, and music at the close, as the last taste of sweets, is sweetest last, writ in remembrance more than things long past: my death's sad tale may yet undeaf his ear.
cassio, my lord? no, sure, i cannot think it that he would steal away so guilty-like seeing you coming.
what, art thou afraid?
no; it is stopp'd with other flattering sounds, as praises, of whose taste the wise are feared, lascivious metres, to whose venom sound report of fashions in proud italy, whose manners still our tardy apish nation limps after in base imitation. where doth the world thrust forth a vanity, that is not quickly buzzed into his ears? then all too late comes counsel to be heard, where will doth mutiny with wit's regard. direct not him whose way himself will choose:
i do believe 'twas he.
not to kill him, having a warrant, but to be damned for killing him, from the which no warrant can defend me.
methinks i am a prophet new inspired and thus expiring do foretell of him: his rash fierce blaze of riot cannot last, for violent fires soon burn out themselves; he tires betimes that spurs too fast betimes; with eager feeding food doth choke the feeder: light vanity, insatiate cormorant, consuming means, soon preys upon itself. this earth of majesty, this seat of mars, this other eden, demi-paradise, this fortress built by nature for herself against infection and the hand of war, this precious stone set in the silver sea, which serves it in the office of a wall, or as a moat defensive to a house, against the envy of less happier lands, this nurse, this teeming womb of royal kings, fear'd by their breed and famous by their birth, renowned for their deeds as far from home, for christian service and true chivalry, of the world's ransom, blessed mary's son, this land of such dear souls, this dear dear land, dear for her reputation through the world, is now leased out, i die pronouncing it, england, bound in with the triumphant sea whose rocky shore beats back the envious siege of watery neptune, is now bound in with shame, with inky blots and rotten parchment bonds: hath made a shameful conquest of itself. ah, would the scandal vanish with my life, how happy then were my ensuing death!
how now, my lord? i have been talking with a suitor here, a man that languishes in your displeasure.
i thought thou hadst been resolute.
[to john of gaunt]the king is come: deal mildly with his youth;
who is 't you mean?
so i am, to let him live.
how fares our noble uncle, lancaster?
why, your lieutenant, cassio. good my lord, his present reconciliation take. for if he be not one that truly loves you, that errs in ignorance and not in cunning, i have no judgment in an honest face.
i'll back to the duke of gloucester and tell him so.
what comfort, man? how is't with aged gaunt?
went he hence now?
nay, i prithee stay a little. i hope this passionate humor of mine will change. it was wont to hold me but while one tells twenty.
o how that name befits my composition! old gaunt indeed, and gaunt in being old: and who abstains from meat that is not gaunt? for sleeping england long time have i watch'd; watching breeds leanness, leanness is all gaunt: the pleasure that some fathers feed upon, and therein fasting, hast thou made me gaunt: gaunt am i for the grave, gaunt as a grave, whose hollow womb inherits nought but bones.
ay, sooth, so humbled that he hath left part of his grief with me to suffer with him. good love, call him back.
how dost thou feel thyself now?
can sick men play so nicely with their names?
not now, sweet desdemona. some other time.
faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me.
since thou dost seek to kill my name in me, i mock my name, great king, to flatter thee.
but shall 't be shortly?
remember our reward when the deed's done.
should dying men flatter with those that live?
the sooner, sweet, for you.
zounds, he dies! i had forgot the reward.
no, no, men living flatter those that die.
shall 't be tonight at supper?
where's thy conscience now?
thou, now a-dying, say'st thou flatterest me.
no, not tonight.
o, in the duke of gloucester's purse.
o, no! thou diest, though i the sicker be.
tomorrow dinner, then?
so when he opens his purse to give us our reward, thy conscience flies out.
i am in health, i breathe, and see thee ill.
i shall not dine at home, i meet the captains at the citadel.
'tis no matter. let it go. there's few or none will entertain it.
now he that made me knows i see thee ill; ill in myself to see, and in thee seeing ill. wherein thou liest in reputation sick; and thou, too careless patient as thou art, commit'st thy anointed body to the cure of those physicians that first wounded thee: whose compass is no bigger than thy head; and yet, incaged in so small a verge, the waste is no whit lesser than thy land. o, had thy grandsire with a prophet's eye from forth thy reach he would have laid thy shame, deposing thee before thou wert possess'd, which art possess'd now to depose thyself. why, cousin, wert thou regent of the world, but for thy world enjoying but this land, is it not more than shame to shame it so? landlord of england art thou now, not king: thy state of law is bondslave to the law; and thou, 
on tuesday noon, or night, or wednesday morn. i prithee name the time, but let it not exceed three days. in faith, he's penitent, and yet his trespass, in our common reason out of her best) is not, almost, a fault t' incur a private check. when shall he come? tell me, othello. i wonder in my soul what you would ask me that i should deny that came a-wooing with you, and so many a time, when i have spoke of you dispraisingly, hath ta'en your part, to have so much to do to bring him in? trust me, i could do much, 
what if it come to thee again?
presuming on an ague's privilege, darest with thy frozen admonition make pale our cheek, chasing the royal blood with fury from his native residence. wert thou not brother to great edward's son, this tongue that runs so roundly in thy head should run thy head from thy unreverent shoulders.
i will deny thee nothing.
i'll not meddle with it. it makes a man a coward: a man cannot steal but it accuseth him; a man cannot swear but it checks him; a man cannot lie with his neighbor's wife but it detects him. 'tis a blushing, shamefaced spirit that mutinies in a man's bosom. it fills a man full of obstacles. it made me once restore a purse of gold that by chance i found. it beggars any man that keeps it. it is turned out of towns and cities for a dangerous thing, and every man that means to live well endeavors to trust to himself and live without it.
o, spare me not, my brother edward's son, that blood already, like the pelican, hast thou tapp'd out and drunkenly caroused: my brother gloucester, plain well-meaning soul, whom fair befal in heaven 'mongst happy souls! that thou respect'st not spilling edward's blood: join with the present sickness that i have; and thy unkindness be like crooked age, to crop at once a too long wither'd flower. these words hereafter thy tormentors be! convey me to my bed, then to my grave: love they to live that love and honour have.
why, this is not a boon, 'tis as i should entreat you wear your gloves, or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm, or sue to you to do a peculiar profit wherein i mean to touch your love indeed it shall be full of poise and difficult weight and fearful to be granted.
zounds, 'tis even now at my elbow, persuading me not to kill the duke.
and let them die that age and sullens have;
i will deny thee nothing! whereon i do beseech thee, grant me this,
take the devil in thy mind, and believe him not. he would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.
i do beseech your majesty, impute his words to wayward sickliness and age in him: he loves you, on my life, and holds you dear as harry duke of hereford, were he here.
shall i deny you? no. farewell, my lord.
i am strong-framed. he cannot prevail with me.
as theirs, so mine; and all be as it is.
farewell, my desdemona. i'll come to thee straight.
spoke like a tall man that respects thy reputation. come, shall we fall to work?
my liege, old gaunt commends him to your majesty.
emilia, come., be as your fancies teach you. whate'er you be, i am obedient.
take him on the costard with the hilts of thy sword, and then throw him into the malmsey butt in the next room.
what says he?
but i do love thee! and when i love thee not chaos is come again.
o excellent device, and make a sop of him.
nay, nothing; all is said words, life and all, old lancaster hath spent.
my noble lord, 
soft, he wakes.
be york the next that must be bankrupt so! though death be poor, it ends a mortal woe.
what dost thou say, iago?
strike!
the ripest fruit first falls, and so doth he; so much for that. now for our irish wars: we must supplant those rough rug-headed kerns, which live like venom where no venom else but only they have privilege to live. towards our assistance we do seize to us the plate, corn, revenues and moveables, whereof our uncle gaunt did stand possess'd.
know of your love?
no, we'll reason with him.
how long shall i be patient? ah, how long not gloucester's death, nor hereford's banishment. not gaunt's rebukes, nor england's private wrongs, nor the prevention of poor bolingbroke about his marriage, nor my own disgrace, or bend one wrinkle on my sovereign's face. i am the last of noble edward's sons, of whom thy father, prince of wales, was first: in war was never lion raged more fierce, than was that young and princely gentleman. his face thou hast, for even so look'd he, accomplish'd with the number of thy hours; but when he frown'd, it was against the french did will what he did spend and spent not that which his triumphant father's hand had won; his hands were guilty of no kindred blood, but bloody with the enemies of his kin. or else he never would compare between.
he did, from first to last. why dost thou ask?
where art thou, keeper? give me a cup of wine.
why, uncle, what's the matter?
but for a satisfaction of my thought,
you shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.
o my liege, pardon me, if you please; if not, i, pleased seek you to seize and gripe into your hands the royalties and rights of banish'd hereford? is not gaunt dead, and doth not hereford live? was not gaunt just, and is not harry true? is not his heir a well-deserving son? take hereford's rights away, and take from time his charters and his customary rights; let not to-morrow then ensue to-day; but by fair sequence and succession? now, afore god, god forbid i say true!, if you do wrongfully seize hereford's rights, call in the letters patent that he hath his livery, and deny his offer'd homage, you pluck a thousand dangers on your head, you lose a thousand well-disposed hearts and prick my tender patience, to those thoughts
why of thy thought, iago?
in god's name, what art thou?
think what you will, we seize into our hands his plate, his goods, his money and his lands.
i did not think he had been acquainted with her.
a man, as you are.
i'll not be by the while: my liege, farewell: what will ensue hereof, there's none can tell; that their events can never fall out good.
oh, yes, and went between us very oft.
but not, as i am, royal.
go, bushy, to the earl of wiltshire straight: bid him repair to us to ely house to see this business. to-morrow next and we create, in absence of ourself, our uncle york lord governor of england; for he is just and always loved us well. come on, our queen: to-morrow must we part;
indeed?
nor you, as we are, loyal.
well, lords, the duke of lancaster is dead.
indeed? ay, indeed! discern'st thou aught in that?
thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.
and living too; for now his son is duke.
honest, my lord?
my voice is now the king's, my looks mine own.
barely in title, not in revenue.
honest, ay, honest.
how darkly and how deadly dost thou speak! who sent you hither? wherefore do you come?
richly in both, if justice had her right.
my lord, for aught i know.
to, to, to, 
ere't be disburden'd with a liberal tongue.
what dost thou think?
to murder me?
nay, speak thy mind; and let him ne'er speak more that speaks thy words again to do thee harm!
think, my lord?
ay, ay.
tends that thou wouldst speak to the duke of hereford? quick is mine ear to hear of good towards him.
as if there were some monster in thy thought too hideous to be shown. thou dost mean something. i heard thee say even now thou lik'st not that when cassio left my wife. what didst not like? of my whole course of wooing, thou cried'st "indeed?" and didst contract and purse thy brow together as if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain some horrible conceit. if thou dost love me
and therefore cannot have the hearts to do it. wherein, my friends, have i offended you?
no good at all that i can do for him; unless you call it good to pity him, bereft and gelded of his patrimony.
my lord, you know i love you.
offended us you have not, but the king.
in him, a royal prince, and many moe of noble blood in this declining land. the king is not himself, but basely led by flatterers; and what they will inform, that will the king severely prosecute 'gainst us, our lives, our children, and our heirs.
i think thou dost. and for i know thou 'rt full of love and honesty and weigh'st thy words before thou giv'st them breath, for such things in a false disloyal knave are tricks of custom, but in a man that's just they are close dilations, working from the heart, that passion cannot rule.
i shall be reconciled to him again.
the commons hath he pill'd with grievous taxes, and quite lost their hearts: the nobles hath he fined
for michael cassio,
never, my lord. therefore prepare to die.
and daily new exactions are devised, as blanks, benevolences, and i wot not what: but what, o' god's name, doth become of this?
i think so too.
are you drawn forth among a world of men to slay the innocent? what is my offense? where is the evidence that doth accuse me? what lawful quest have given their verdict up the bitter sentence of poor clarence' death before i be convict by course of law? to threaten me with death is most unlawful. i charge you, as you hope to have redemption, that you depart, and lay no hands on me. the deed you undertake is damnable.
wars have not wasted it, for warr'd he hath not, that which his noble ancestors achieved with blows: more hath he spent in peace than they in wars.
men should be what they seem, or those that be not, would they might seem none!
what we will do, we do upon command.
the earl of wiltshire hath the realm in farm.
certain, men should be what they seem.
and he that hath commanded is our king.
the king's grown bankrupt, like a broken man.
why then i think cassio's an honest man.
hath in the tables of his law commanded that thou shalt do no murder. will thou then spurn at his edict and fulfill a man's? take heed, for he holds vengeance in his hand
reproach and dissolution hangeth over him.
i prithee speak to me as to thy thinkings, as thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts the worst of words.
and that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee for false forswearing and for murder too. thou didst receive the sacrament to fight in quarrel of the house of lancaster.
he hath not money for these irish wars, his burthenous taxations notwithstanding, but by the robbing of the banish'd duke.
good my lord, pardon me, though i am bound to every act of duty utter my thoughts? why, say they are vile and false, as where's that palace whereinto foul things sometimes intrude not? who has that breast so pure wherein uncleanly apprehensions with meditations lawful?
didst break that vow, and with thy treacherous blade unrippedst the bowels of thy sovereign's son.
his noble kinsman: most degenerate king! yet see no shelter to avoid the storm; we see the wind sit sore upon our sails, and yet we strike not, but securely perish.
thou dost conspire against thy friend, iago, if thou but think'st him wronged and mak'st his ear a stranger to thy thoughts.
whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.
we see the very wreck that we must suffer; for suffering so the causes of our wreck.
i do beseech you, as, i confess, it is my nature's plague to spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy shapes faults that are not, that your wisdom, from one that so imperfectly conceits, out of his scattering and unsure observance. it were not for your quiet nor your good,
how canst thou urge god's dreadful law to us
not so; even through the hollow eyes of death i spy life peering; but i dare not say how near the tidings of our comfort is.
nor for my manhood, honesty, and wisdom to let you know my thoughts.
alas! for whose sake did i that ill deed? for edward, for my brother, for his sake. he sends you not to murder me for this, for in that sin he is as deep as i. o, know you yet he doth it publicly! take not the quarrel from his powerful arm; he needs no indirect or lawless course to cut off those that have offended him.
nay, let us share thy thoughts, as thou dost ours.
what dost thou mean?
when gallant-springing, brave plantagenet, that princely novice, was struck dead by thee?
be confident to speak, northumberland: we three are but thyself; and, speaking so, thy words are but as thoughts; therefore, be bold.
is the immediate jewel of their souls. who steals my purse steals trash. 'tis something, nothing: 'twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands. but he that filches from me my good name and makes me poor indeed.
my brother's love, the devil, and my rage.
then thus: i have from port le blanc, a bay that harry duke of hereford, rainold lord cobham, that late broke from the duke of exeter, his brother, archbishop late of canterbury, sir thomas erpingham, sir john ramston, all these well furnish'd by the duke of bretagne with eight tall ships, three thousand men of war, are making hither with all due expedience and shortly mean to touch our northern shore: the first departing of the king for ireland. if then we shall shake off our slavish yoke, imp out our drooping country's broken wing, redeem from broking pawn the blemish'd crown, and make high majesty look like itself, away with me in post to ravenspurgh; but if you faint, as fearing to do so, stay and be secret, and myself will go.
i'll know thy thoughts.
thy brother's love, our duty, and thy faults
to horse, to horse! urge doubts to them that fear.
you cannot, if my heart were in your hand, nor shall not, whilst 'tis in my custody.
if you do love my brother, hate not me. i am his brother, and i love him well. if you are hired for meed, go back again, and i will send you to my brother gloucester, than edward will for tidings of my death.
hold out my horse, and i will first be there.
ha!
you are deceived. your brother gloucester hates you.
madam, your majesty is too much sad: you promised, when you parted with the king, to lay aside life-harming heaviness and entertain a cheerful disposition.
it is the green-eyed monster which doth mock the meat it feeds on. that cuckold lives in bliss who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger, but, oh, what damnèd minutes tells he o'er
o, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear. go you to him from me.
i cannot do it; yet i know no cause why i should welcome such a guest as grief, save bidding farewell to so sweet a guest as my sweet richard: yet again, methinks, is coming towards me, and my inward soul with nothing trembles: at some thing it grieves, more than with parting from my lord the king.
oh, misery!
ay, so we will.
each substance of a grief hath twenty shadows, for sorrow's eye, glazed with blinding tears, divides one thing entire to many objects; like perspectives, which rightly gazed upon show nothing but confusion, eyed awry looking awry upon your lord's departure, find shapes of grief, more than himself, to wail; which, look'd on as it is, is nought but shadows of what it is not. then, thrice-gracious queen, or if it be, 'tis with false sorrow's eye, which for things true weeps things imaginary.
poor and content is rich, and rich enough, but riches fineless is as poor as winter to him that ever fears he shall be poor. from jealousy!
blessed his three sons with his victorious arm, he little thought of this divided friendship. bid gloucester think of this, and he will weep.
it may be so; but yet my inward soul persuades me it is otherwise: howe'er it be, as, though on thinking on no thought i think, makes me with heavy nothing faint and shrink.
why, why is this? think'st thou i'd make a life of jealousy, to follow still the changes of the moon with fresh suspicions? no! to be once in doubt when i shall turn the business of my soul to such exsufflicate and blowed surmises, matching thy inference. 'tis not to make me jealous to say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company, where virtue is, these are more virtuous. nor from mine own weak merits will i draw the smallest fear or doubt of her revolt, for she had eyes and chose me. no, iago, and on the proof there is no more but this: away at once with love or jealousy!
ay, millstones, as he lessoned us to weep.
'tis nothing but conceit, my gracious lady.
i am glad of this, for now i shall have reason to show the love and duty that i bear you receive it from me. i speak not yet of proof. look to your wife, observe her well with cassio. wear your eyes thus, not jealous nor secure. i would not have your free and noble nature i know our country disposition well. in venice they do let god see the pranks they dare not show their husbands. their best conscience is not to leave 't undone, but keep't unknown.
o, do not slander him, for he is kind.
'tis nothing le conceit is still derived for nothing had begot my something grief; or something hath the nothing that i grieve: 'tis in reversion that i do possess; but what it is, that is not yet known; what
dost thou say so?
right, as snow in harvest. come, you deceive yourself. 'tis he that sends us to destroy you here.
god save your majesty! and well met, gentlemen: i hope the king is not yet shipp'd for ireland.
she did deceive her father, marrying you, and when she seemed to shake and fear your looks, she loved them most.
it cannot be, for he bewept my fortune, and hugged me in his arms, and swore with sobs
why hopest thou so? 'tis better hope he is; for his designs crave haste, his haste good hope:
and so she did.
why, so he doth, when he delivers you from this earth's thralldom to the joys of heaven.
that he, our hope, might have retired his power, and driven into despair an enemy's hope, who strongly hath set footing in this land: the banish'd bolingbroke repeals himself, at ravenspurgh.
why, go to then. she that, so young, could give out such a seeming, he thought 'twas witchcraft. but i am much to blame. i humbly do beseech you of your pardon for too much loving you.
make peace with god, for you must die, my lord.
now god in heaven forbid!
i am bound to thee forever.
have you that holy feeling in your souls and art you yet to your own souls so blind that thou will war with god by murd'ring me? o sirs, consider: they that set you on to do this deed will hate you for the deed.
ah, madam, 'tis too true: and that is worse, the lord northumberland, his son young henry percy, with all their powerful friends, are fled to him.
i see this hath a little dashed your spirits.
(to first murderer) what shall we do?
why have you not proclaim'd northumberland and all the rest revolted faction traitors?
not a jot, not a jot.
relent, and save your souls. which of you, if you were a prince's son being pent from liberty, as i am now, if two such murderers as yourselves came to you, would not entreat for life? ay, you would beg,
we have: whereupon the earl of worcester and all the household servants fled with him to bolingbroke.
trust me, i fear it has. i hope you will consider what is spoke comes from my love. but i do see you're moved. i am to pray you not to strain my speech to grosser issues nor to larger reach
relent? no. 'tis cowardly and womanish.
so, green, thou art the midwife to my woe, and bolingbroke my sorrow's dismal heir: and i, a gasping new-deliver'd mother, have woe to woe, sorrow to sorrow join'd.
i will not.
not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish. (to second murderer) my friend, i spy some pity in thy looks. come thou on my side and entreat for me. a begging prince what beggar pities not?
despair not, madam.
should you do so, my lord, my speech should fall into such vile success which my thoughts aimed not at. cassio's my worthy friend, 
look behind you, my lord.
who shall hinder me? with cozening hope: he is a flatterer, a parasite, a keeper back of death, who gently would dissolve the bands of life, which false hope lingers in extremity.
no, not much moved. i do not think but desdemona's honest.
take that, and that. (stabs clarence) i'll drown you in the malmsey butt within.
here comes the duke of york.
long live she so. and long live you to think so.
a bloody deed, and desperately dispatched. how fain, like pilate, would i wash my hands of this most grievous murder.
with signs of war about his aged neck: o, full of careful business are his looks! uncle, for god's sake, speak comfortable words.
and yet how nature, erring from itself, 
by heavens, the duke shall know how slack you have been.
should i do so, i should belie my thoughts: where nothing lives but crosses, cares and grief. your husband, he is gone to save far off, whilst others come to make him lose at home: here am i left to underprop his land, now comes the sick hour that his surfeit made; now shall he try his friends that flatter'd him.
ay, there's the point. as, to be bold with you, of her own clime, complexion, and degree, whereto we see in all things nature tends, foh! one may smell in such a will most rank, foul disproportions, thoughts unnatural. distinctly speak of her, though i may fear her will, recoiling to her better judgment, may fall to match you with her country forms, and happily repent.
i would he knew that i had saved his brother. take thou the fee, and tell him what i say, for i repent me that the duke is slain.
my lord, your son was gone before i came.
farewell, farewell. set on thy wife to observe. leave me, iago.
well, i'll go hide the body in some hole till that the duke give order for his burial. and when i have my meed, i will away, for this will out, and then i must not stay.
he was? why, so! go all which way it will! and will, i fear, revolt on hereford's side. sirrah, get thee to plashy, to my sister gloucester; bid her send me presently a thousand pound: hold, take my ring.
my lord, i take my leave. (going)
why, so. now have i done a good day's work. you peers, continue this united league. i every day expect an embassage from my redeemer to redeem me hence, since i have made my friends at peace on earth rivers and hastings, take each other's hand. dissemble not your hatred. swear your love.
to-day, as i came by, i called there; but i shall grieve you to report the rest.
(aside) why did i marry? this honest creature doubtless sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.
(taking hastings's hand) by heaven, my soul is purged from grudging hate,
what is't, knave?
to scan this thing no farther. leave it to time. although 'tis fit that cassio have his place, for sure, he fills it up with great ability, yet, if you please to hold him off awhile, note if your lady strain his entertainment
so thrive i as i truly swear the like.
an hour before i came, the duchess died.
with any strong or vehement importunity. much will be seen in that. in the meantime, let me be thought too busy in my fears, and hold her free, i do beseech your honor.
take heed you dally not before your king, lest he that is the supreme king of kings either of you to be the other's end.
comes rushing on this woeful land at once! i know not what to do: i would to god, so my untruth had not provoked him to it, the king had cut off my head with my brother's. how shall we do for money for these wars? come, sister,, cousin, i would say, pray, pardon me. go, fellow, get thee home, provide some carts and bring away the armour that is there.
fear not my government.
so prosper i as i swear perfect love.
if i know how or which way to order these affairs thus thrust disorderly into my hands, never believe me. both are my kinsmen: the one is my sovereign, whom both my oath is my kinsman, whom the king hath wrong'd, whom conscience and my kindred bids to right. well, somewhat we must do. come, cousin, i'll dispose of you. and meet me presently at berkeley. i should to plashy too; but time will not permit: all is uneven, and every thing is left at six and seven.
i once more take my leave.
and i as i love hastings with my heart.
but none returns. for us to levy power proportionable to the enemy is all unpossible.
this fellow's of exceeding honesty and knows all quantities, with a learnèd spirit, though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings, i'd whistle her off and let her down the wind to prey at fortune. haply, for i am black and have not those soft parts of conversation into the vale of years, yet that's not much, she's gone, i am abused, and my relief must be to loathe her. oh, curse of marriage that we can call these delicate creatures ours and live upon the vapor of a dungeon than keep a corner in the thing i love for others' uses. yet 'tis the plague to great ones, prerogatived are they less than the base. even then this forkèd plague is fated to us when we do quicken. look where she comes.
(to queen elizabeth) nor you, son dorset, , buckingham, nor you. you have been factious one against the other., wife, love lord hastings. let him kiss your hand, and what you do, do it unfeignedly.
besides, our nearness to the king in love
if she be false, heaven mocked itself. i'll not believe 't.
our former hatred, so thrive i and mine.
and that's the wavering commons: for their love lies in their purses, and whoso empties them by so much fills their hearts with deadly hate.
how now, my dear othello? by you invited, do attend your presence.
dorset, embrace him., hastings, love lord marquess.
wherein the king stands generally condemn'd.
i am to blame.
this interchange of love, i here protest, upon my part shall be inviolable.
because we ever have been near the king.
why do you speak so faintly? are you not well?
and so swear i.
well, i will for refuge straight to bristol castle: the earl of wiltshire is already there.
i have a pain upon my forehead, here.
now, princely buckingham, seal thou this league with thy embracements to my wife's allies and make me happy in your unity.
thither will i with you; for little office except like curs to tear us all to pieces. will you go along with us?
why that's with watching, 'twill away again. let me but bind it hard, within this hour it will be well. (pulls out a handkerchief)
(to queen elizabeth) upon your grace, but with all duteous love doth cherish you and yours, god punish me when i have most need to employ a friend, with hate in those where i expect most love. deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile be he unto me: this do i beg of god when i am cold in love to you or yours.
no; i will to ireland to his majesty. farewell: if heart's presages be not vain,
your napkin is too little,
a pleasing cordial, princely buckingham, there wanteth now our brother gloucester here to make the blessèd period of this peace.
that's as york thrives to beat back bolingbroke.
come, i'll go in with you.
and in good time, here comes sir richard ratcliffe and the duke.
alas, poor duke! the task he undertakes is numbering sands and drinking oceans dry: where one on his side fights, thousands will fly.
i am very sorry that you are not well.
and, princely peers, a happy time of day.
well, we may meet again.
(picks up the handkercheif) i am glad i have found this napkin, my wayward husband hath a hundred times
happy indeed, as we have spent the day. gloucester, we have done deeds of charity, made peace of enmity, fair love of hate,
i fear me, never.
wooed me to steal it, but she so loves the token (for he conjured her she should ever keep it) that she reserves it evermore about her and give 't iago. what he will do with it heaven knows, not i. i nothing but to please his fantasy.
a blessèd labor, my most sovereign lord. amongst this princely heap, if any here by false intelligence, or wrong surmise hold me a foe, have aught committed that is hardly borne by any in this presence, i desire to reconcile me to his friendly peace. 'tis death to me to be at enmity; first, madam, i entreat true peace of you, which i will purchase with my duteous service;, of you, my noble cousin buckingham, if ever any grudge were lodged between us;, that all without desert have frowned on me;, of you, lord woodeville and lord scales;, of you, dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen; indeed, of all. i do not know that englishman alive more than the infant that is born tonight. i thank my god for my humility.
how far is it, my lord, to berkeley now?
how now! what do you here alone?
a holy day shall this be kept hereafter. i would to god all strifes were well compounded. to take our brother clarence to your grace.
believe me, noble lord, i am a stranger here in gloucestershire: these high wild hills and rough uneven ways and yet your fair discourse hath been as sugar, making the hard way sweet and delectable. but i bethink me what a weary way from ravenspurgh to cotswold will be found which, i protest, hath very much beguiled the tediousness and process of my travel: but theirs is sweetened with the hope to have the present benefit which i possess; than hope enjoy'd: by this the weary lords shall make their way seem short, as mine hath done by sight of what i have, your noble company.
do not you chide. i have a thing for you.
why, madam, have i offered love for this, to be so flouted in this royal presence? who knows not that the gentle duke is dead?
of much less value is my company
a thing for me? it is a common thing, 
you do him injury to scorn his corse.
it is my son, young harry percy, sent from my brother worcester, whencesoever. harry, how fares your uncle?
ha?
who knows not he is dead! who knows he is?
i had thought, my lord, to have learn'd his health of you.
to have a foolish wife.
all-seeing heaven, what a world is this!
why, is he not with the queen?
oh, is that all? what will you give me now
look i so pale, lord dorset, as the rest?
no, my good lord; he hath forsook the court, broken his staff of office and dispersed the household of the king.
what handkerchief?
ay, my good lord, and no one in the presence
what was his reason?
what handkerchief? why, that the moor first gave to desdemona, that which so often you did bid me steal.
is clarence dead? the order was reversed.
because your lordship was proclaimed traitor. but he, my lord, is gone to ravenspurgh, to offer service to the duke of hereford, and sent me over by berkeley, to discover then with directions to repair to ravenspurgh.
hast stolen it from her?
but he, poor man, by your first order died, and that a wingèd mercury did bear. some tardy cripple bear the countermand, god grant that some, less noble and less loyal, nearer in bloody thoughts, and not in blood, deserve not worse than wretched clarence did, and yet go current from suspicion.
have you forgot the duke of hereford, boy?
no, but she let it drop by negligence and, to th' advantage, i being here, took 't up. look, here it is.
(kneeling) a boon, my sovereign, for my service done.
no, my good lord, for that is not forgot which ne'er i did remember: to my knowledge,
a good wench, give it me.
i prithee, peace. my soul is full of sorrow.
then learn to know him now; this is the duke.
what will you do with 't, that you have been so earnest
i will not rise unless your highness hear me.
my gracious lord, i tender you my service, such as it is, being tender, raw and young: which elder days shall ripen and confirm
why, what is that to you?
then say at once what is it thou requests.
i thank thee, gentle percy; and be sure i count myself in nothing else so happy as in a soul remembering my good friends; and, as my fortune ripens with thy love, my heart this covenant makes, my hand thus seals it.
if it be not for some purpose of import, give 't me again. poor lady, she'll run mad when she shall lack it.
the forfeit, sovereign, of my servant's life, lately attendant on the duke of norfolk.
how far is it to berkeley? and what stir keeps good old york there with his men of war?
be not acknown on 't,
have i a tongue to doom my brother's death, and shall the tongue give pardon to a slave? my brother killed no man; his fault was thought, who sued to me for him? who, in my wrath, kneeled at my feet, and bade me be advised? who spoke of brotherhood? who spoke of love? who told me how the poor soul did forsake who told me, in the field by tewkesbury, when oxford had me down, he rescued me, and said "dear brother, live, and be a king"? who told me, when we both lay in the field even in his garments and did give himself, all thin and naked, to the numb-cold night? all this from my remembrance brutish wrath sinfully plucked, and not a man of you but when your carters or your waiting vassals have done a drunken slaughter and defaced the precious image of our dear redeemer, you straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon, stanley rises but for my brother, not a man would speak, nor i, ungracious, speak unto myself for him, poor soul. the proudest of you all yet none of you would once beg for his life. o god, i fear thy justice will take hold on me and you, and mine and yours for this!, come, hastings, help me to my closet., 
there stands the castle, by yon tuft of trees, and in it are the lords of york, berkeley, and seymour; none else of name and noble estimate.
i will in cassio's lodging lose this napkin and let him find it. trifles light as air are to the jealous confirmations strong as proofs of holy writ. this may do something. dangerous conceits are in their natures poisons which at the first are scarce found to distaste, but with a little act upon the blood burn like the mines of sulfur.
this is the fruits of rashness. marked you not how that the guilty kindred of the queen looked pale when they did hear of clarence' death? o, they did urge it still unto the king. to comfort edward with our company?
here come the lords of ross and willoughby, bloody with spurring, fiery-red with haste.
i did say so. nor all the drowsy syrups of the world, shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep which thou owedst yesterday.
we wait upon your grace.
a banish'd traitor: all my treasury is yet but unfelt thanks, which more enrich'd shall be your love and labour's recompense.
ha! ha! false to me?
good grandam, tell us, is our father dead?
your presence makes us rich, most noble lord.
why, how now, general? no more of that.
no, boy.
and far surmounts our labour to attain it.
i swear 'tis better to be much abused than but to know 't a little.
why do you weep so oft, and beat your breast, and cry, "o clarence, my unhappy son?"
evermore thanks, the exchequer of the poor; which, till my infant fortune comes to years, stands for my bounty. but who comes here?
how now, my lord!
and call us orphans, wretches, castaways, if that our noble father were alive?
it is my lord of berkeley, as i guess.
what sense had i in her stol'n hours of lust? i saw 't not, thought it not, it harmed not me. i found not cassio's kisses on her lips. he that is robbed, not wanting what is stol'n, let him not know't, and he's not robbed at all.
my pretty cousins, you mistake me both. i do lament the sickness of the king, it were lost sorrow to wail one that's lost.
my lord of hereford, my message is to you.
i am sorry to hear this.
then, you conclude, my grandam, he is dead. the king mine uncle is to blame for it. god will revenge it, whom i will importune
my lord, my answer is, to lancaster; and i am come to seek that name in england; and i must find that title in your tongue, before i make reply to aught you say.
pioneers and all, had tasted her sweet body, so i had nothing known. oh, now forever farewell the tranquil mind! farewell content! farewell the plumèd troops and the big wars farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump, the spirit-stirring drum, th' ear-piercing fife, the royal banner, and all quality, pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war! the immortal jove's dead clamors counterfeit, farewell! othello's occupation's gone.
and so will i.
to raze one title of your honour out: to you, my lord, i come, what lord you will, from the most gracious regent of this land, the duke of york, to know what pricks you on and fright our native peace with self-born arms.
is 't possible, my lord?
peace, children, peace. the king doth love you well. incapable and shallow innocents, you cannot guess who caused your father's death.
i shall not need transport my words by you; here comes his grace in person. my noble uncle!
villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore, or by the worth of mine eternal soul thou hadst been better have been born a dog than answer my waked wrath!
told me the king, provoked to it by the queen, devised impeachments to imprison him; and when my uncle told me so, he wept, and pitied me, and kindly kissed my cheek, and he would love me dearly as a child.
show me thy humble heart, and not thy knee,
is 't come to this?
ah, that deceit should steal such gentle shape, and with a virtuous visor hide deep vice. he is my son, ay, and therein my shame,
my gracious uncle, 
make me to see 't, or at the least so prove it to hang a doubt on, or woe upon thy life!
think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?
tut, tut! grace me no grace, nor uncle me no uncle: i am no traitor's uncle; and that word 'grace.' why have those banish'd and forbidden legs dared once to touch a dust of england's ground? but then more 'why?' why have they dared to march so many miles upon her peaceful bosom, and ostentation of despised arms? comest thou because the anointed king is hence? why, foolish boy, the king is left behind, and in my loyal bosom lies his power. as when brave gaunt, thy father, and myself rescued the black prince, that young mars of men, from forth the ranks of many thousand french, o, then how quickly should this arm of mine. and minister correction to thy fault!
my noble lord, 
ay, boy.
my gracious uncle, let me know my fault: on what condition stands it and wherein?
if thou dost slander her and torture me, never pray more. abandon all remorse. do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amazed, for nothing canst thou to damnation add greater than that.
i cannot think it. hark, what noise is this?
even in condition of the worst degree, thou art a banish'd man, and here art come before the expiration of thy time, in braving arms against thy sovereign.
oh, grace! oh, heaven forgive me! are you a man? have you a soul or sense? that lov'st to make thine honesty a vice! o monstrous world! take note, take note, o world, to be direct and honest is not safe. i thank you for this profit, and from hence
ah, who shall hinder me to wail and weep, i'll join with black despair against my soul and to myself become an enemy.
as i was banish'd, i was banish'd hereford; and, noble uncle, i beseech your grace look on my wrongs with an indifferent eye: you are my father, for methinks in you i see old gaunt alive; o, then, my father, a wandering vagabond; my rights and royalties pluck'd from my arms perforce and given away to upstart unthrifts? wherefore was i born? if that my cousin king be king of england, you have a son, aumerle, my noble cousin; had you first died, and he been thus trod down, he should have found his uncle gaunt a father, to rouse his wrongs and chase them to the bay. and yet my letters-patents give me leave: my father's goods are all distrain'd and sold, and these and all are all amiss employ'd. what would you have me do? i am a subject, and therefore, personally i lay my claim to my inheritance of free descent.
nay, stay. thou shouldst be honest.
what means this scene of rude impatience?
the noble duke hath been too much abused.
i should be wise, for honesty's a fool and loses that it works for.
to make an act of tragic violence. why grow the branches when the root is gone? why wither not the leaves that want their sap?
it stands your grace upon to do him right.
by the world, i think my wife be honest and think she is not. i'll have some proof. her name, that was as fresh as dian's visage, is now begrimed and black as mine own face. if there be cords or knives, poison, or fire, or suffocating streams,
if you will live, lament. if die, be brief, that our swift-wingèd souls may catch the king's, to his new kingdom of ne'er-changing night.
base men by his endowments are made great.
i see, sir, you are eaten up with passion. i do repent me that i put it to you. you would be satisfied?
ah, so much interest have i in thy sorrow as i had title in thy noble husband. i have bewept a worthy husband's death but now two mirrors of his princely semblance are cracked in pieces by malignant death, and i, for comfort, have but one false glass that grieves me when i see my shame in him. and hast the comfort of thy children left, but death hath snatched my husband from mine arms and plucked two crutches from my feeble hands, clarence and edward. o, what cause have i, to overgo thy woes and drown thy cries!
my lords of england, let me tell you this: i have had feeling of my cousin's wrongs and laboured all i could to do him right; but in this kind to come, in braving arms, to find out right with wrong, it may not be; and you that do abet him in this kind cherish rebellion and are rebels all.
would? nay, and i will.
(to queen elizabeth) ah, aunt, you wept not for our father's death. how can we aid you with our kindred tears?
the noble duke hath sworn his coming is we all have strongly sworn to give him aid; and let him ne'er see joy that breaks that oath!
and may, but how? how satisfied, my lord? behold her topped?
our fatherless distress was left unmoaned.
well, well, i see the issue of these arms: i cannot mend it, i must needs confess, but if i could, by him that gave me life, i would attach you all and make you stoop unto the sovereign mercy of the king; but since i cannot, be it known to you unless you please to enter in the castle and there repose you for this night.
death and damnation! oh!
give me no help in lamentation. i am not barren to bring forth complaints. all springs reduce their currents to mine eyes, that i, being governed by the watery moon, ah, for my husband, for my dear lord edward!
an offer, uncle, that we will accept: but we must win your grace to go with us by bushy, bagot and their complices, the caterpillars of the commonwealth, which i have sworn to weed and pluck away.
it were a tedious difficulty, i think, to bring them to that prospect. damn them then, if ever mortal eyes do see them bolster what shall i say? where's satisfaction? it is impossible you should see this, were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys, as salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross if imputation and strong circumstances which lead directly to the door of truth will give you satisfaction, you may have 't.
ah, for our father, for our dear lord clarence!
it may be i will go with you: but yet i'll pause; nor friends nor foes, to me welcome you are: things past redress are now with me past care.
give me a living reason she's disloyal.
alas for both, both mine, edward and clarence!
my lord of salisbury, we have stay'd ten days, and hardly kept our countrymen together, and yet we hear no tidings from the king; therefore we will disperse ourselves: farewell.
but, sith i am entered in this cause so far, pricked to 't by foolish honesty and love, i will go on. i lay with cassio lately and, being troubled with a raging tooth, so loose of soul that in their sleeps will mutter
what stay had i but edward? and he's gone.
the king reposeth all his confidence in thee.
their affairs. one of this kind is cassio. in sleep i heard him say "sweet desdemona, let us be wary, let us hide our loves." cry "o sweet creature!" and then kiss me hard, as if he plucked up kisses by the roots that grew upon my lips, lay his leg over my thigh, and sigh, and kiss, and then
what stay had we but clarence? and he's gone.
'tis thought the king is dead; we will not stay. the bay-trees in our country are all wither'd and meteors fright the fixed stars of heaven; and lean-look'd prophets whisper fearful change; rich men look sad and ruffians dance and leap, the one in fear to lose what they enjoy, the other to enjoy by rage and war: farewell: our countrymen are gone and fled, as well assured richard their king is dead.
oh, monstrous! monstrous!
what stays had i but they? and they are gone.
ah, richard, with the eyes of heavy mind i see thy glory like a shooting star thy sun sets weeping in the lowly west, witnessing storms to come, woe and unrest: thy friends are fled to wait upon thy foes, and crossly to thy good all fortune goes.
nay, this was but his dream.
was never widow had so dear a loss.
bring forth these men. bushy and green, i will not vex your souls, since presently your souls must part your bodies, with too much urging your pernicious lives, from off my hands, here in the view of men i will unfold some causes of your deaths. you have misled a prince, a royal king, a happy gentleman in blood and lineaments, you have in manner with your sinful hours made a divorce betwixt his queen and him, broke the possession of a royal bed and stain'd the beauty of a fair queen's cheeks myself, a prince by fortune of my birth, near to the king in blood, and near in love till you did make him misinterpret me, have stoop'd my neck under your injuries, eating the bitter bread of banishment; whilst you have fed upon my signories, dispark'd my parks and fell'd my forest woods, from my own windows torn my household coat, save men's opinions and my living blood, to show the world i am a gentleman. this and much more, much more than twice all this, condemns you to the death. see them deliver'd over
but this denoted a foregone conclusion.
were never orphans had so dear a loss.
to execution and the hand of death.
'tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream. that do demonstrate thinly.
was never mother had so dear a loss. their woes are parceled; mine are general. she for an edward weeps, and so do i; i for a clarence weep; so doth not she. these babes for clarence weep and so do i; alas, you three, on me, threefold distressed, pour all your tears. i am your sorrow's nurse, and i will pamper it with lamentations.
more welcome is the stroke of death to me than bolingbroke to england. lords, farewell.
i'll tear her all to pieces!
(to queen elizabeth) comfort, dear mother. god is much displeased in common worldly things, 'tis called ungrateful with dull unwillingness to repay a debt which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent; much more to be thus opposite with heaven,
my comfort is that heaven will take our souls and plague injustice with the pains of hell.
nay, yet be wise, yet we see nothing done, she may be honest yet. tell me but this, have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief
madam, bethink you, like a careful mother, of the young prince your son. send straight for him. let him be crowned. in him your comfort lives. drown desperate sorrow in dead edward's grave
my lord northumberland, see them dispatch'd.
i gave her such a one, 'twas my first gift.
sister, have comfort. all of us have cause to wail the dimming of our shining star, but none can help our harms by wailing them., madam, my mother, i do cry you mercy; i crave your blessing.
uncle, you say the queen is at your house; for god's sake, fairly let her be entreated: tell her i send to her my kind commends; take special care my greetings be deliver'd.
i know not that, but such a handkerchief, i am sure it was your wife's, did i today see cassio wipe his beard with.
god bless thee, and put meekness in thy breast, love, charity, obedience, and true duty.
with letters of your love to her at large.
if it be that, 
(standing) amen. (aside) and make me die a good old man! i marvel that her grace did leave it out.
thank, gentle uncle. come, lords, away. to fight with glendower and his complices: awhile to work, and after holiday.
it speaks against her with the other proofs.
you cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers that bear this heavy mutual load of moan, now cheer each other in each other's love. we are to reap the harvest of his son. the broken rancor of your high-swoll'n hates, but lately splintered, knit, and joined together, must gently be preserved, cherished, and kept. forthwith from ludlow the young prince be fet hither to london, to be crowned our king.
barkloughly castle call they this at hand?
oh, that the slave had forty thousand lives! one is too poor, too weak for my revenge. now do i see 'tis true. look here, iago, 'tis gone. arise, black vengeance, from the hollow hell! yield up, o love, thy crown and hearted throne to tyrannous hate! swell, bosom, with thy fraught,
why "with some little train," my lord of buckingham?
yea, my lord. how brooks your grace the air, after your late tossing on the breaking seas?
yet be content.
marry, my lord, lest by a multitude which would be so much the more dangerous by how much the estate is green and yet ungoverned. where every horse bears his commanding rein and may direct his course as please himself, in my opinion, ought to be prevented.
needs must i like it well: i weep for joy dear earth, i do salute thee with my hand, though rebels wound thee with their horses' hoofs: as a long-parted mother with her child plays fondly with her tears and smiles in meeting, and do thee favours with my royal hands. feed not thy sovereign's foe, my gentle earth, nor with thy sweets comfort his ravenous sense; but let thy spiders, that suck up thy venom, doing annoyance to the treacherous feet which with usurping steps do trample thee: yield stinging nettles to mine enemies; and when they from thy bosom pluck a flower, whose double tongue may with a mortal touch throw death upon thy sovereign's enemies. mock not my senseless conjuration, lords: this earth shall have a feeling and these stones shall falter under foul rebellion's arms.
oh, blood, blood, blood!
i hope the king made peace with all of us; and the compact is firm and true in me.
fear not, my lord: that power that made you king hath power to keep you king in spite of all. the means that heaven yields must be embraced, and we will not, heaven's offer we refuse, the proffer'd means of succor and redress.
patience, i say. your mind may change.
and so in me, and so, i think, in all. to no apparent likelihood of breach, which haply by much company might be urged. therefore i say with noble buckingham that it is meet so few should fetch the prince.
he means, my lord, that we are too remiss; whilst bolingbroke, through our security,
never, iago. like to the pontic sea, whose icy current and compulsive course ne'er keeps retiring ebb but keeps due on even so my bloody thoughts with violent pace shall ne'er look back, ne'er ebb to humble love till that a capable and wide revenge swallow them up. now, by yon marble heaven, i here engage my words. (he kneels)
and so say i.
discomfortable cousin! know'st thou not that when the searching eye of heaven is hid, behind the globe, that lights the lower world, then thieves and robbers range abroad unseen but when from under this terrestrial ball he fires the proud tops of the eastern pines and darts his light through every guilty hole, then murders, treasons and detested sins, stand bare and naked, trembling at themselves? so when this thief, this traitor, bolingbroke, who all this while hath revell'd in the night whilst we were wandering with the antipodes, his treasons will sit blushing in his face, not able to endure the sight of day, but self-affrighted tremble at his sin. not all the water in the rough rude sea the breath of worldly men cannot depose the deputy elected by the lord: for every man that bolingbroke hath press'd to lift shrewd steel against our golden crown, a glorious angel: then, if angels fight, weak men must fall, for heaven still guards the right.
do not rise yet. witness, you ever-burning lights above, you elements that clip us round about, witness that here iago doth give up to wronged othello's service. let him command, and to obey shall be in me remorse, what bloody business ever.
then be it so, and go we to determine who they shall be that straight shall post to ludlow., madam, and you, my sister, will you go to give your censures in this business?
welcome, my lord how far off lies your power?
i greet thy love not with vain thanks but with acceptance bounteous, within these three days let me hear thee say that cassio's not alive.
for god's sake let not us two at home. for by the way i'll sort occasion, as index to the story we late talked of, to part the queen's proud kindred from the prince.
nor near nor farther off, my gracious lord, and bids me speak of nothing but despair. one day too late, i fear me, noble lord, hath clouded all thy happy days on earth: o, call back yesterday, bid time return, to-day, to-day, unhappy day, too late, o'erthrows thy joys, friends, fortune and thy state: for all the welshmen, hearing thou wert dead. are gone to bolingbroke, dispersed and fled.
my friend is dead, 'tis done at your request. but let her live.
my oracle, my prophet, my dear cousin, i, as a child, will go by thy direction toward ludlow then, for we'll not stay behind.
comfort, my liege; why looks your grace so pale?
damn her, lewd minx! oh, damn her, damn her! to furnish me with some swift means of death for the fair devil. now art thou my lieutenant.
good morrow, neighbor, whither away so fast?
but now the blood of twenty thousand men did triumph in my face, and they are fled; and, till so much blood thither come again, have i not reason to look pale and dead? for time hath set a blot upon my pride.
i am your own for ever.
i promise you i scarcely know myself. hear you the news abroad?
comfort, my liege; remember who you are.
do you know, sirrah, where lieutenant cassio lies?
yes, that the king is dead.
i had forgot myself; am i not king? awake, thou coward majesty! thou sleepest. arm, arm, my name! a puny subject strikes at thy great glory. look not to the ground, ye favourites of a king: are we not high? high be our thoughts: i know my uncle york
i dare not say he lies anywhere.
i fear, i fear, 'twill prove a giddy world.
more health and happiness betide my liege than can my care-tuned tongue deliver him!
why, man?
neighbors, god speed.
mine ear is open and my heart prepared; the worst is worldly loss thou canst unfold. and what loss is it to be rid of care? strives bolingbroke to be as great as we? greater he shall not be; if he serve god, we'll serve him too and be his fellow so: they break their faith to god as well as us: cry woe, destruction, ruin and decay: the worst is death, and death will have his day.
he's a soldier, and for one to say a soldier lies, 'tis stabbing.
give you good morrow, sir.
glad am i that your highness is so arm'd like an unseasonable stormy day, which makes the silver rivers drown their shores, as if the world were all dissolved to tears, so high above his limits swells the rage with hard bright steel and hearts harder than steel. white-beards have arm'd their thin and hairless scalps against thy majesty; boys, with women's voices, strive to speak big and clap their female joints the very beadsmen learn to bend their bows of double-fatal yew against thy state; yea, distaff-women manage rusty bills against thy seat: both young and old rebel,
go to. where lodges he?
doth this news hold of good king edward's death?
too well, too well thou tell'st a tale so ill. where is the earl of wiltshire? where is bagot? what is become of bushy? where is green? that they have let the dangerous enemy if we prevail, their heads shall pay for it: i warrant they have made peace with bolingbroke.
to tell you where he lodges is to tell you where i lie.
ay, sir, it is too true, god help the while.
peace have they made with him indeed, my lord.
can anything be made of this?
then, masters, look to see a troublous world.
o villains, vipers, damn'd without redemption! snakes, in my heart-blood warm'd, that sting my heart! three judases, each one thrice worse than judas! would they make peace? terrible hell make war upon their spotted souls for this offence!
i know not where he lodges, and for me to devise a lodging and say he lies here, or he lies there, were to lie in mine own throat.
no, no, by god's good grace, his son shall reign.
turns to the sourest and most deadly hate: again uncurse their souls; their peace is made with heads, and not with hands; those whom you curse have felt the worst of death's destroying wound
can you inquire him out and be edified by report?
woe to the land that's governed by a child.
is bushy, green, and the earl of wiltshire dead?
i will catechize the world for him, that is, make questions, and by them answer.
in him there is a hope of government, and, in his full and ripened years, himself, no doubt shall then, and till then, govern well.
ay, all of them at bristol lost their heads.
seek him, bid him come hither. tell him i have moved my lord on his behalf, and hope all will be well.
so stood the state when henry the sixth was crowned in paris but at nine months old.
where is the duke my father with his power?
to do this is within the compass of man's wit, and therefore i will attempt the doing it.
for then this land was famously enriched with politic grave counsel; then the king had virtuous uncles to protect his grace.
no matter where; of comfort no man speak: make dust our paper and with rainy eyes write sorrow on the bosom of the earth, let's choose executors and talk of wills: and yet not so, for what can we bequeath our lands, our lives and all are bolingbroke's, and nothing can we call our own but death and that small model of the barren earth which serves as paste and cover to our bones. and tell sad stories of the death of kings; how some have been deposed; some slain in war, some haunted by the ghosts they have deposed; some poison'd by their wives: some sleeping kill'd; that rounds the mortal temples of a king keeps death his court and there the antic sits, scoffing his state and grinning at his pomp, allowing him a breath, a little scene, infusing him with self and vain conceit, as if this flesh which walls about our life, were brass impregnable, and humour'd thus comes at the last and with a little pin cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood with solemn reverence: throw away respect, tradition, form and ceremonious duty, for you have but mistook me all this while: taste grief, need friends: subjected thus, how can you say to me, i am a king?
where should i lose that handkerchief, emilia?
why, so hath this, both by the father and mother.
my lord, wise men ne'er sit and wail their woes, but presently prevent the ways to wail. gives in your weakness strength unto your foe, and so your follies fight against yourself. fear and be slain; no worse can come to fight: and fight and die is death destroying death;
i know not, madam.
or by the father there were none at all, for emulation who shall now be nearest will touch us all too near if god prevent not. o, full of danger is the duke of gloucester, and were they to be ruled, and not to rule, this sickly land might solace as before.
my father hath a power; inquire of him and learn to make a body of a limb.
full of crusadoes. and but my noble moor is true of mind and made of no such baseness as jealous creatures are, it were enough to put him to ill thinking.
come, come, we fear the worst. all will be well.
thou chidest me well: proud bolingbroke, i come to change blows with thee for our day of doom. an easy task it is to win our own. say, scroop, where lies our uncle with his power? speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.
is he not jealous?
when clouds are seen, wise men put on their cloaks; when the sun sets, who doth not look for night? untimely storms make men expect a dearth. all may be well; but if god sort it so, 'tis more than we deserve or i expect.
men judge by the complexion of the sky so may you by my dull and heavy eye, my tongue hath but a heavier tale to say. i play the torturer, by small and small to lengthen out the worst that must be spoken: and all your northern castles yielded up, and all your southern gentlemen in arms upon his party.
who, he? i think the sun where he was born drew all such humors from him.
ye cannot reason almost with a man that looks not heavily and full of dread.
thou hast said enough.
look where he comes.
before the days of change, still is it so. by a divine instinct, men's minds mistrust the water swell before a boist'rous storm. but leave it all to god. whither away?
of that sweet way i was in to despair! what say you now? what comfort have we now? by heaven, i'll hate him everlastingly that bids me be of comfort any more. a king, woe's slave, shall kingly woe obey. that power i have, discharge; and let them go to ear the land that hath some hope to grow, for i have none: let no man speak again
i will not leave him now till cassio
marry, we were sent for to the justices.
my liege, one word.
well, my good lady., (aside) oh, hardness to dissemble!, how do you, desdemona?
and so was i. i'll bear you company.
he does me double wrong that wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue. discharge my followers: let them hence away,
well, my good lord.
last night, i hear, they lay at stony stratford, and at northampton they do rest tonight. tomorrow or next day they will be here.
so that by this intelligence we learn the welshmen are dispersed, and salisbury is gone to meet the king, who lately landed with some few private friends upon this coast.
give me your hand. this hand is moist, my lady.
i long with all my heart to see the prince.
richard not far from hence hath hid his head.
it hath felt no age nor known no sorrow.
but i hear no; they say my son of york has almost overta'en him in his growth.
it would beseem the lord northumberland to say 'king richard:' alack the heavy day when such a sacred king should hide his head.
hot, hot, and moist. this hand of yours requires a sequester from liberty, fasting, and prayer,
ay, mother, but i would not have it so.
left i his title out.
much castigation, exercise devout, for here's a young and sweating devil here, a frank one.
why, my young cousin? it is good to grow.
the time hath been, would you have been so brief with him, he would have been so brief with you, to shorten you,
you may indeed say so, for 'twas that hand that gave away my heart.
my uncle rivers talked how i did grow more than my brother: "ay," quoth my uncle gloucester, "small herbs have grace; great weeds do grow apace." and since, methinks i would not grow so fast
mistake not, uncle, further than you should.
a liberal hand. the hearts of old gave hands, but our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.
good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold in him that did object the same to thee! he was the wretched'st thing when he was young, so long a-growing and so leisurely,
take not, good cousin, further than you should. lest you mistake the heavens are o'er our heads.
i cannot speak of this. come now, your promise.
and so no doubt he is, my gracious madam.
i know it, uncle, and oppose not myself
what promise, chuck?
i hope he is, but yet let mothers doubt.
welcome, harry: what, will not this castle yield?
i have sent to bid cassio come speak with you.
now, by my troth, if i had been remembered, i could have given my uncle's grace a flout
the castle royally is mann'd, my lord, against thy entrance.
i have a salt and sorry rheum offends me. lend me thy handkerchief.
how, my pretty york? i prithee let me hear it.
royally!
here, my lord.
marry, they say my uncle grew so fast that he could gnaw a crust at two hours old. 'twas full two years ere i could get a tooth.
yes, my good lord, it doth contain a king; king richard lies within the limits of yon lime and stone: and with him are the lord aumerle, lord salisbury, of holy reverence; who, i cannot learn.
that which i gave you.
i prithee, pretty york, who told thee this?
o, belike it is the bishop of carlisle.
i have it not about me.
grandam, his nurse.
noble lords, go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle; into his ruin'd ears, and thus deliver: henry bolingbroke on both his knees doth kiss king richard's hand and sends allegiance and true faith of heart even at his feet to lay my arms and power, provided that my banishment repeal'd and lands restored again be freely granted: if not, i'll use the advantage of my power rain'd from the wounds of slaughter'd englishmen: the which, how far off from the mind of bolingbroke it is, such crimson tempest should bedrench the fresh green lap of fair king richard's land, go, signify as much, while here we march upon the grassy carpet of this plain. let's march without the noise of threatening drum, that from this castle's tatter'd battlements methinks king richard and myself should meet with no less terror than the elements of fire and water, when their thundering shock at meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven. the rage be his, whilst on the earth i rain my waters; on the earth, and not on him. march on, and mark king richard how he looks.
not?
his nurse? why, she was dead ere thou wast born.
see, see, king richard doth himself appear, from out the fiery portal of the east, when he perceives the envious clouds are bent to dim his glory and to stain the track of his bright passage to the occident.
no, indeed, my lord.
if 'twere not she, i cannot tell who told me.
as bright as is the eagle's, lightens forth controlling majesty: alack, alack, for woe, that any harm should stain so fair a show!
that's a fault. that handkerchief did an egyptian to my mother give, she was a charmer and could almost read
a parlous boy! go to, you are too shrewd.
we are amazed; and thus long have we stood
the thoughts of people. she told her, while she kept it entirely to her love, but if she lost it or made gift of it, my father's eye should hold her loathèd and his spirits should hunt after new fancies. she, dying, gave it me to give it her. i did so, and take heed on 't, make it a darling like your precious eye. to lose 't or give 't away were such perdition as nothing else could match.
good madam, be not angry with the child.
because we thought ourself thy lawful king: and if we be, how dare thy joints forget to pay their awful duty to our presence? if we be not, show us the hand of god for well we know, no hand of blood and bone can grip the sacred handle of our sceptre, unless he do profane, steal, or usurp. and though you think that all, as you have done, and we are barren and bereft of friends; yet know, my master, god omnipotent, is mustering in his clouds on our behalf armies of pestilence; and they shall strike that lift your vassal hands against my head and threat the glory of my precious crown. tell bolingbroke, for yond methinks he stands, that every stride he makes upon my land the purple testament of bleeding war; but ere the crown he looks for live in peace, ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers' sons shall ill become the flower of england's face, to scarlet indignation and bedew her pastures' grass with faithful english blood.
is 't possible?
pitchers have ears.
the king of heaven forbid our lord the king should so with civil and uncivil arms harry bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand; and by the honourable tomb he swears, that stands upon your royal grandsire's bones, and by the royalties of both your bloods, and by the buried hand of warlike gaunt, and by the worth and honour of himself, comprising all that may be sworn or said, his coming hither hath no further scope enfranchisement immediate on his knees: which on thy royal party granted once, his glittering arms he will commend to rust, his barbed steeds to stables, and his heart this swears he, as he is a prince, is just; and, as i am a gentleman, i credit him.
a sibyl, that had numbered in the world the sun to course two hundred compasses, in her prophetic fury sewed the work. the worms were hallowed that did breed the silk, conserved of maidens' hearts.
here comes a messenger. , what news?
northumberland, say thus the king returns: his noble cousin is right welcome hither; shall be accomplish'd without contradiction: with all the gracious utterance thou hast speak to his gentle hearing kind commends. we do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not,
indeed? is 't true?
such news, my lord, as grieves me to report.
my lord, in the base court he doth attend to speak with you; may it please you to come down.
most veritable, therefore look to 't well.
how doth the prince?
wanting the manage of unruly jades. in the base court? base court, where kings grow base, to come at traitors' calls and do them grace. in the base court? come down? down, court! for night-owls shriek where mounting larks should sing.
then would to heaven that i had never seen 't!
well, madam, and in health.
what says his majesty?
ha! wherefore?
what is thy news then?
sorrow and grief of heart yet he is come.
why do you speak so startingly and rash?
lord rivers and lord grey are sent to pomfret, and, with them, sir thomas vaughan, prisoners.
stand all apart, and show fair duty to his majesty.
is 't lost? is 't gone? speak, is 't out o' th' way?
who hath committed them?
my gracious lord,, 
bless us!
the mighty dukes, gloucester and buckingham.
to make the base earth proud with kissing it: me rather had my heart might feel your love than my unpleased eye see your courtesy. up, cousin, up; your heart is up, i know,
say you?
for what offence?
my gracious lord, i come but for mine own.
it is not lost, but what and if it were?
the sum of all i can, i have disclosed. why, or for what, the nobles were committed
your own is yours, and i am yours, and all.
how!
ay me! i see the ruin of my house. the tiger now hath seized the gentle hind. insulting tyranny begins to jut upon the innocent and aweless throne. i see, as in a map, the end of all.
so far be mine, my most redoubted lord, as my true service shall deserve your love.
i say, it is not lost.
accursèd and unquiet wrangling days, how many of you have mine eyes beheld? my husband lost his life to get the crown, for me to joy, and weep, their gain and loss. and being seated, and domestic broils clean overblown, themselves the conquerors make war upon themselves, brother to brother, and frantic outrage, end thy damnèd spleen, or let me die, to look on death no more.
that know the strong'st and surest way to get. uncle, give me your hands: nay, dry your eyes; tears show their love, but want their remedies. cousin, i am too young to be your father, what you will have, i'll give, and willing too; for do we must what force will have us do. set on towards london, cousin, is it so?
fetch 't, let me see 't.
(to york) come, come, my boy. we will to sanctuary. madam, farewell.
yea, my good lord.
why, so i can, sir, but i will not now. this is a trick to put me from my suit. pray you, let cassio be received again.
stay, i will go with you
then i must not say no.
fetch me the handkerchief, my mind misgives.
you have no cause.
what sport shall we devise here in this garden, to drive away the heavy thought of care?
come, come, you'll never meet a more sufficient man.
(to queen elizabeth) my gracious lady, go, and thither bear your treasure and your goods. for my part, i'll resign unto your grace as well i tender you and all of yours. go. i'll conduct you to the sanctuary.
madam, we'll play at bowls.
the handkerchief!
welcome, sweet prince, to london, to your chamber.
'twill make me think the world is full of rubs,
a man that all his time hath founded his good fortunes on your love,
(to prince) welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts' sovereign. the weary way hath made you melancholy.
madam, we'll dance.
the handkerchief!
no, uncle, but our crosses on the way i want more uncles here to welcome me.
my legs can keep no measure in delight, when my poor heart no measure keeps in grief: therefore, no dancing, girl; some other sport.
in sooth, you are to blame.
sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years hath not yet dived into the world's deceit; nor more can you distinguish of a man seldom or never jumpeth with the heart. those uncles which you want were dangerous. your grace attended to their sugared words but looked not on the poison of their hearts.
madam, we'll tell tales.
away!
god keep me from false friends, but they were none.
of sorrow or of joy?
is not this man jealous?
my lord, the mayor of london comes to greet you.
of either, madam.
i ne'er saw this before. i am most unhappy in the loss of it.
god bless your grace with health and happy days.
of neither, girl: for of joy, being altogether wanting, or if of grief, being altogether had, it adds more sorrow to my want of joy: for what i have i need not to repeat; and what i want it boots not to complain.
'tis not a year or two shows us a man. they are all but stomachs, and we all but food. to eat us hungerly, and when they are full,
i thank you, good my lord, and thank you all., would long ere this have met us on the way. fie, what a slug is hastings that he comes not to tell us whether they will come or no!
madam, i'll sing.
there is no other way. 'tis she must do 't, and, lo, the happiness! go and importune her.
and in good time here comes the sweating lord.
'tis well that thou hast cause but thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep.
how now, good cassio, what's the news with you?
welcome, my lord. what, will our mother come?
i could weep, madam, would it do you good.
madam, my former suit. i do beseech you exist, and be a member of his love whom i, with all the office of my heart entirely honor. i would not be delayed. if my offence be of such mortal kind nor purposed merit in futurity, can ransom me into his love again, but to know so must be my benefit. so shall i clothe me in a forced content, to fortune's alms.
on what occasion god he knows, not i, the queen your mother and your brother york have taken sanctuary. the tender prince would fain have come with me to meet your grace,
and i could sing, would weeping do me good,
alas, thrice-gentle cassio, my advocation is not now in tune. my lord is not my lord, nor should i know him were he in favor as in humor altered. as i have spoken for you all my best and stood within the blank of his displeasure for my free speech. you must awhile be patient. what i can do i will, and more i will
fie, what an indirect and peevish course is this of hers! , lord cardinal, will your grace persuade the queen to send the duke of york unto his princely brother presently?, and from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.
but stay, here come the gardeners: let's step into the shadow of these trees. my wretchedness unto a row of pins, they'll talk of state; for every one doth so
is my lord angry?
my lord of buckingham, if my weak oratory can from his mother win the duke of york, anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate we should infringe the holy privilege of blessèd sanctuary! not for all this land would i be guilty of so deep a sin.
go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks, which, like unruly children, make their sire stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight: give some supportance to the bending twigs. cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays, that look too lofty in our commonwealth: all must be even in our government. you thus employ'd, i will go root away the soil's fertility from wholesome flowers.
he went hence but now, and certainly in strange unquietness.
you are too senseless obstinate, my lord, weigh it but with the grossness of this age, you break not sanctuary in seizing him. the benefit thereof is always granted to those whose dealings have deserved the place this prince hath neither claimed it nor deserved it and therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it. then taking him from thence that is not there, you break no privilege nor charter there. but sanctuary children, ne'er till now.
why should we in the compass of a pale keep law and form and due proportion, showing, as in a model, our firm estate, is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up, her fruit-trees all upturned, her hedges ruin'd, her knots disorder'd and her wholesome herbs swarming with caterpillars?
can he be angry? i have seen the cannon when it hath blown his ranks into the air puffed his own brother, and is he angry? something of moment then, i will go meet him. there's matter in 't indeed, if he be angry.
my lord, you shall o'errule my mind for once., come on, lord hastings, will you go with me?
he that hath suffer'd this disorder'd spring hath now himself met with the fall of leaf: the weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter, that seem'd in eating him to hold him up, i mean the earl of wiltshire, bushy, green.
i prithee, do so.
i go, my lord.
what, are they dead?
something, sure, of state, made demonstrable here in cyprus to him, hath puddled his clear spirit, and in such cases men's natures wrangle with inferior things, though great ones are their object. 'tis even so, our other healthful members even to that sense of pain. nay, we must think men are not gods, nor of them look for such observances as fit the bridal. beshrew me much, emilia, arraigning his unkindness with my soul, but now i find i had suborned the witness, and he's indicted falsely.
good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.
they are; and bolingbroke hath seized the wasteful king. o, what pity is it as we this garden! we at time of year do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit-trees, lest, being over-proud in sap and blood, with too much riches it confound itself: they might have lived to bear and he to taste their fruits of duty: superfluous branches we lop away, that bearing boughs may live: had he done so, himself had borne the crown,
pray heaven it be state matters, as you think, and no conception
say, uncle gloucester, if our brother come, where shall we sojourn till our coronation?
what, think you then the king shall be deposed?
alas the day! i never gave him cause.
where it seems best unto your royal self. if i may counsel you, some day or two then where you please and shall be thought most fit for your best health and recreation.
depress'd he is already, and deposed 'tis doubt he will be: letters came last night to a dear friend of the good duke of york's,
but jealous souls will not be answered so. they are not ever jealous for the cause, but jealous for they're jealous. it is a monster
i do not like the tower, of any place., did julius caesar build that place, my lord?
o, i am press'd to death through want of speaking!
heaven keep the monster from othello's mind!
which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.
thou, old adam's likeness, set to dress this garden, how dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news? what eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee why dost thou say king richard is deposed? darest thou, thou little better thing than earth, divine his downfall? say, where, when, and how, camest thou by this ill tidings? speak, thou wretch.
lady, amen.
is it upon record, or else reported successively from age to age, he built it?
to breathe this news; yet what i say is true. king richard, he is in the mighty hold of bolingbroke: their fortunes both are weigh'd: in your lord's scale is nothing but himself, but in the balance of great bolingbroke, besides himself, are all the english peers, and with that odds he weighs king richard down. post you to london, and you will find it so;
i will go seek him., cassio, walk hereabout. if i do find him fit, i'll move your suit
upon record, my gracious lord.
nimble mischance, that art so light of foot, doth not thy embassage belong to me, and am i last that knows it? o, thou think'st to serve me last, that i may longest keep to meet at london london's king in woe. what, was i born to this, that my sad look should grace the triumph of great bolingbroke? gardener, for telling me these news of woe,
i humbly thank your ladyship.
methinks the truth should live from age to age, as 'twere retailed to all posterity, even to the general all-ending day.
poor queen! so that thy state might be no worse, i would my skill were subject to thy curse. here did she fall a tear; here in this place i'll set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace: in the remembrance of a weeping queen.
save you, friend cassio!
(aside) so wise so young, they say, do never live long.
call forth bagot. now, bagot, freely speak thy mind; what thou dost know of noble gloucester's death, who wrought it with the king, and who perform'd
what make you from home? how is 't with you, my most fair bianca? indeed, sweet love, i was coming to your house.
what say you, uncle?
then set before my face the lord aumerle.
what, keep a week away? seven days and nights? eight score eight hours? and lovers' absent hours more tedious than the dial eightscore times! oh weary reckoning!
i say, without characters fame lives long. (aside) thus, like the formal vice, iniquity, i moralize two meanings in one word.
cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.
pardon me, bianca, but i shall, in a more continuate time, strike off this score of absence. sweet bianca, (giving her desdemona's handkerchief) take me this work out.
that julius caesar was a famous man. his wit set down to make his valor live. death makes no conquest of this conqueror, for now he lives in fame, though not in life. i'll tell you what, my cousin buckingham, 
my lord aumerle, i know your daring tongue scorns to unsay what once it hath deliver'd. i heard you say, 'is not my arm of length, that reacheth from the restful english court as far as calais, to mine uncle's head?' amongst much other talk, that very time, the offer of an hundred thousand crowns than bolingbroke's return to england; adding withal how blest this land would be in this your cousin's death.
o cassio, whence came this? to the felt absence now i feel a cause. is 't come to this? well, well.
what, my gracious lord?
what answer shall i make to this base man? shall i so much dishonour my fair stars, on equal terms to give him chastisement? either i must, or have mine honour soil'd there is my gage, the manual seal of death, that marks thee out for hell: i say, thou liest, and will maintain what thou hast said is false in thy heart-blood, though being all too base
go to, woman, throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth from whence you have them. you are jealous now no, in good troth, bianca.
an if i live until i be a man, i'll win our ancient right in france again or die a soldier, as i lived a king.
bagot, forbear; thou shalt not take it up.
why, whose is it?
(aside) short summers lightly have a forward spring.
excepting one, i would he were the best in all this presence that hath moved me so.
i know not neither, i found it in my chamber. i like the work well. ere it be demanded, as like enough it will, i would have it copied.
now in good time here comes the duke of york.
if that thy valour stand on sympathy, by that fair sun which shows me where thou stand'st, i heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakest it that thou wert cause of noble gloucester's death. if thou deny'st it twenty times, thou liest; where it was forged, with my rapier's point.
leave you! wherefore?
richard of york, how fares our loving brother?
thou darest not, coward, live to see that day.
i do attend here on the general and think it no addition, nor my wish, to have him see me womaned.
well, my dread lord, so must i call you now.
now by my soul, i would it were this hour.
why, i pray you?
ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours. too late he died that might have kept that title,
fitzwater, thou art damn'd to hell for this.
not that i love you not.
how fares our cousin, noble lord of york?
in this appeal as thou art all unjust; and that thou art so, there i throw my gage, to prove it on thee to the extremest point of mortal breathing: seize it, if thou darest.
but that you do not love me. i pray you bring me on the way a little and say if i shall see you soon at night.
i thank you, gentle uncle. o, my lord, you said that idle weeds are fast in growth. the prince my brother hath outgrown me far.
and never brandish more revengeful steel over the glittering helmet of my foe!
'tis but a little way that i can bring you, for i attend here. but i'll see you soon.
he hath, my lord.
i task the earth to the like, forsworn aumerle; and spur thee on with full as many lies from sun to sun: there is my honour's pawn; engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
'tis very good. i must be circumstanced.
and therefore is he idle?
who sets me else? by heaven, i'll throw at all: i have a thousand spirits in one breast,
will you think so?
o, my fair cousin, i must not say so.
my lord fitzwater, i do remember well the very time aumerle and you did talk.
think so, iago?
then is he more beholding to you than i.
'tis very true: you were in presence then; and you can witness with me this is true.
what, to kiss in private?
he may command me as my sovereign,
as false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.
an unauthorized kiss!
i pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.
surrey, thou liest.
or to be naked with her friend in bed an hour or more, not meaning any harm?
my dagger, little cousin? with all my heart.
dishonourable boy! that lie shall lie so heavy on my sword, that it shall render vengeance and revenge in earth as quiet as thy father's skull: in proof whereof, there is my honour's pawn; engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
it is hypocrisy against the devil. they that mean virtuously, and yet do so, the devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.
a beggar, brother?
how fondly dost thou spur a forward horse! i dare meet surrey in a wilderness, and spit upon him, whilst i say he lies, and lies, and lies: there is my bond of faith, to tie thee to my strong correction. aumerle is guilty of my true appeal: besides, i heard the banish'd norfolk say that thou, aumerle, didst send two of thy men to execute the noble duke at calais.
so they do nothing, 'tis a venial slip.
of my kind uncle, that i know will give,
that norfolk lies: here do i throw down this, if he may be repeal'd, to try his honour.
what then?
a greater gift than that i'll give my cousin.
these differences shall all rest under gage till norfolk be repeal'd: repeal'd he shall be, to all his lands and signories: when he's return'd, against aumerle we will enforce his trial.
why then 'tis hers, my lord, and, being hers, she may, i think, bestow 't on any man.
a greater gift? o, that's the sword to it.
that honourable day shall ne'er be seen. many a time hath banish'd norfolk fought streaming the ensign of the christian cross against black pagans, turks, and saracens: and toil'd with works of war, retired himself to italy; and there at venice gave and his pure soul unto his captain christ, under whose colours he had fought so long.
she is protectress of her honor too.
ay, gentle cousin, were it light enough.
why, bishop, is norfolk dead?
her honor is an essence that's not seen, they have it very oft that have it not. but for the handkerchief, 
o, then i see you will part but with light gifts.
as surely as i live, my lord.
by heaven, i would most gladly have forgot it. as doth the raven o'er the infectious house, boding to all, he had my handkerchief.
it is too heavy for your grace to wear.
of good old abraham! lords appellants, your differences shall all rest under gage till we assign you to your days of trial.
ay, what of that?
i weigh it lightly, were it heavier.
great duke of lancaster, i come to thee adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields to the possession of thy royal hand: ascend his throne, descending now from him; and long live henry, fourth of that name!
that's not so good now.
what, would you have my weapon, little lord?
in god's name, i'll ascend the regal throne.
what if i had said i had seen him do you wrong? who having, by their own importunate suit, or voluntary dotage of some mistress, convincèd or supplied them, cannot choose but they must blab, 
i would, that i might thank you as you call me.
marry. god forbid! worst in this royal presence may i speak, yet best beseeming me to speak the truth. would god that any in this noble presence of noble richard! then true noblesse would learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong. what subject can give sentence on his king? and who sits here that is not richard's subject? although apparent guilt be seen in them; and shall the figure of god's majesty, his captain, steward, deputy-elect, anointed, crowned, planted many years, and he himself not present? o, forfend it, god, that in a christian climate souls refined should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed! i speak to subjects, and a subject speaks, my lord of hereford here, whom you call king, is a foul traitor to proud hereford's king: and if you crown him, let me prophesy: the blood of english shall manure the ground, peace shall go sleep with turks and infidels, and in this seat of peace tumultuous wars shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound; disorder, horror, fear and mutiny the field of golgotha and dead men's skulls. o, if you raise this house against this house, it will the woefullest division prove that ever fell upon this cursed earth. lest child, child's children, cry against you woe!
hath he said any thing?
how?
well have you argued, sir; and, for your pains, of capital treason we arrest you here. my lord of westminster, be it your charge may it please you, lords, to grant the commons' suit.
no more than he'll unswear.
little.
fetch hither richard, that in common view he may surrender; so we shall proceed without suspicion.
what hath he said?
my lord of york will still be cross in talk. uncle, your grace knows how to bear with him.
i will be his conduct.
why, that he did, i know not what he did.
you mean, to bear me, not to bear with me., because that i am little, like an ape, he thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.
lords, you that here are under our arrest, procure your sureties for your days of answer. little are we beholding to your love, and little look'd for at your helping hands.
what? what?
(aside) with what a sharp-provided wit he reasons! to mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle, so cunning and so young is wonderful.
before i have shook off the regal thoughts wherewith i reign'd? i hardly yet have learn'd to insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my limbs: give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me the favours of these men: were they not mine? did they not sometime cry, 'all hail!' to me? so judas did to christ: but he, in twelve, found truth in all but one: i, in twelve thousand, none. am i both priest and clerk? well then, amen. god save the king! although i be not he; and yet, amen, if heaven do think him me. to do what service am i sent for hither?
lie, 
(to prince) my lord, will 't please you pass along? myself and my good cousin buckingham will to your mother, to entreat of her
which tired majesty did make thee offer, the resignation of thy state and crown to henry bolingbroke.
with her?
(to prince) what, will you go unto the tower, my lord?
give me the crown. here, cousin, seize the crown; on this side my hand, and on that side yours. now is this golden crown like a deep well that owes two buckets, filling one another, the emptier ever dancing in the air, that bucket down and full of tears am i, drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.
with her, on her, what you will.
my lord protector needs will have it so.
i thought you had been willing to resign.
lie with her? lie on her? we say "lie on her" when they belie her! lie with her, that's fulsome. handkerchief, confessions, handkerchief! to confess, and be hanged for his labor. first to be hanged, and then to confess, i tremble at it. nature would not invest herself in such shadowing passion without some instruction. it is not words that shake me thus. pish! noses, ears, and lips. is 't possible? confess!, handkerchief!, oh, devil!, 
i shall not sleep in quiet at the tower.
my crown i am; but still my griefs are mine: but not my griefs; still am i king of those.
and many worthy and chaste dames even thus, all guiltless, meet reproach., what, ho! my lord! my lord, i say! othello!
why, what should you fear?
part of your cares you give me with your crown.
how now, cassio!
my grandam told me he was murdered there.
your cares set up do not pluck my cares down. my care is loss of care, by old care done; the cares i give i have, though given away; they tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.
what's the matter?
i fear no uncles dead.
are you contented to resign the crown?
this is his second fit. he had one yesterday.
nor none that live, i hope.
ay, no; no, ay; for i must nothing be; now mark me, how i will undo myself; i give this heavy weight from off my head and this unwieldy sceptre from my hand, the pride of kingly sway from out my heart; with mine own hands i give away my crown, with mine own tongue deny my sacred state, with mine own breath release all duty's rites: all pomp and majesty i do forswear; my acts, decrees, and statutes i deny: god pardon all oaths that are broke to me! god keep all vows unbroke that swear to thee! make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved, long mayst thou live in richard's seat to sit, and soon lie richard in an earthly pit! god save king harry, unking'd richard says, and send him many years of sunshine days!
rub him about the temples.
an if they live, i hope i need not fear. thinking on them, go i unto the tower.
no more, but that you read these accusations and these grievous crimes committed by your person and your followers against the state and profit of this land; may deem that you are worthily deposed.
no, forbear. the lethargy must have his quiet course. if not, he foams at mouth and by and by do you withdraw yourself a little while,
think you, my lord, this little prating york was not incensèd by his subtle mother to taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?
must i do so? and must i ravel out my weaved-up folly? gentle northumberland, if thy offences were upon record, to read a lecture of them? if thou wouldst, there shouldst thou find one heinous article, containing the deposing of a king and cracking the strong warrant of an oath, nay, all of you that stand and look upon, whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself, though some of you with pilate wash your hands showing an outward pity; yet you pilates and water cannot wash away your sin.
he will recover straight. when he is gone i would on great occasion speak with you.
bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable. he is all the mother's, from the top to toe.
my lord, dispatch; read o'er these articles.
how is it, general? have you not hurt your head?
well, let them rest., come hither, catesby. thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend thou knowest our reasons, urged upon the way. what thinkest thou? is it not an easy matter to make william lord hastings of our mind for the installment of this noble duke
mine eyes are full of tears, i cannot see: and yet salt water blinds them not so much nay, if i turn mine eyes upon myself, i find myself a traitor with the rest; for i have given here my soul's consent to undeck the pompous body of a king; proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.
dost thou mock me?
he, for his father's sake, so loves the prince that he will not be won to aught against him.
my lord,, 
i mock you not, by heaven. would you would bear your fortune like a man!
what think'st thou then of stanley? will not he?
no lord of thine, thou haught insulting man, nor no man's lord; i have no name, no title, but 'tis usurp'd: alack the heavy day, that i have worn so many winters out, and know not now what name to call myself! o that i were a mockery king of snow, to melt myself away in water-drops! good king, great king, and yet not greatly good, an if my word be sterling yet in england, let it command a mirror hither straight, since it is bankrupt of his majesty.
a hornèd man's a monster and a beast.
he will do all in all as hastings doth.
go some of you and fetch a looking-glass.
there's many a beast then in a populous city, and many a civil monster.
and, as it were far off, sound thou lord hastings how he doth stand affected to our purpose and summon him tomorrow to the tower to sit about the coronation. encourage him and show him all our reasons. if he be leaden, icy, cold, unwilling, be thou so too, and so break off the talk, and give us notice of his inclination; wherein thyself shalt highly be employed.
read o'er this paper while the glass doth come.
did he confess it?
commend me to lord william. tell him, catesby, his ancient knot of dangerous adversaries tomorrow are let blood at pomfret castle, give mistress shore one gentle kiss the more.
fiend, thou torment'st me ere i come to hell!
good sir, be a man, think every bearded fellow that's but yoked may draw with you. there's millions now alive that nightly lie in those unproper beds which they dare swear peculiar. your case is better. to lip a wanton in a secure couch, and to suppose her chaste. no, let me know, and knowing what i am, i know what she shall be.
good catesby, go effect this business soundly.
urge it no more, my lord northumberland.
oh, thou art wise! 'tis certain.
my good lords both, with all the heed i can.
the commons will not then be satisfied.
stand you awhile apart, whilst you were here o'erwhelmèd with your grief, a passion most resulting such a man, cassio came hither. i shifted him away and laid good 'scuses upon your ecstasy,
shall we hear from you, catesby, ere we sleep?
they shall be satisfied: i'll read enough, when i do see the very book indeed where all my sins are writ, and that's myself.
the which he promised. do but encave yourself, and mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns that dwell in every region of his face. for i will make him tell the tale anew he hath, and is again to cope your wife. i say, but mark his gesture. marry, patience, or i shall say you are all in all in spleen, and nothing of a man.
you shall, my lord.
no deeper wrinkles yet? hath sorrow struck so many blows upon this face of mine, and made no deeper wounds? o flattering glass, like to my followers in prosperity, that every day under his household roof did keep ten thousand men? was this the face that, like the sun, did make beholders wink? was this the face that faced so many follies, a brittle glory shineth in this face: as brittle as the glory is the face;
dost thou hear, iago? but, dost thou hear?, most bloody.
at crosby place, there shall you find us both.
for there it is, crack'd in a hundred shivers. mark, silent king, the moral of this sport,
that's not amiss, but yet keep time in all. will you withdraw?
now, my lord, what shall we do, if we perceive lord hastings will not yield to our complots?
the shadow of your sorrow hath destroy'd the shadow or your face.
now will i question cassio of bianca, a huswife that by selling her desires that dotes on cassio, as 'tis the strumpet's plague to beguile many and be beguiled by one. he, when he hears of her, cannot refrain from the excess of laughter. here he comes.
chop off his head. something we will determine. the earldom of hereford, and all the moveables whereof the king my brother was possessed.
say that again. the shadow of my sorrow! ha! let's see: and these external manners of laments are merely shadows to the unseen grief that swells with silence in the tortured soul; there lies the substance: and i thank thee, king, me cause to wail but teachest me the way how to lament the cause. i'll beg one boon, and then be gone and trouble you no more. shall i obtain it?
and his unbookish jealousy must construe poor cassio's smiles, gestures, and light behavior quite in the wrong., how do you now, lieutenant?
i'll claim that promise at your grace's hands.
name it, fair cousin.
the worser that you give me the addition
and look to have it yielded with all kindness. we may digest our complots in some form.
'fair cousin'? i am greater than a king: for when i was a king, my flatterers were then but subjects; being now a subject, i have a king here to my flatterer.
ply desdemona well, and you are sure on 't. now if this suit lay in bianca's power how quickly should you speed!
(knocking) my lord, my lord.
yet ask.
alas, poor caitiff!
(within) who knocks?
and shall i have?
look how he laughs already!
one from the lord stanley.
you shall.
i never knew woman love man so.
(within) what is 't o'clock?
then give me leave to go.
alas, poor rogue, i think indeed she loves me.
upon the stroke of four.
whither?
now he denies it faintly, and laughs it out.
cannot my lord stanley sleep these tedious nights?
whither you will, so i were from your sights.
do you hear, cassio?
so it appears by that i have to say. first, he commends him to your noble self.
go, some of you convey him to the tower.
now he importunes him to tell it o'er. go to, well said, well said.
what then?
o, good! convey? conveyers are you all, that rise thus nimbly by a true king's fall.
do you intend it?
he dreamt the boar had razèd his helm besides, he says there are two councils kept, and that may be determined at the one which may make you and him to rue at th' other. if you will presently take horse with him and with all speed post with him toward the north to shun the danger that his soul divines.
our coronation: lords, prepare yourselves.
ha, ha, ha!
go, fellow, go. return unto thy lord. his honor and myself are at the one, and at the other is my good friend catesby, where nothing can proceed that toucheth us whereof i shall not have intelligence. and for his dreams, i wonder he's so simple to trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers. to fly the boar before the boar pursues were to incense the boar to follow us go, bid thy master rise and come to me, and we will both together to the tower, where he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.
a woeful pageant have we here beheld.
do ye triumph, roman? do you triumph?
i'll go, my lord, and tell him what you say.
the woe's to come; the children yet unborn. shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.
i marry her! what? a customer? prithee bear some charity to my wit. do not think it so unwholesome. ha, ha, ha!
many good morrows to my noble lord.
to rid the realm of this pernicious blot?
so, so, so, so! they laugh that win!
good morrow, catesby. you are early stirring. what news, what news in this our tott'ring state?
my lord, before i freely speak my mind herein, you shall not only take the sacrament whatever i shall happen to devise. i see your brows are full of discontent, your hearts of sorrow and your eyes of tears: come home with me to supper; and i'll lay
why the cry goes that you shall marry her.
it is a reeling world indeed, my lord, and i believe will never stand upright
this way the king will come; this is the way to julius caesar's ill-erected tower, to whose flint bosom my condemned lord is doom'd a prisoner by proud bolingbroke: have any resting for her true king's queen.
prithee say true!
how "wear the garland"? dost thou mean the crown?
but soft, but see, or rather do not see, my fair rose wither: yet look up, behold, that you in pity may dissolve to dew, ah, thou, the model where old troy did stand, thou map of honour, thou king richard's tomb, and not king richard; thou most beauteous inn, why should hard-favour'd grief be lodged in thee,
i am a very villain else.
ay, my good lord.
join not with grief, fair woman, do not so, to make my end too sudden: learn, good soul, to think our former state a happy dream; from which awaked, the truth of what we are to grim necessity, and he and i will keep a league till death. hie thee to france and cloister thee in some religious house: our holy lives must win a new world's crown,
have you scored me? well.
i'll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders before i'll see the crown so foul misplaced.
what, is my richard both in shape and mind transform'd and weaken'd? hath bolingbroke deposed thine intellect? hath he been in thy heart? the lion dying thrusteth forth his paw, to be o'erpower'd; and wilt thou, pupil-like, take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod, and fawn on rage with base humility, which art a lion and a king of beasts?
this is the monkey's own giving out. she is persuaded i will marry her, out of her own love and flattery, not out of my promise.
ay, on my life, and hopes to find you forward upon his party for the gain thereof; and thereupon he sends you this good news, that this same very day your enemies,
i had been still a happy king of men. good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for france: think i am dead and that even here thou takest, as from my death-bed, thy last living leave. with good old folks and let them tell thee tales of woeful ages long ago betid; and ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs, tell thou the lamentable tale of me for why, the senseless brands will sympathize the heavy accent of thy moving tongue and in compassion weep the fire out; and some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black,
iago beckons me. now he begins the story.
indeed, i am no mourner for that news, because they have been still my adversaries. but that i'll give my voice on richard's side to bar my master's heirs in true descent,
my lord, the mind of bolingbroke is changed: you must to pomfret, not unto the tower. and, madam, there is order ta'en for you; with all swift speed you must away to france.
she was here even now. she haunts me in every place. i was the other day talking on the sea-bank with certain venetians, and thither comes the bauble and, by this hand, she falls me thus about my neck, 
god keep your lordship in that gracious mind.
the mounting bolingbroke ascends my throne, the time shall not be many hours of age more than it is ere foul sin gathering head shalt break into corruption: thou shalt think, it is too little, helping him to all; and he shall think that thou, which know'st the way to plant unrightful kings, wilt know again, being ne'er so little urged, another way the love of wicked men converts to fear; that fear to hate, and hate turns one or both to worthy danger and deserved death.
crying "o dear cassio!" as it were. his gesture imports it.
but i shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence, that they which brought me in my master's hate, i live to look upon their tragedy. i'll send some packing that yet think not on 't.
my guilt be on my head, and there an end.
so hangs and lolls and weeps upon me, so shakes, and pulls me! ha, ha, ha!
'tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord, when men are unprepared and look not for it.
doubly divorced! bad men, you violate a twofold marriage, 'twixt my crown and me, and then betwixt me and my married wife. let me unkiss the oath 'twixt thee and me; part us, northumberland; i toward the north, where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime; my wife to france: from whence, set forth in pomp, she came adorned hither like sweet may,
now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber. oh, i see that nose of yours, but not that dog i shall throw it to.
o monstrous, monstrous! and so falls it out with some men else that think themselves as safe as thou and i, who, as thou know'st, are dear to princely richard and to buckingham.
and must we be divided? must we part?
well, i must leave her company.
the princes both make high account of you, (aside) for they account his head upon the bridge.
ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.
before me! look, where she comes.
i know they do, and i have well deserved it.
banish us both and send the king with me.
'tis such another fitchew. marry, a perfumed one., what do you mean by this haunting of me?
come on, come on. where is your boar-spear, man? fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?
that were some love but little policy.
let the devil and his dam haunt you! what did you mean by that same handkerchief you gave me even now? i was a fine fool to take it. i must take out the work? a likely piece of work, that you should find it in your chamber, and not know who left it there! this is some minx's token, and i must take out the work? there, give it your hobby-horse. wheresoever you had it, i'll take out no work on 't.
my lord, good morrow. , good morrow, catesby., you may jest on, but, by the holy rood,
then whither he goes, thither let me go.
how now, my sweet bianca! how now, how now?
my lord, i hold my life as dear as you do yours, and never in my days, i do protest, was it so precious to me as 'tis now. think you but that i know our state secure,
so two, together weeping, make one woe. weep thou for me in france, i for thee here; better far off than near, be ne'er the near. go, count thy way with sighs; i mine with groans.
by heaven, that should be my handkerchief!
the lords at pomfret, when they rode from london, were jocund and supposed their states were sure, and they indeed had no cause to mistrust; but yet you see how soon the day o'ercast. pray god, i say, i prove a needless coward! what, shall we toward the tower? the day is spent.
so longest way shall have the longest moans.
if you'll come to supper tonight, you may. if you will not, come when you are next prepared for.
come, come. have with you. wot you what, my lord? today the lords you talked of are beheaded.
twice for one step i'll groan, the way being short, and piece the way out with a heavy heart. come, come, in wooing sorrow let's be brief, since, wedding it, there is such length in grief; thus give i mine, and thus take i thy heart.
after her, after her.
than some that have accused them wear their hats. but come, my lord, let's away.
give me mine own again; 'twere no good part to take on me to keep and kill thy heart. so, now i have mine own again, be gone,
i must, she'll rail in the street else.
go on before. i'll talk with this good fellow.
we make woe wanton with this fond delay: once more, adieu; the rest let sorrow say.
will you sup there?
how now, sirrah! how goes the world with thee?
my lord, you told me you would tell the rest, when weeping made you break the story off, of our two cousins coming into london.
yes, i intend so.
the better that your lordship please to ask.
where did i leave?
well, i may chance to see you, for i would very fain speak with you.
i tell thee, man, 'tis better with me now than when thou met'st me last where now we meet. then was i going prisoner to the towerby the suggestion of the queen's allies. but now, i tell thee, keep it to thyself, and i in better state than e'er i was.
where rude misgovern'd hands from windows' tops threw dust and rubbish on king richard's head.
prithee come, will you?
god hold it, to your honor's good content!
then, as i said, the duke, great bolingbroke, mounted upon a hot and fiery steed with slow but stately pace kept on his course, whilst all tongues cried 'god save thee, bolingbroke!' you would have thought the very windows spake, through casements darted their desiring eyes upon his visage, and that all the walls with painted imagery had said at once 'jesu preserve thee! welcome, bolingbroke!' bareheaded, lower than his proud steed's neck, bespake them thus: 'i thank you, countrymen:' and thus still doing, thus he pass'd along.
go to! say no more.
gramercy, fellow. there, drink that for me.
alack, poor richard! where rode he the whilst?
(advancing) how shall i murder him, iago?
i thank your honor.
after a well-graced actor leaves the stage, are idly bent on him that enters next, thinking his prattle to be tedious; even so, or with much more contempt, men's eyes no joyful tongue gave him his welcome home: but dust was thrown upon his sacred head: which with such gentle sorrow he shook off, his face still combating with tears and smiles, that had not god, for some strong purpose, steel'd the hearts of men, they must perforce have melted and barbarism itself have pitied him. but heaven hath a hand in these events, to bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now, whose state and honour i for aye allow.
did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?
well met, my lord. i am glad to see your honor.
here comes my son aumerle.
o iago!
i thank thee, good sir john, with all my heart. i am in your debt for your last exercise. come the next sabbath, and i will content you.
aumerle that was; and, madam, you must call him rutland now: i am in parliament pledge for his truth and lasting fealty to the new-made king.
and did you see the handkerchief?
i'll wait upon your lordship
welcome, my son: who are the violets now
was that mine?
your friends at pomfret, they do need the priest; your honor hath no shriving work in hand.
madam, i know not, nor i greatly care not: god knows i had as lief be none as one.
yours by this hand. and to see how he prizes the foolish woman your wife! she gave it him, and he hath given it his whore.
good faith, and when i met this holy man, the men you talk of came into my mind.
well, bear you well in this new spring of time, lest you be cropp'd before you come to prime.
i would have him nine years a-killing. a fine woman! a fair woman! a sweet woman!
i do, my lord, but long i shall not stay there. i shall return before your lordship thence.
for aught i know, my lord, they do.
nay, you must forget that.
nay, like enough, for i stay dinner there.
you will be there, i know.
ay, let her rot and perish and be damned tonight, for she shall not live. no, my heart is turned to stone. i strike it and it hurts my hand. oh, the world hath not a sweeter creature, she might lie by an emperor's side and command him tasks.
(aside) and supper too, although thou know'st it not., 
if god prevent not, i purpose so.
nay, that's not your way.
i'll wait upon your lordship.
what seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom?
hang her! i do but say what she is. so delicate with her needle, an admirable musician. oh, she will sing the savageness out of a bear! of so high and plenteous wit and invention!
sir richard ratcliffe, let me tell thee this: today shalt thou behold a subject die for truth, for duty, and for loyalty.
my lord, 'tis nothing.
she's the worse for all this.
(to ratcliffe) a knot you are of damnèd bloodsuckers.
no matter, then, who see it; i will be satisfied; let me see the writing.
oh, a thousand thousand times, and then of so gentle a condition!
(to ratcliffe) you live that shall cry woe for this hereafter.
i do beseech your grace to pardon me: which for some reasons i would not have seen.
ay, too gentle.
dispatch. the limit of your lives is out.
which for some reasons, sir, i mean to see. i fear, i fear,, 
nay, that's certain. but yet the pity of it, iago! o iago, the pity of it, iago!
o pomfret, pomfret! o thou bloody prison, within the guilty closure of thy walls, richard the second here was hacked to death, and, for more slander to thy dismal seat, we give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.
what should you fear? for gay apparel 'gainst the triumph day.
if you are so fond over her iniquity, give her patent to offend, for if it touch not you it comes near nobody.
when she exclaimed on hastings, you, and i, for standing by when richard stabbed her son.
bound to himself! what doth he with a bond that he is bound to? wife, thou art a fool. boy, let me see the writing.
i will chop her into messes! cuckold me?
then cursed she richard, then cursed she buckingham. then cursed she hastings. o, remember, god, and for my sister and her princely sons, be satisfied, dear god, with our true blood, which, as thou know'st, unjustly must be spilt.
i do beseech you, pardon me; i may not show it.
oh, 'tis foul in her.
make haste. the hour of death is expiate.
i will be satisfied; let me see it, i say.
with mine officer!
they embrace farewell until we meet in heaven.
treason! foul treason! villain! traitor! slave!
that's fouler.
now, noble peers. the cause why we are met is to determine of the coronation. in god's name, speak. when is the royal day?
what is the matter, my lord?
get me some poison, iago, this night. i'll not expostulate with her, lest her body and beauty unprovide my mind again, this night, iago!
is all things ready for the royal time?
ho! who is within there?
do it not with poison. strangle her in her bed, even the bed she hath contaminated.
it is, and wants but nomination.
god for his mercy, what treachery is here!
good, good, the justice of it pleases! very good!
tomorrow, then, i judge a happy day.
why, what is it, my lord?
and for cassio, let me be his undertaker. you shall hear more by midnight.
who knows the lord protector's mind herein? who is most inward with the noble duke?
give me my boots, i say; saddle my horse. now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth,
excellent good.
your grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.
what is the matter?
what trumpet is that same?
he knows no more of mine than i of yours, or i of his, my lord, than you of mine., lord hastings, you and he are near in love.
peace, foolish woman.
i warrant something from venice. 'tis lodovico, this, comes from the duke. see, your wife's with him.
i thank his grace. i know he loves me well. i have not sounded him, nor he delivered his gracious pleasure any way therein. but you, my honorable lords, may name the time, and in the duke's behalf i'll give my voice,
i will not peace. what is the matter, aumerle.
save you, worthy general!
in happy time here comes the duke himself.
good mother, be content; it is no more
with all my heart, sir.
my noble lords and cousins all, good morrow. i have been long a sleeper; but i trust my absence doth neglect no great design
thy life answer!
the duke and senators of venice greet you.
had you not come upon your cue, my lord, william lord hastings had pronounced your part, i mean your voice for crowning of the king.
bring me my boots: i will unto the king.
i kiss the instrument of their pleasures.
than my lord hastings no man might be bolder. my lord of ely, when i was last in holborn i saw good strawberries in your garden there; i do beseech you, send for some of them.
strike him, aumerle. poor boy, thou art amazed. hence, villain! never more come in my sight.
and what's the news, good cousin lodovico?
marry and will, my lord, with all my heart.
give me my boots, i say.
i am very glad to see you, signior. welcome to cyprus.
they move aside catesby hath sounded hastings in our business and finds the testy gentleman so hot as he will lose his head ere give consent shall lose the royalty of england's throne.
why, york, what wilt thou do? wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own? have we more sons? or are we like to have? is not my teeming date drunk up with time? and rob me of a happy mother's name? is he not like thee? is he not thine own?
i thank you. how does lieutenant cassio?
withdraw yourself awhile. i'll go with you.
thou fond mad woman, wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy? and interchangeably set down their hands, to kill the king at oxford.
lives, sir.
we have not yet set down this day of triumph. tomorrow, in my judgement, is too sudden, as else i would be, were the day prolonged.
he shall be none; we'll keep him here: then what is that to him?
an unkind breach, but you shall make all well.
where is my lord the duke of gloucester? i have sent for these strawberries.
i would appeach him.
are you sure of that?
his grace looks cheerfully and smooth this morning. when that he bids good morrow with such spirit. i think there's never a man in christendom can lesser hide his love or hate than he, for by his face straight shall you know his heart.
hadst thou groan'd for him as i have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful. but now i know thy mind; thou dost suspect and that he is a bastard, not thy son: sweet york, sweet husband, be not of that mind: he is as like thee as a man may be, not like to me, or any of my kin,
my lord?
by any livelihood he showed today?
make way, unruly woman!
(reads) "this fail you not to do, as you will, "
marry, that with no man here he is offended, for were he, he had shown it in his looks.
after, aumerle! mount thee upon his horse; spur post, and get before him to the king, and beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee. i doubt not but to ride as fast as york: and never will i rise up from the ground till bolingbroke have pardon'd thee. away, be gone!
is there division 'twixt my lord and cassio?
i pray god he be not, i say.
can no man tell me of my unthrifty son? 'tis full three months since i did see him last; if any plague hang over us, 'tis he. i would to god, my lords, he might be found: for there, they say, he daily doth frequent, with unrestrained loose companions, even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes, and beat our watch, and rob our passengers; takes on the point of honour to support so dissolute a crew.
a most unhappy one. i would do much t' atone them, for the love i bear to cassio.
that do conspire my death with devilish plots of damnèd witchcraft, and that have prevailed upon my body with their hellish charms?
my lord, some two days since i saw the prince, and told him of those triumphs held at oxford.
fire and brimstone!
the tender love i bear your grace, my lord, to doom th' offenders, whosoe'er they be. i say, my lord, they have deservèd death.
and what said the gallant?
my lord?
then be your eyes the witness of their evil. (shows his arm) is like a blasted sapling withered up; and this is edward's wife, that monstrous witch, consorted with that harlot, strumpet shore, that by their witchcraft thus have markèd me.
his answer was, he would unto the stews, and from the common'st creature pluck a glove, and wear it as a favour; and with that he would unhorse the lustiest challenger.
are you wise?
if they have done this deed, my noble lord, 
i see some sparks of better hope, which elder years may happily bring forth. but who comes here?
what, is he angry?
if? thou protector of this damnèd strumpet, talk'st thou to me of "ifs"? thou art a traitor, off with his head. now by saint paul i swear i will not dine until i see the same., the rest that love me, rise and follow me.
where is the king?
maybe the letter moved him, for, as i think, they do command him home, deputing cassio in his government.
woe, woe for england! not a whit for me, for i, too fond, might have prevented this. stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm, three times today my foot-cloth horse did stumble, and started when he looked upon the tower, as loath to bear me to the slaughterhouse. o, now i need the priest that spake to me!
what means our cousin, that he stares and looks
trust me, i am glad on 't.
as too triumphing, how mine enemies today at pomfret bloodily were butchered, and i myself secure in grace and favor. o margaret, margaret, now thy heavy curse
god save your grace! i do beseech your majesty, to have some conference with your grace alone.
indeed!
come, come, dispatch. the duke would be at dinner. make a short shrift. he longs to see your head.
withdraw yourselves, and leave us here alone.
my lord?
o momentary grace of mortal men, which we more hunt for than the grace of god! lives like a drunken sailor on a mast, ready with every nod to tumble down into the fatal bowels of the deep.
what is the matter with our cousin now?
i am glad to see you mad.
come, come, dispatch. 'tis bootless to exclaim.
my tongue cleave to my roof within my mouth unless a pardon ere i rise or speak.
why, sweet othello, 
i prophesy the fearfull'st time to thee that ever wretched age hath looked upon., come, lead me to the block. bear him my head. they smile at me that shortly shall be dead.
intended or committed was this fault? if on the first, how heinous e'er it be,
(striking her) devil!
come, cousin, canst thou quake and change thy color, murder thy breath in the middle of a word, and then begin again, and stop again, as if thou wert distraught and mad with terror?
then give me leave that i may turn the key, that no man enter till my tale be done.
i have not deserved this.
speak, and look back, and pry on every side, tremble and start at wagging of a straw, intending deep suspicion. ghastly looks are at my service, like enforcèd smiles, at any time to grace my stratagems. but what, is catesby gone?
have thy desire.
though i should swear i saw 't. 'tis very much. make her amends, she weeps.
he is; and see, he brings the mayor along.
[within] my liege, beware; look to thyself;
oh, devil, devil! if that the earth could teem with woman's tears, each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.
lord mayor, 
villain, i'll make thee safe.
i will not stay to offend you.
look to the drawbridge there!
stay thy revengeful hand; thou hast no cause to fear.
truly, an obedient lady. i do beseech your lordship, call her back.
hark, a drum!
[within] open the door, secure, foolhardy king: shall i for love speak treason to thy face?
mistress!
catesby, o'erlook the walls.
what is the matter, uncle? speak; recover breath; tell us how near is danger, that we may arm us to encounter it.
my lord?
lord mayor, the reason we have sent, 
peruse this writing here, and thou shalt know
what would you with her, sir?
look back! defend thee! here are enemies.
remember, as thou read'st, thy promise pass'd: i do repent me; read not my name there my heart is not confederate with my hand.
who, i, my lord?
god and our innocence defend and guard us!
it was, villain, ere thy hand did set it down. fear, and not love, begets his penitence: forget to pity him, lest thy pity prove a serpent that will sting thee to the heart.
ay, you did wish that i would make her turn. sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on, and she's obedient, as you say, obedient, very obedient., proceed you in your tears., concerning this, sir, oh, well-painted passion!, i am commanded home., get you away, and will return to venice., hence, avaunt!
be patient. they are friends, ratcliffe and lovell.
o heinous, strong and bold conspiracy! thou sheer, immaculate and silver fountain, from when this stream through muddy passages hath held his current and defiled himself! thy overflow of good converts to bad, this deadly blot in thy digressing son.
cassio shall have my place. and, sir, tonight i do entreat that we may sup together. you are welcome, sir, to cyprus. goats and monkeys!
here is the head of that ignoble traitor, the dangerous and unsuspected hastings.
so shall my virtue be his vice's bawd; and he shall spend mine honour with his shame, as thriftless sons their scraping fathers' gold. or my shamed life in his dishonour lies: thou kill'st me in his life; giving him breath, the traitor lives, the true man's put to death.
call all in all sufficient? is this the nature whom passion could not shake? whose solid virtue the shot of accident nor dart of chance could neither graze nor pierce?
so dear i loved the man that i must weep. that breathed upon this earth a christian; made him my book, wherein my soul recorded the history of all her secret thoughts. so smooth he daubed his vice with show of virtue i mean his conversation with shore's wife, he lived from all attainder of suspects.
[within] what ho, my liege! for god's sake,
he is much changed.
well, well, he was the covert'st sheltered traitor that ever lived., were 't not that by great preservation we live to tell it, that subtle traitor this day had plotted, in the council house to murder me and my good lord of gloucester?
what shrill-voiced suppliant makes this eager cry?
are his wits safe? is he not light of brain?
had he done so?
a woman, and thy aunt, great king; 'tis i. speak with me, pity me, open the door. a beggar begs that never begg'd before.
he's that he is. i may not breathe my censure what he might be. if what he might he is not, i would to heaven he were!
what, think you we are turks or infidels? or that we would, against the form of law, proceed thus rashly in the villain's death, but that the extreme peril of the case, enforced us to this execution?
and now changed to 'the beggar and the king.' my dangerous cousin, let your mother in: i know she is come to pray for your foul sin.
what? strike his wife?
now fair befall you! he deserved his death, and your good graces both have well proceeded to warn false traitors from the like attempts.
if thou do pardon, whosoever pray, this fester'd joint cut off, the rest rest sound; this let alone will all the rest confound.
'faith, that was not so well. yet would i knew
after he once fell in with mistress shore. yet had we not determined he should die until your lordship came to see his end (which now the loving haste of these our friends, because, my lord, i would have had you heard the traitor speak, and timorously confess the manner and the purpose of his treasons, that you might well have signified the same misconstrue us in him, and wail his death.
o king, believe not this hard-hearted man! love loving not itself none other can.
is it his use? or did the letters work upon his blood and new-create his fault?
but, my good lord, your graces' words shall serve as well as i had seen and heard him speak; and do not doubt, right noble princes both, with all your just proceedings in this case.
shall thy old dugs once more a traitor rear?
alas, alas! it is not honesty in me to speak what i have seen and known. you shall observe him, that i may save my speech. do but go after and mark how he continues.
and to that end we wished your lordship here t' avoid the censures of the carping world.
sweet york, be patient. hear me, gentle liege.
i am sorry that i am deceived in him.
which since you come too late of our intent, and so, my good lord mayor, we bid farewell.
rise up, good aunt.
you have seen nothing then?
go, after, after, cousin buckingham. the mayor towards guildhall hies him in all post. there, at your meetest vantage of the time, tell them how edward put to death a citizen only for saying he would make his son heir to the crown, meaning indeed his house, which, by the sign thereof, was termèd so. and bestial appetite in change of lust, which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives, even where his raging eye or savage heart, without control, lusted to make his prey. tell them when that my mother went with child of that insatiate edward, noble york my princely father then had wars in france, and, by true computation of the time, which well appearèd in his lineaments, being nothing like the noble duke my father. yet touch this sparingly, as 'twere far off, because, my lord, you know my mother lives.
not yet, i thee beseech: and never see day that the happy sees, till thou give joy; until thou bid me joy, by pardoning rutland, my transgressing boy.
nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.
as if the golden fee for which i plead were for myself. and so, my lord, adieu.
unto my mother's prayers i bend my knee.
yes, you have seen cassio and she together.
if you thrive well, bring them to baynard's castle, where you shall find me well accompanied
ill mayst thou thrive, if thou grant any grace!
but then i saw no harm, and then i heard
i go; and towards three or four o'clock look for the news that the guildhall affords.
pleads he in earnest? look upon his face; his eyes do drop no tears, his prayers are in jest; his words come from his mouth, ours from our breast: we pray with heart and soul and all beside: his weary joints would gladly rise, i know; our knees shall kneel till to the ground they grow: his prayers are full of false hypocrisy; our prayers do out-pray his; then let them have that mercy which true prayer ought to have.
what, did they never whisper?
go, lovell, with all speed to doctor shaw. (to ratcliffe) go thou to friar penker. bid them both
good aunt, stand up.
never, my lord.
now will i go to take some privy order to draw the brats of clarence out of sight, and to give order that no manner of person have any time recourse unto the princes.
nay, do not say, 'stand up;' and if i were thy nurse, thy tongue to teach, 'pardon' should be the first word of thy speech. i never long'd to hear a word till now; say 'pardon,' king; let pity teach thee how: no word like 'pardon' for kings' mouths so meet.
nor send you out o' th' way?
this is the indictment of the good lord hastings, which in a set hand fairly is engrossed, that it may be today read o'er in paul's. and mark how well the sequel hangs together: for yesternight by catesby was it sent me; the precedent was full as long a-doing, and yet within these five hours hastings lived, untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty. that cannot see this palpable device? yet who so bold but says he sees it not? bad is the world, and all will come to naught when such ill dealing must be seen in thought.
speak it in french, king; say, 'pardonne moi.'
never.
how now, how now? what say the citizens?
dost thou teach pardon pardon to destroy? ah, my sour husband, my hard-hearted lord, speak 'pardon' as 'tis current in our land; the chopping french we do not understand. thine eye begins to speak; set thy tongue there; or in thy piteous heart plant thou thine ear; pity may move thee 'pardon' to rehearse.
to fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?
now, by the holy mother of our lord, the citizens are mum, say not a word.
good aunt, stand up.
never, my lord.
touched you the bastardy of edward's children?
i do not sue to stand; pardon is all the suit i have in hand.
that's strange.
and his contract by deputy in france; th' unsatiate greediness of his desire and his enforcement of the city wives; his tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy, his resemblance being not like the duke. withal, i did infer your lineaments, being the right idea of your father, both in your form and nobleness of mind; your discipline in war, wisdom in peace, your bounty, virtue, fair humility; indeed, left nothing fitting for your purpose untouched or slightly handled in discourse. i bid them that did love their country's good cry "god save richard, england's royal king!"
i pardon him, as god shall pardon me.
i durst, my lord, to wager she is honest, lay down my soul at stake. if you think other if any wretch have put this in your head let heaven requite it with the serpent's curse for if she be not honest, chaste, and true there's no man happy. the purest of their wives
and did they so?
o happy vantage of a kneeling knee! yet am i sick for fear: speak it again; twice saying 'pardon' doth not pardon twain, but makes one pardon strong.
bid her come hither. go.
no. so god help me, they spake not a word stared each on other and looked deadly pale; which when i saw, i reprehended them and asked the mayor what meant this willful silence. his answer was, the people were not used then he was urged to tell my tale again: "thus saith the duke. thus hath the duke inferred", but nothing spoke in warrant from himself. when he had done, some followers of mine own, and some ten voices cried "god save king richard!" and thus i took the vantage of those few. "thanks, gentle citizens and friends," quoth i. "this general applause and cheerful shout and even here brake off, and came away.
i pardon him.
she says enough, yet she's a simple bawd that cannot say as much. this is a subtle whore, a closet, lock and key, of villainous secrets. and yet she'll kneel and pray, i have seen her do 't.
what tongueless blocks were they! would not they speak? will not the mayor then and his brethren come?
a god on earth thou art.
my lord, what is your will?
the mayor is here at hand. intend some fear; and look you get a prayer book in your hand and stand between two churchmen, good my lord, for on that ground i'll make a holy descant. and be not easily won to our requests.
but for our trusty brother-in-law and the abbot, with all the rest of that consorted crew, good uncle, help to order several powers to oxford, or where'er these traitors are: they shall not live within this world, i swear, but i will have them, if i once know where. your mother well hath pray'd, and prove you true.
pray, chuck, come hither.
i go. an if you plead as well for them as i can say "nay" to thee for myself, no doubt we bring it to a happy issue.
come, my old son: i pray god make thee new.
what is your pleasure?
go, go, up to the leads. the lord mayor knocks.
didst thou not mark the king, what words he spake, 'have i no friend will rid me of this living fear?' was it not so?
let me see your eyes. look in my face.
i think the duke will not be spoke withal.
these were his very words.
what horrible fancy's this?
now, catesby, what says your lord to my request?
and urged it twice together, did he not?
(to emilia) some of your function, mistress, cough or cry "hem" if any body come. your mystery, your mystery! nay, dispatch!
he doth entreat your grace, my noble lord, to visit him tomorrow or next day. divinely bent to meditation, and in no worldly suits would he be moved to draw him from his holy exercise.
he did.
upon my knee, what doth your speech import? i understand a fury in your words,
return, good catesby, to the gracious duke. no less importing than our general good, in deep designs, and matters of great moment are come to have some conference with his grace.
and speaking it, he wistly look'd on me, and who should say, 'i would thou wert the man' meaning the king at pomfret. come, let's go: i am the king's friend, and will rid his foe.
why, what art thou?
i'll signify so much unto him straight.
i have been studying how i may compare this prison where i live unto the world: and for because the world is populous and here is not a creature but myself, my brain i'll prove the female to my soul, my soul the father; and these two beget a generation of still-breeding thoughts, and these same thoughts people this little world, for no thought is contented. the better sort, as thoughts of things divine, are intermix'd with scruples and do set the word itself against the word: 'it is as hard to come as for a camel to thread the postern of a small needle's eye.' thoughts tending to ambition, they do plot unlikely wonders; how these vain weak nails of this hard world, my ragged prison walls, and, for they cannot, die in their own pride. thoughts tending to content flatter themselves that they are not the first of fortune's slaves, who sitting in the stocks refuge their shame, that many have and others must sit there; and in this thought they find a kind of ease, bearing their own misfortunes on the back thus play i in one person many people, and none contented: sometimes am i king; then treasons make me wish myself a beggar, and so i am: then crushing penury then am i king'd again: and by and by think that i am unking'd by bolingbroke, and straight am nothing: but whate'er i be, nor i nor any man that but man is with being nothing. music do i hear?
your wife, my lord. your true and loyal wife.
he is not lolling on a lewd love bed, but on his knees at meditation; not dallying with a brace of courtesans, but meditating with two deep divines; but praying, to enrich his watchful soul. happy were england would this virtuous prince take on his grave the sovereignty thereof. but sure i fear we shall not win him to it.
ha, ha! keep time: how sour sweet music is, when time is broke and no proportion kept! so is it in the music of men's lives. to cheque time broke in a disorder'd string; but for the concord of my state and time had not an ear to hear my true time broke. i wasted time, and now doth time waste me; my thoughts are minutes; and with sighs they jar their watches on unto mine eyes, the outward watch, whereto my finger, like a dial's point, is pointing still, in cleansing them from tears. are clamorous groans, which strike upon my heart, which is the bell: so sighs and tears and groans show minutes, times, and hours: but my time runs posting on in bolingbroke's proud joy, this music mads me; let it sound no more; for though it have holp madmen to their wits, in me it seems it will make wise men mad. yet blessing on his heart that gives it me! is a strange brooch in this all-hating world.
come, swear it, damn thyself. lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves should fear to seize thee. therefore be double damned,
marry, god defend his grace should say us nay!
hail, royal prince!
heaven doth truly know it.
i fear he will. here catesby comes again.
thanks, noble peer; the cheapest of us is ten groats too dear. where no man never comes but that sad dog that brings me food to make misfortune live?
heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.
now, catesby, what says his grace?
i was a poor groom of thy stable, king, when thou wert king; who, travelling towards york, to look upon my sometimes royal master's face. o, how it yearn'd my heart when i beheld in london streets, that coronation-day, when bolingbroke rode on roan barbary, that horse that i so carefully have dress'd!
to whom, my lord? with whom? how am i false?
he wonders to what end you have assembled such troops of citizens to come to him, he fears, my lord, you mean no good to him.
rode he on barbary? tell me, gentle friend, how went he under him?
ah, desdemona, away, away, away!
sorry i am my noble cousin should suspect me that i mean no good to him. by heaven, we come to him in perfect love,
so proudly as if he disdain'd the ground.
alas the heavy day, why do you weep? if haply you my father do suspect an instrument of this your calling back, lay not your blame on me. if you have lost him, why, i have lost him too.
when holy and devout religious men are at their beads, 'tis much to draw them thence, so sweet is zealous contemplation.
that jade hath eat bread from my royal hand; this hand hath made him proud with clapping him. would he not stumble? would he not fall down, since pride must have a fall, and break the neck forgiveness, horse! why do i rail on thee, since thou, created to be awed by man, wast born to bear? i was not made a horse; and yet i bear a burthen like an ass,
had it pleased heaven all kinds of sores and shames on my bare head, steeped me in poverty to the very lips, given to captivity me and my utmost hopes, i should have found in some place of my soul
see where his grace stands, 'tween two clergymen.
fellow, give place; here is no longer stay.
the fixèd figure for the time of scorn to point his slow and moving finger at! yet could i bear that too, well, very well. but there where i have garnered up my heart, the fountain from the which my current runs or else dries up, to be discarded thence! or keep it as a cistern for foul toads to knot and gender in! turn thy complexion there, ay, there, look grim as hell!
to stay him from the fall of vanity; and, see, a book of prayer in his hand, true ornaments to know a holy man., famous plantagenet, most gracious prince, and pardon us the interruption of thy devotion and right christian zeal.
if thou love me, 'tis time thou wert away.
i hope my noble lord esteems me honest.
my lord, there needs no such apology. i do beseech your grace pardon me, deferred the visitation of my friends. but, leaving this, what is your grace's pleasure?
what my tongue dares not, that my heart shall say.
oh, ay, as summer flies are in the shambles, that quicken even with blowing. o thou weed, that the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst ne'er been born!
even that, i hope, which pleaseth god above and all good men of this ungoverned isle.
my lord, will't please you to fall to?
alas, what ignorant sin have i committed?
that seems disgracious in the city's eye, and that you come to reprehend my ignorance.
taste of it first, as thou art wont to do.
was this fair paper, this most goodly book, made to write "whore" upon? what committed? i should make very forges of my cheeks that would to cinders burn up modesty did i but speak thy deeds. what committed? heaven stops the nose at it and the moon winks, is hushed within the hollow mine of earth and will not hear 't. what committed! impudent strumpet!
you have, my lord. would it might please your grace, on our entreaties, to amend your fault.
my lord, i dare not: sir pierce of exton, who lately came from the king, commands the contrary.
by heaven, you do me wrong!
else wherefore breathe i in a christian land?
the devil take henry of lancaster and thee! patience is stale, and i am weary of it.
are you not a strumpet?
know, then, it is your fault that you resign the supreme seat, the throne majestical, the sceptered office of your ancestors, your state of fortune, and your due of birth, to the corruption of a blemished stock, whiles in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts, which here we waken to our country's good, the noble isle doth want her proper limbs, her royal stock graft with ignoble plants, and almost shouldered in the swallowing gulf of dark forgetfulness and deep oblivion; which to recure, we heartily solicit and kingly government of this your land, not as protector, steward, substitute, or lowly factor for another's gain, but as successively, from blood to blood, for this, consorted with the citizens, your very worshipful and loving friends, and by their vehement instigation, in this just suit come i to move your grace.
help, help, help!
no, as i am a christian. if to preserve this vessel for my lord from any other foul unlawful touch be not to be a strumpet, i am none.
or bitterly to speak in your reproof best fitteth my degree or your condition. if not to answer, you might haply think tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded which fondly you would here impose on me. if to reprove you for this suit of yours, so seasoned with your faithful love to me, then on the other side i checked my friends. and then, in speaking, not to incur the last, definitively thus i answer you: your love deserves my thanks, but my desert unmeritable shuns your high request. and that my path were even to the crown as the ripe revenue and due of birth, yet so much is my poverty of spirit, so mighty and so many my defects, being a bark to brook no mighty sea, than in my greatness covet to be hid and in the vapor of my glory smothered. but, god be thanked, there is no need of me, the royal tree hath left us royal fruit, which, mellowed by the stealing hours of time, will well become the seat of majesty, and make, no doubt, us happy by his reign. the right and fortune of his happy stars, which god defend that i should wring from him.
how now! what means death in this rude assault? villain, thy own hand yields thy death's instrument.
what, not a whore?
my lord, this argues conscience in your grace, but the respects thereof are nice and trivial, you say that edward is your brother's son; so say we too, but not by edward's wife. for first was he contract to lady lucy, your mother lives a witness to that vow, to bona, sister to the king of france. these both put off, a poor petitioner, a care-crazed mother to a many sons, a beauty-waning and distressèd widow, made prize and purchase of his wanton eye, seduced the pitch and height of his degree to base declension and loathed bigamy. by her in his unlawful bed he got more bitterly could i expostulate, save that, for reverence to some alive, i give a sparing limit to my tongue. then, good my lord, take to your royal self if not to bless us and the land withal, yet to draw forth your noble ancestry from the corruption of abusing times unto a lineal, true-derivèd course.
go thou, and fill another room in hell.
no, as i shall be saved.
do, good my lord. your citizens entreat you.
that hand shall burn in never-quenching fire hath with the king's blood stain'd the king's own land. mount, mount, my soul! thy seat is up on high; whilst my gross flesh sinks downward, here to die.
is 't possible?
refuse not, mighty lord, this proffered love.
as full of valour as of royal blood: for now the devil, that told me i did well, says that this deed is chronicled in hell. this dead king to the living king i'll bear take hence the rest, and give them burial here.
oh, heaven forgive us!
o, make them joyful. grant their lawful suit.
kind uncle york, the latest news we hear is that the rebels have consumed with fire our town of cicester in gloucestershire; but whether they be ta'en or slain we hear not.
i cry you mercy, then, i took you for that cunning whore of venice that have the office opposite to saint peter and keep the gate of hell!
alas, why would you heap this care on me? i am unfit for state and majesty. i cannot, nor i will not, yield to you.
welcome, my lord what is the news?
you, you, ay, you! we have done our course. there's money for your pains. i pray you, turn the key and keep our counsel.
if you refuse it, as in love and zeal loath to depose the child, your brother's son, as well we know your tenderness of heart which we have noted in you to your kindred and equally indeed to all estates, yet know whe'er you accept our suit or no, your brother's son shall never reign our king, to the disgrace and downfall of your house. and in this resolution here we leave you., come, citizens. zounds, i'll entreat no more.
first, to thy sacred state wish i all happiness. the next news is, i have to london sent the heads of oxford, salisbury, blunt, and kent: the manner of their taking may appear
how do you, madam? how do you, my good lady?
o, do not swear, my lord of buckingham!
we thank thee, gentle percy, for thy pains; and to thy worth will add right worthy gains.
faith, half asleep.
if you deny them, all the land will rue it.
my lord, i have from oxford sent to london the heads of brocas and sir bennet seely, that sought at oxford thy dire overthrow.
good madam, what's the matter with my lord?
will you enforce me to a world of cares? call them again. i am not made of stones, but penetrable to your kind entreaties,
thy pains, fitzwater, shall not be forgot; right noble is thy merit, well i wot.
with who?
cousin of buckingham and sage, grave men, since you will buckle fortune on my back, to bear her burden, whe'er i will or no, i must have patience to endure the load; attend the sequel of your imposition, your mere enforcement shall acquittance me from all the impure blots and stains thereof, for god doth know, and you may partly see,
the grand conspirator, abbot of westminster, hath yielded up his body to the grave; but here is carlisle living, to abide thy kingly doom and sentence of his pride.
why, with my lord, madam.
god bless your grace! we see it and will say it.
carlisle, this is your doom: more than thou hast, and with it joy thy life; so as thou livest in peace, die free from strife: for though mine enemy thou hast ever been, high sparks of honour in thee have i seen.
who is thy lord?
in saying so, you shall but say the truth.
thy buried fear: herein all breathless lies the mightiest of thy greatest enemies, richard of bordeaux, by me hither brought.
he that is yours, sweet lady.
then i salute you with this royal title: long live richard, england's worthy king!
exton, i thank thee not; for thou hast wrought upon my head and all this famous land.
i have none. do not talk to me, emilia. i cannot weep, nor answers have i none, but what should go by water. prithee, tonight lay on my bed my wedding sheets. remember,
amen.
from your own mouth, my lord, did i this deed.
here's a change indeed!
tomorrow will it please you to be crowned?
they love not poison that do poison need, nor do i thee: though i did wish him dead, the guilt of conscience take thou for thy labour, but neither my good word nor princely favour: with cain go wander through shades of night, and never show thy head by day nor light.
'tis meet i should be used so, very meet. how have i been behaved that he might stick the small'st opinion on my least misuse?
even when you please, since you will have it so.
that blood should sprinkle me to make me grow: come, mourn with me for that i do lament, and put on sullen black incontinent: i'll make a voyage to the holy land, march sadly after; grace my mournings here; in weeping after this untimely bier.
what is your pleasure, madam? how is 't with you?
tomorrow, then, we will attend your grace, and so most joyfully we take our leave.
do it with gentle means and easy tasks. he might have chid me so, for, in good faith, i am a child to chiding.
farewell, my cousin. farewell, gentle friends.
if you shall chance, camillo, to visit bohemia, on the like occasion whereon my services are now on foot, you shall see, as i have said, great difference betwixt our bohemia and your sicilia.
what is the matter, lady?
who meets us here? my niece plantagenet led in the hand of her kind aunt of gloucester? now, for my life, she's wandering to the tower, on pure heart's love, to greet the tender prince., 
means to pay bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him.
alas, iago, my lord hath so bewhored her, that true hearts cannot bear it.
god give your graces both a happy and a joyful time of day.
wherein our entertainment shall shame us we will be justified in our loves; for indeed, 
am i that name, iago?
as much to you, good sister. whither away?
beseech you,, 
what name, fair lady?
no farther than the tower, and, as i guess, upon the like devotion as yourselves,
we cannot with such magnificence, in so rare, i know not what to say. we will give you sleepy drinks, that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience, may, though they cannot praise us, as little accuse
such as she says my lord did say i was.
kind sister, thanks. we'll enter all together.
you pay a great deal too dear for what's given freely.
could not have laid such terms upon his callet.
and in good time here the lieutenant comes., master lieutenant, pray you, by your leave, how doth the prince and my young son of york?
believe me, i speak as my understanding instructs me and as mine honesty puts it to utterance.
why did he so?
i may not suffer you to visit them. the king hath strictly charged the contrary.
sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to bohemia. there rooted betwixt them then such an affection, which cannot choose but branch now. since their more mature dignities and royal necessities made separation of their society, their encounters, with interchange of gifts, letters, loving embassies; that they have seemed to be together, though absent, shook hands, as over a vast, and embraced, as it were, from the ends of opposed
i do not know. i am sure i am none such.
the king? who's that?
i think there is not in the world either malice or matter to alter it. you have an unspeakable comfort of your young prince mamillius: it is a gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came
do not weep, do not weep. alas the day!
i mean, the lord protector.
i very well agree with you in the hopes of him: it is a gallant child; one that indeed physics the subject, makes old hearts fresh: they that went on crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to
her father and her country, and her friends, to be called "whore"? would it not make one weep?
the lord protect him from that kingly title! i am their mother. who shall bar me from them?
would they else be content to die?
it is my wretched fortune.
i am their father's mother. i will see them.
yes; if there were no other excuse why they should desire to live.
beshrew him for 't! how comes this trick upon him?
their aunt i am in law, in love their mother. then bring me to their sights. i'll bear thy blame
if the king had no son, they would desire to live
nay, heaven doth know.
no, madam, no. i may not leave it so. i am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.
nine changes of the watery star hath been the shepherd's note since we have left our throne without a burthen: time as long again would be filled up, my brother, with our thanks; go hence in debt: and therefore, like a cipher, yet standing in rich place, i multiply with one 'we thank you' many thousands more that go before it.
some busy and insinuating rogue, some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office, have not devised this slander. i will be hanged else!
let me but meet you ladies one hour hence, and i'll salute your grace of york as mother (to anne) come, madam, you must straight to westminster, there to be crownèd richard's royal queen.
and pay them when you part.
fie, there is no such man. it is impossible.
ah, cut my lace asunder, or else i swoon with this dead-killing news!
sir, that's to-morrow. i am question'd by my fears, of what may chance or breed upon our absence; that may blow 'this is put forth too truly:' besides, i have stay'd to tire your royalty.
if any such there be, heaven pardon him!
despiteful tidings! o, unpleasing news!
we are tougher, brother, than you can put us to't.
a halter pardon him and hell gnaw his bones! why should he call her "whore"? who keeps her company? what place? what time? what form? what likelihood? the moor's abused by some most villainous knave, o heavens, that such companions thou'dst unfold, and put in every honest hand a whip to lash the rascals naked through the world even from the east to th' west!
(to queen elizabeth) be of good cheer, mother. how fares your grace?
no longer stay.
speak within door.
o dorset, speak not to me. get thee gone. thy mother's name is ominous to children. if thou wilt outstrip death, go, cross the seas, and live with richmond, from the reach of hell. go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughterhouse, and make me die the thrall of margaret's curse, nor mother, wife, nor england's counted queen.
one seven-night longer.
that turned your wit the seamy side without and made you to suspect me with the moor.
full of wise care is this your counsel, madam. (to dorset) take all the swift advantage of the hours. in your behalf, to meet you on the way. be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay.
very sooth, to-morrow.
you are a fool. go to.
o ill-dispersing wind of misery! o my accursèd womb, the bed of death! whose unavoided eye is murderous.
we'll part the time between's then; and in that i'll no gainsaying.
alas iago, what shall i do to win my lord again? i know not how i lost him. here i kneel: if e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love, either in discourse of thought or actual deed, or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense, or that i do not yet, and ever did,
(to anne) come, madam, come. i in all haste was sent.
there is no tongue that moves, none, none i' the world, so soon as yours could win me: so it should now, were there necessity in your request, although 'twere needful i denied it. my affairs were in your love a whip to me; my stay to you a charge and trouble: to save both, farewell, our brother.
and ever will, though he do shake me off to beggarly divorcement, love him dearly, comfort forswear me! unkindness may do much, but never taint my love. i cannot say "whore," it does abhor me now i speak the word. to do the act that might the addition earn not the world's mass of vanity could make me.
and i in all unwillingness will go. o, would to god that the inclusive verge were red-hot steel to sear me to the brains! anointed let me be with deadly venom, and die ere men can say, "god save the queen."
tongue-tied, our queen?
the business of the state does him offence, and he does chide with you.
go, go, poor soul, i envy not thy glory.
i had thought, sir, to have held my peace until you have drawn oaths from him not to stay. you, sir, charge him too coldly. tell him, you are sure all in bohemia's well; this satisfaction he's beat from his best ward.
if 'twere no other, 
no? why? when he that is my husband now came to me, as i followed henry's corse, when scarce the blood was well washed from his hands which issued from my other angel husband o, when, i say, i looked on richard's face, this was my wish: be thou, quoth i, accursed for making me, so young, so old a widow; and, when thou wedd'st, let sorrow haunt thy bed; more miserable by the life of thee than thou hast made me by my dear lord's death. lo, ere i can repeat this curse again, within so small a time my woman's heart and proved the subject of mine own soul's curse, which hitherto hath held my eyes from rest, for never yet one hour in his bed did i enjoyed the golden dew of sleep, besides, he hates me for my father warwick, and will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.
well said, hermione.
'tis but so, i warrant.
poor heart, adieu. i pity thy complaining.
to tell, he longs to see his son, were strong: but let him say so then, and let him go; we'll thwack him hence with distaffs. yet of your royal presence i'll adventure the borrow of a week. when at bohemia you take my lord, i'll give him my commission prefix'd for's parting: yet, good deed, leontes, i love thee not a jar o' the clock behind what lady-she her lord. you'll stay?
the messengers of venice stays the meat. go in, and weep not. all things shall be well.
no more than from my soul i mourn for yours.
no, madam.
how now, roderigo!
farewell, thou woeful welcomer of glory.
nay, but you will?
i do not find that thou deal'st justly with me.
adieu, poor soul that tak'st thy leave of it.
i may not, verily.
what in the contrary?
(to dorset) go thou to richmond, and good fortune guide thee. (to anne) go thou to richard, and good angels tend thee. go thou to sanctuary, and good thoughts possess thee. i to my grave, where peace and rest lie with me. eighty-odd years of sorrow have i seen, and each hour's joy wracked with a week of teen.
verily! you put me off with limber vows; but i, though you would seek to unsphere the should yet say 'sir, no going.' verily, you shall not go: a lady's 'verily' 's as potent as a lord's. will you go yet? force me to keep you as a prisoner, when you depart, and save your thanks. how say you? my prisoner? or my guest? by your dread 'verily,' one of them you shall be.
every day thou daff'st me with some device, iago, and rather, as it seems to me now, keep'st from me all conveniency than suppliest me with the least advantage of hope.
pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes whom envy hath immured within your walls, rough cradle for such little pretty ones. rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow so foolish sorrows bids your stones farewell.
your guest, then, madam: which is for me less easy to commit than you to punish.
i will indeed no longer endure it, nor am i yet persuaded to put up in peace what already i have foolishly suffered.
stand all apart. , cousin of buckingham.
not your gaoler, then, but your kind hostess. come, i'll question you you were pretty lordings then?
will you hear me, roderigo?
my gracious sovereign.
we were, fair queen, two lads that thought there was no more behind but such a day to-morrow as to-day,
i have heard too much, and your words and performances are no kin together.
give me thy hand.
was not my lord the verier wag o' the two?
you charge me most unjustly.
thus high, by thy advice but shall we wear these glories for a day, or shall they last and we rejoice in them?
we were as twinn'd lambs that did frisk i' the sun, and bleat the one at the other: what we changed the doctrine of ill-doing, nor dream'd that any did. had we pursued that life, and our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd with stronger blood, we should have answer'd heaven hereditary ours.
with naught but truth. i have wasted myself out of my means. the jewels you have had from me to deliver desdemona would half have corrupted a votaress. you have told me she hath received them and returned me expectations and comforts of sudden respect and acquaintance, but i find none.
still live they, and forever let them last.
by this we gather you have tripp'd since.
well, go to. very well.
ah, buckingham, now do i play the touch, young edward lives; think now what i would speak.
o my most sacred lady! in those unfledged days was my wife a girl; your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes of my young play-fellow.
"very well," "go to"! i cannot go to, man, nor 'tis not very well. nay, i think it is scurvy, and begin to find myself fopped in it.
say on, my loving lord.
grace to boot! your queen and i are devils: yet go on; the offences we have made you do we'll answer, if you first sinn'd with us and that with us you did continue fault and that you slipp'd not
very well.
why, buckingham, i say i would be king,
is he won yet?
i tell you 'tis not very well. i will make myself known to desdemona. if she will return me my jewels i will give over my suit and repent my unlawful solicitation. if not, assure yourself i will seek satisfaction of you.
why so you are, my thrice-renownèd lord.
he'll stay my lord.
you have said now.
ha! am i king? 'tis so, but edward lives.
at my request he would not. hermione, my dearest, thou never spokest
ay, and said nothing but what i protest intendment of doing.
true, noble prince.
never?
why, now i see there's mettle in thee, and even from this instant to build on thee a better opinion than ever before. give me thy hand, roderigo. thou hast taken against me a most just exception, but yet i protest i have dealt most directly in thy affair.
o bitter consequence that edward still should live "true noble prince"! cousin, thou wast not wont to be so dull. shall i be plain? i wish the bastards dead, what sayest thou now? speak suddenly. be brief.
never, but once.
it hath not appeared.
your grace may do your pleasure.
what! have i twice said well? when was't before? i prithee tell me; cram's with praise, and make's slaughters a thousand waiting upon that. our praises are our wages: you may ride's with one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere with spur we beat an acre. but to the goal: what was my first? it has an elder sister, or i mistake you: o, would her name were grace! but once before i spoke to the purpose: when? nay, let me have't; i long.
i grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your suspicion is not without wit and judgment. but, roderigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed, which i have greater reason to believe now than ever, i mean purpose, courage and valor, this night show it. if thou the next night following enjoy not desdemona, take me from this world with treachery and devise engines for my life.
tut, tut, thou art all ice; thy kindness freezes. say, have i thy consent that they shall die?
three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death, ere i could make thee open thy white hand and clap thyself my love: then didst thou utter 'i am yours for ever.'
well, what is it? is it within reason and compass?
before i positively speak in this. i will resolve you herein presently.
why, lo you now, i have spoke to the purpose twice: the one for ever earn'd a royal husband; the other for some while a friend.
sir, there is especial commission come from venice to depute cassio in othello's place.
(aside to the other attendants) the king is angry. see, he gnaws his lip.
[aside] too hot, too hot! i have tremor cordis on me: my heart dances; but not for joy; not joy. this entertainment may a free face put on, derive a liberty from heartiness, from bounty, fertile bosom, but to be paddling palms and pinching fingers, as now they are, and making practised smiles, as in a looking-glass, and then to sigh, as 'twere the mort o' the deer; o, that is entertainment art thou my boy?
is that true? why, then othello and desdemona return again to venice.
and unrespective boys. none are for me that look into me with considerate eyes. high-reaching buckingham grows circumspect., boy!
ay, my good lord.
oh, no, he goes into mauritania and taketh away with him the fair desdemona, unless his abode be lingered here by some accident, wherein none can be so determinate as the removing of cassio.
(coming forward) my lord?
i' fecks! why, that's my bawcock. what, hast they say it is a copy out of mine. come, captain, we must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, captain: and yet the steer, the heifer and the calf are all call'd neat., still virginalling art thou my calf?
how do you mean, removing of him?
know'st thou not any whom corrupting gold will tempt unto a close exploit of death?
yes, if you will, my lord.
why, by making him uncapable of othello's place: knocking out his brains.
i know a discontented gentleman whose humble means match not his haughty spirit. and will, no doubt, tempt him to anything.
thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that i have, to be full like me: yet they say we are that will say anything but were they false as o'er-dyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false as dice are to be wish'd by one that fixes no bourn 'twixt his and mine, yet were it true look on me with your welkin eye: sweet villain! most dear'st! my collop! can thy dam?, may't be?, affection! thy intention stabs the centre: thou dost make possible things not so held, with what's unreal thou coactive art, and fellow'st nothing: then 'tis very credent thou mayst co-join with something; and thou dost, and that beyond commission, and i find it, and hardening of my brows.
and that you would have me to do!
what is his name?
what means sicilia?
ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right. he sups tonight with a harlotry, and thither will i go to him. he knows not yet of his honorable fortune. if you will watch his going thence (which i will fashion to fall out between twelve and one) you may take him at your pleasure. i will be near to second your attempt, and he shall fall between us. come, stand not amazed at it, but go along with me. i will show you such a necessity in his death that you shall think yourself bound to put it on him. it is now high suppertime, and the night grows to waste. about it!
his name, my lord, is tyrrel.
he something seems unsettled.
i will hear further reason for this.
i partly know the man. go, call him hither, boy
how, my lord?
and you shall be satisfied.
(aside) the deep-revolving witty buckingham hath he so long held out with me, untired, and stops he now for breath? well, be it so.
what cheer? how is't with you, best brother?
i do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.
how now, lord stanley, what's the news?
you look as if you held a brow of much distraction are you moved, my lord?
oh, pardon me, 'twill do me good to walk.
know, my long lord, to richmond, in the parts where he abides.
no, in good earnest. how sometimes nature will betray its folly, to harder bosoms! looking on the lines of my boy's face, methoughts i did recoil twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreech'd, in my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled, as ornaments oft do, too dangerous: how like, methought, i then was to this kernel, this squash, this gentleman. mine honest friend, will you take eggs for money?
madam, good night. i humbly thank your ladyship.
come hither, catesby. rumor it abroad that anne my wife is very grievous sick. i will take order for her keeping close. whom i will marry straight to clarence' daughter. the boy is foolish, and i fear not him. look how thou dream'st! i say again, give out that anne my queen is sick and like to die. to stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.
no, my lord, i'll fight.
your honor is most welcome.
(aside) i must be married to my brother's daughter, or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass. murder her brothers, and then marry her, so far in blood that sin will pluck on sin. tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.
you will! why, happy man be's dole! my brother, are you so fond of your young prince as we do seem to be of ours?
will you walk, sir?, o desdemona, 
is thy name tyrrel?
if at home, sir, now my sworn friend and then mine enemy, my parasite, my soldier, statesman, all: he makes a july's day short as december, and with his varying childness cures in me
my lord?
james tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.
so stands this squire officed with me: we two will walk, my lord, and leave you to your graver steps. hermione, how thou lovest us, show in our brother's welcome; next to thyself and my young rover, he's apparent to my heart.
get you to bed on th' instant, i will be returned forthwith. dismiss your attendant there, look 't be done.
art thou indeed?
if you would seek us, we are yours i' the garden: shall's attend you there?
i will, my lord.
prove me, my gracious sovereign.
be you beneath the sky. aside i am angling now, though you perceive me not how i give line. how she holds up the neb, the bill to him! and arms her with the boldness of a wife to her allowing husband!
how goes it now? he looks gentler than he did.
dar'st thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?
gone already! ears a fork'd one! go, play, boy, play: thy mother plays, and i play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamour there have been, or i am much deceived, cuckolds ere now; and many a man there is, even at this present, now while i speak this, holds his wife by the arm, and his pond fish'd by his next neighbour, by sir smile, his neighbour: nay, there's comfort in't whiles other men have gates and those gates open'd, as mine, against their will. should all despair would hang themselves. physic for't there is none; it is a bawdy planet, that will strike where 'tis predominant; and 'tis powerful, think it, from east, west, north and south: be it concluded, it will let in and out the enemy with bag and baggage: many thousand on's have the disease, and feel't not. how now, boy!
he says he will return incontinent, and hath commanded me to go to bed and bid me to dismiss you.
please you. but i had rather kill two enemies.
i am like you, they say.
dismiss me?
why then, thou hast it. two deep enemies, foes to my rest, and my sweet sleep's disturbers, tyrrel, i mean those bastards in the tower.
why that's some comfort. what, camillo there?
it was his bidding. therefore, good emilia, we must not now displease him.
let me have open means to come to them, and soon i'll rid you from the fear of them.
ay, my good lord.
ay. would you had never seen him!
thou sing'st sweet music. hark, come hither, tyrrel.
go play, mamillius; thou'rt an honest man.
so would not i. my love doth so approve him that even his stubbornness, his checks, his frowns, 
go, by this token. rise, and lend thine ear.
camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.
i have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.
there is no more but so. say it is done, and i will love thee and prefer thee for it.
you had much ado to make his anchor hold:
all's one. good father, how foolish are our minds! if i do die before thee, prithee, shroud me in one of these same sheets.
i will dispatch it straight.
didst note it?
come, come! you talk!
my lord, i have considered in my mind
he would not stay at your petitions: made his business more material.
she was in love, and he she loved proved mad and did forsake her. she had a song of "willow," an old thing 'twas, but it expressed her fortune and she died singing it. that song tonight but to go hang my head all at one side and sing it like poor barbary. prithee, dispatch.
well, let that rest. dorset is fled to richmond.
didst perceive it? 'sicilia is a so-forth:' 'tis far gone, when i shall gust it last. how came't, camillo, that he did stay?
shall i go fetch your nightgown?
i hear the news, my lord.
at the good queen's entreaty.
no, unpin me here. this lodovico is a proper man.
stanley, he is your wife's son. well, look unto it.
but, so it is, it is not. was this taken by any understanding pate but thine? for thy conceit is soaking, will draw in more than the common blocks: not noted, is't, of head-piece extraordinary? lower messes perchance are to this business purblind? say.
a very handsome man.
my lord, i claim the gift, my due by promise, th' earldom of hereford and the movables which you promisèd i shall possess.
business, my lord? i think most understand bohemia stays here longer.
he speaks well.
stanley, look to your wife. if she convey letters to richmond, you shall answer it.
ha?
i know a lady in venice would have walked barefoot to palestine for a touch of his nether lip.
what says your highness to my just request?
stays here longer.
(singing) the poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree, sing all a green willow. her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee, sing willow, willow, willow. the fresh streams ran by her, and murmured her moans, sing willow, willow, willow. her salt tears fell from her, and softened the stones sing willow, willow, willow, lay by these, willow, willow, prithee, hie thee, he'll come anon, sing all a green willow must be my garland. let nobody blame him, his scorn i approve, nay, that's not next, hark! who is 't that knocks?
i do remember me, henry the sixth did prophesy that richmond should be king, when richmond was a little peevish boy. a king, perhaps, 
ay, but why?
it's the wind.
my lord, 
to satisfy your highness and the entreaties of our most gracious mistress.
i called my love false love but what said he then? sing willow, willow, willow. if i court more women you'll couch with more men, so, get thee gone, good night. mine eyes do itch, doth that bode weeping?
how chance the prophet could not at that time have told me, i being by, that i should kill him?
the entreaties of your mistress! satisfy! let that suffice. i have trusted thee, camillo, with all the nearest things to my heart, as well my chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou thy penitent reform'd: but we have been deceived in thy integrity, deceived in that which seems so.
'tis neither here nor there.
my lord, your promise for the earldom, 
be it forbid, my lord!
dost thou in conscience think, tell me, emilia, that there be women do abuse their husbands in such gross kind?
richmond! when last i was at exeter, and called it rougemont, at which name i started, because a bard of ireland told me once i should not live long after i saw richmond.
if thou inclinest that way, thou art a coward, which hoxes honesty behind, restraining from course required; or else thou must be counted a servant grafted in my serious trust that seest a game play'd home, the rich stake drawn, and takest it all for jest.
there be some such, no question.
my lord, 
my gracious lord, i may be negligent, foolish and fearful; but that his negligence, his folly, fear, among the infinite doings of the world, sometime puts forth. in your affairs, my lord, if ever i were wilful-negligent, i play'd the fool, it was my negligence, not weighing well the end; if ever fearful to do a thing, where i the issue doubted, where of the execution did cry out which oft infects the wisest: these, my lord, are such allow'd infirmities that honesty is never free of. but, beseech your grace, be plainer with me; let me know my trespass 'tis none of mine.
wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
ay, what's o'clock?
ha' not you seen, camillo,, but that's past doubt, you have, or your eye-glass is thicker than a cuckold's horn,, or heard,, cannot be mute,, or thought,, for cogitation resides not in that man that does not think,, my wife is slippery? if thou wilt confess, or else be impudently negative, my wife's a hobby-horse, deserves a name as rank as any flax-wench that puts to before her troth-plight: say't and justify't.
why, would not you?
i am thus bold to put your grace in mind of what you promised me.
i would not be a stander-by to hear my present vengeance taken: 'shrew my heart, you never spoke what did become you less than this; which to reiterate were sin as deep as that, though true.
no, by this heavenly light!
well, but what's o'clock?
is leaning cheek to cheek? is meeting noses? kissing with inside lip? stopping the career of laughing with a sigh?, a note infallible of breaking honesty, horsing foot on foot? hours, minutes? noon, midnight? and all eyes blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only, that would unseen be wicked? is this nothing? why, then the world and all that's in't is nothing; my wife is nothing; nor nothing have these nothings, if this be nothing.
nor i neither, by this heavenly light. i might do 't as well i' th' dark.
upon the stroke of ten.
good my lord, be cured of this diseased opinion, and betimes;
wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
well, let it strike.
say it be, 'tis true.
the world's a huge thing. it is a great price for a small vice.
why let it strike?
no, no, my lord.
in troth, i think thou wouldst not.
because that, like a jack, thou keep'st the stroke betwixt thy begging and my meditation. i am not in the giving vein today.
it is; you lie, you lie: i say thou liest, camillo, and i hate thee, or else a hovering temporizer, that canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil, inclining to them both: were my wife's liver infected as her life, she would not live
in troth, i think i should, and undo 't when i had done. marry, i would not do such a thing for a joint-ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty exhibition. but for the whole world? why, who would not make her husband a cuckold to make him a monarch? i should venture purgatory for 't.
why then, resolve me whether you will or no.
who does infect her?
beshrew me, if i would do such a wrong for the whole world.
thou troublest me; i am not in the vein.
why, he that wears her like a medal, hanging about his neck, bohemia: who, if i had servants true about me, that bare eyes their own particular thrifts, they would do that which should undo more doing: ay, and thou, his cupbearer,, whom i from meaner form have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see how i am galled,, mightst bespice a cup, to give mine enemy a lasting wink; which draught to me were cordial.
why the wrong is but a wrong i' th' world, and having the world for your labor, 'tis a wrong in your own world, and you might quickly make it right.
and is it thus? repays he my deep service with such deep contempt? made i him king for this? o, let me think on hastings and be gone
sir, my lord, but with a lingering dram that should not work maliciously like poison: but i cannot believe this crack to be in my dread mistress, so sovereignly being honourable.
i do not think there is any such woman.
the tyrannous and bloody act is done, the most arch deed of piteous massacre that ever yet this land was guilty of. dighton and forrest, whom i did suborn albeit they were fleshed villains, bloody dogs, melted with tenderness and mild compassion, wept like two children in their deaths' sad story. "o thus" quoth dighton, "lay those gentle babes." within their alabaster innocent arms. their lips were four red roses on a stalk, and in their summer beauty kissed each other. a book of prayers on their pillow lay, but o, the devil, "there the villain stopped; when dighton thus told on: "we smotherèd the most replenishèd sweet work of nature that from the prime creation e'er she framed." they could not speak; and so i left them both to bear this tidings to the bloody king.
make that thy question, and go rot! dost think i am so muddy, so unsettled, to appoint myself in this vexation, sully the purity and whiteness of my sheets, is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps, give scandal to the blood o' the prince my son, who i do think is mine and love as mine, without ripe moving to't? would i do this?
yes, a dozen, and as many to th' vantage as would store the world they played for. but i do think it is their husbands' faults if wives do fall. say that they slack their duties
and here he comes., all health, my sovereign lord.
i must believe you, sir: i do; and will fetch off bohemia for't; provided that, when he's removed, your highness will take again your queen as yours at first, the injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms known and allied to yours.
and pour our treasures into foreign laps, throwing restraint upon us. or say they strike us, or scant our former having in despite. why, we have galls, and though we have some grace, yet have we some revenge. let husbands know and have their palates both for sweet and sour, as husbands have. what is it that they do when they change us for others? is it sport? i think it is. and doth affection breed it? it is so too. and have not we affections, desires for sport, and frailty, as men have? then let them use us well, else let them know, the ills we do, their ills instruct us so.
kind tyrrel, am i happy in thy news?
thou dost advise me even so as i mine own course have set down:
not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend!
beget your happiness, be happy then, for it is done.
my lord, go then; and with a countenance as clear as friendship wears at feasts, keep with bohemia and with your queen. i am his cupbearer: account me not your servant.
here, stand behind this bulk, straight will he come. wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home. quick, quick! fear nothing. i'll be at thy elbow. it makes us, or it mars us. think on that,
but did'st thou see them dead?
this is all: do't and thou hast the one half of my heart; do't not, thou split'st thine own.
be near at hand, i may miscarry in 't.
i did, my lord.
i'll do't, my lord.
here, at thy hand. be bold, and take thy stand.
and buried, gentle tyrrel?
i will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.
i have no great devotion to the deed and yet he hath given me satisfying reasons.
the chaplain of the tower hath buried them,
o miserable lady! but, for me, what case stand i in? i must be the poisoner of good polixenes; and my ground to do't who in rebellion with himself will have all that are his so too. to do this deed, promotion follows. if i could find example of thousands that had struck anointed kings nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one, let villany itself forswear't. i must forsake the court: to do't, or no, is certain to me a break-neck. happy star, reign now!
(aside) i have rubbed this young quat almost to the sense, and he grows angry. now, whether he kill cassio or cassio him, or each do kill the other, every way makes my gain. live roderigo, of gold and jewels that i bobbed from him as gifts to desdemona. it must not be. if cassio do remain he hath a daily beauty in his life may unfold me to him, there stand i in much peril. no, he must die. but so, i hear him coming.
come to me, tyrrel, soon at after-supper, when thou shalt tell the process of their death. meantime, but think how i may do thee good, and be inheritor of thy desire.
this is strange: methinks my favour here begins to warp. not speak? good day, camillo.
i know his gait, 'tis he., villain, thou diest!
i humbly take my leave.
hail, most royal sir!
that thrust had been mine enemy indeed i will make proof of thine.
the son of clarence have i pent up close, his daughter meanly have i matched in marriage, the sons of edward sleep in abraham's bosom, and anne my wife hath bid this world goodnight. at young elizabeth, my brother's daughter, and by that knot looks proudly on the crown, to her go i, a jolly thriving wooer.
what is the news i' the court?
oh, i am slain!
my lord!
none rare, my lord.
i am maimed for ever. help, ho! murder! murder!
good or bad news, that thou com'st in so bluntly?
the king hath on him such a countenance as he had lost some province and a region loved as he loves himself: even now i met him wafting his eyes to the contrary and falling a lip of much contempt, speeds from me and so leaves me to consider what is breeding that changeth thus his manners.
the voice of cassio. iago keeps his word.
bad news, my lord. morton is fled to richmond, and buckingham, backed with the hardy welshmen, is in the field, and still his power increaseth.
i dare not know, my lord.
oh, villain that i am!
ely with richmond troubles me more near come, i have learned that fearful commenting is leaden servitor to dull delay; delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary; then fiery expedition be my wing, go, muster men. my counsel is my shield. we must be brief when traitors brave the field.
how! dare not! do not. do you know, and dare not? be intelligent to me: 'tis thereabouts; for, to yourself, what you do know, you must. and cannot say, you dare not. good camillo, which shows me mine changed too; for i must be a party in this alteration, finding myself thus alter'd with 't.
it is even so.
so now prosperity begins to mellow and drop into the rotten mouth of death. here in these confines slyly have i lurked to watch the waning of mine enemies. and will to france, hoping the consequence will prove as bitter, black, and tragical. withdraw thee, wretched margaret. who comes here?
there is a sickness i cannot name the disease; and it is caught of you that yet are well.
oh, help, ho! light! a surgeon!
ah, my poor princes! ah, my tender babes, if yet your gentle souls fly in the air and be not fixed in doom perpetual, hover about me with your airy wings and hear your mother's lamentation.
how! caught of me! make me not sighted like the basilisk: by my regard, but kill'd none so. camillo,, as you are certainly a gentleman, thereto clerk-like experienced, which no less adorns our gentry than our parents' noble names, if you know aught which does behove my knowledge thereof to be inform'd, imprison't not in ignorant concealment.
'tis he. oh, brave iago, honest and just, that hast such noble sense of thy friend's wrong!
hath dimmed your infant morn to agèd night.
i may not answer.
thou teachest me. minion, your dear lies dead, for, of my heart, those charms, thine eyes, are blotted. thy bed, lust-stained, shall with lust's blood be spotted.
so many miseries have crazed my voice that my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute. edward plantagenet, why art thou dead?
i must be answer'd. dost thou hear, camillo, i conjure thee, by all the parts of man which honour does acknowledge, whereof the least is not this suit of mine, that thou declare is creeping toward me; how far off, how near; which way to be prevented, if to be; if not, how best to bear it.
what, ho! no watch? no passage? murder! murder!
edward for edward pays a dying debt.
sir, i will tell you; that i think honourable: therefore mark my counsel, which must be even as swiftly follow'd as i mean to utter it, or both yourself and me cry lost, and so good night!
'tis some mischance, the cry is very direful.
wilt thou, o god, fly from such gentle lambs and throw them in the entrails of the wolf? when didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?
on, good camillo.
oh, help!
(aside) when holy harry died, and my sweet son.
i am appointed him to murder you.
hark!
(sitting down) dead life, blind sight, poor mortal living ghost, woe's scene, world's shame, grave's due by life usurped, brief abstract and record of tedious days, unlawfully made drunk with innocent blood.
by whom, camillo?
oh, wretched villain!
(sitting down beside her) ah, that thou wouldst as soon afford a grave as thou canst yield a melancholy seat, o, who hath any cause to mourn but we?
by the king.
two or three groan. 'tis heavy night, these may be counterfeits. let's think 't unsafe
(joining them) if ancient sorrow be most reverend, give mine the benefit of seigniory, and let my griefs frown on the upper hand. tell o'er your woes again by viewing mine. i had an edward till a richard killed him; i had a husband till a richard killed him. thou hadst an edward till a richard killed him;
for what?
nobody come? then shall i bleed to death.
i had a richard too, and thou did'st kill him; i had a rutland too; thou holp'st to kill him.
as he had seen't or been an instrument to vice you to't, that you have touch'd his queen forbiddenly.
hark!
thou hadst a clarence too, and richard killed him then forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept that dog, that had his teeth before his eyes, to worry lambs and lap their gentle blood; that excellent grand tyrant of the earth, that reigns in gallèd eyes of weeping souls; thy womb let loose to chase us to our graves. o upright, just, and true-disposing god, how do i thank thee that this carnal cur preys on the issue of his mother's body
o, then my best blood turn be yoked with his that did betray the best! turn then my freshest reputation to a savour that may strike the dullest nostril where i arrive, and my approach be shunn'd, that e'er was heard or read!
here's one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.
o harry's wife, triumph not in my woes! god witness with me, i have wept for thine.
swear his thought over by each particular star in heaven and by all their influences, you may as well as or by oath remove or counsel shake the fabric of his folly, whose foundation is piled upon his faith and will continue the standing of his body.
who's there? whose noise is this that ones on murder?
bear with me, i am hungry for revenge, and now i cloy me with beholding it. thy other edward dead, to quit my edward; young york, he is but boot, because both they matched not the high perfection of my loss. thy clarence he is dead that stabbed my edward, th' adulterate hastings, rivers, vaughan, grey, untimely smothered in their dusky graves. richard yet lives, hell's black intelligencer, only reserved their factor to buy souls ensues his piteous and unpitied end. earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray, to have him suddenly conveyed from hence. cancel his bond of life, dear god i pray,
how should this grow?
we do not know.
o, thou didst prophesy the time would come that i should wish for thee to help me curse that bottled spider, that foul bunch-backed toad!
i know not: but i am sure 'tis safer to avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born. if therefore you dare trust my honesty, that lies enclosed in this trunk which you your followers i will whisper to the business, and will by twos and threes at several posterns clear them o' the city. for myself, i'll put my fortunes to your service, which are here for, by the honour of my parents, i have utter'd truth: which if you seek to prove, i dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer than one condemn'd by the king's own mouth, thereon
do not you hear a cry?
i called thee then "vain flourish of my fortune." the presentation of but what i was, the flattering index of a direful pageant, one heaved a-high, to be hurled down below, a mother only mocked with two fair babes, to be the aim of every dangerous shot, a sign of dignity, a breath, a bubble, a queen in jest, only to fill the scene. where is thy husband now? where be thy brothers? who sues and kneels and says "god save the queen?" where be the bending peers that flattered thee? where be the thronging troops that followed thee? decline all this, and see what now thou art: for joyful mother, one that wails the name; for queen, a very caitiff crowned with care; for she that scorned at me, now scorned of me; for she being feared of all, now fearing one; thus hath the course of justice whirled about and left thee but a very prey to time, having no more but thought of what thou wast to torture thee the more, being what thou art. usurp the just proportion of my sorrow? now thy proud neck bears half my burdened yoke, from which even here i slip my weary head and leave the burthen of it all on thee. these english woes will make me smile in france.
i do believe thee: i saw his heart in 's face. give me thy hand: be pilot to me and thy places shall still neighbour mine. my ships are ready and two days ago. this jealousy is for a precious creature: as she's rare, must it be great, and as his person's mighty, must it be violent, and as he does conceive profess'd to him, why, his revenges must in that be made more bitter. fear o'ershades me: good expedition be my friend, and comfort the gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing i will respect thee as a father if thou bear'st my life off hence: let us avoid.
here, here! for heaven's sake, help me!
o, thou well-skilled in curses, stay awhile, and teach me how to curse mine enemies.
it is in mine authority to command the keys of all the posterns: please your highness
what's the matter?
forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days; think that thy babes were sweeter than they were, and he that slew them fouler than he is. bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse. revolving this will teach thee how to curse.
take the boy to you: he so troubles me, 'tis past enduring.
(to lodovico) this is othello's ancient, as i take it.
my words are dull. o, quicken them with thine!
come, my gracious lord, shall i be your playfellow?
the same indeed, a very valiant fellow.
thy woes will make them sharp and pierce like mine.
no, i'll none of you.
(to cassio) what are you here that cry so grievously?
why should calamity be full of words?
why, my sweet lord?
give me some help.
windy attorneys to their clients' woes, airy succeeders of intestate joys, let them have scope, though what they will impart help nothing else, yet do they ease the heart.
you'll kiss me hard and speak to me as if i were a baby still. i love you better.
oh, me, lieutenant! what villains have done this?
if so, then be not tongue-tied. go with me, and in the breath of bitter words let's smother
and why so, my lord?
i think that one of them is hereabout, and cannot make away.
the trumpet sounds. be copious in exclaims.
your brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say, become some women best, so that there be not too much hair there, but in a semicircle or a half-moon made with a pen.
oh, treacherous villains!, what are you there? come in, and give some help.
who intercepts my expedition?
who taught you this?
oh, help me there!
o, she that might have intercepted thee, by strangling thee in her accursèd womb,
i learnt it out of women's faces. pray now what colour are your eyebrows?
that's one of them.
hid'st thou that forehead with a golden crown where should be branded, if that right were right, the slaughter of the prince that owed that crown and the dire death of my poor sons and brothers?
blue, my lord.
o murd'rous slave! o villain!
thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother clarence? and little ned plantagenet his son?
nay, that's a mock: i have seen a lady's nose
o damned iago! o inhuman dog!
where is gentle rivers, vaughan, grey?
hark ye; the queen your mother rounds apace: we shall present our services to a fine new prince one of these days; and then you'ld wanton with us,
how silent is this town!, ho! murder! murder!, what may you be? are you of good or evil?
where is kind hastings?
she is spread of late into a goodly bulk: good time encounter her!
as you shall prove us, praise us.
let not the heavens hear these telltale women rail on the lord's anointed. strike, i say!
what wisdom stirs amongst you? come, sir, now i am for you again: pray you, sit by us,
signior lodovico?
either be patient and entreat me fair, or with the clamorous report of war
merry or sad shall't be?
he, sir.
art thou my son?
as merry as you will.
i cry you mercy. here's cassio hurt by villains.
ay, i thank god, my father, and yourself.
a sad tale's best for winter: i have one of sprites and goblins.
cassio!
then patiently hear my impatience.
come on, sit down: come on, and do your best to fright me with your sprites; you're powerful at it.
how is 't, brother!
madam, i have a touch of your condition,
there was a man, 
my leg is cut in two.
o, let me speak!
nay, come, sit down; then on.
light, gentlemen, i'll bind it with my shirt.
do then, but i'll not hear.
yond crickets shall not hear it.
what is the matter, ho? who is 't that cried?
i will be mild and gentle in my words.
come on, then, and give't me in mine ear.
who is 't that cried?
and brief, good mother, for i am in haste.
was he met there? his train? camillo with him?
oh, my dear cassio! my sweet cassio! o cassio, cassio, cassio!
art thou so hasty? i have stayed for thee,
saw i men scour so on their way: i eyed them even to their ships.
who they should be that have thus mangled you?
and came i not at last to comfort you?
how blest am i in my just censure, in my true opinion! in being so blest! there may be in the cup a spider steep'd, and one may drink, depart, and yet partake no venom, for his knowledge is not infected: but if one present how he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides, with violent hefts. i have drunk, and seen the spider. camillo was his help in this, his pander: all's true that is mistrusted: that false villain whom i employ'd was pre-employ'd by him: he has discover'd my design, and i remain a pinch'd thing; yea, a very trick so easily open?
no.
no, by the holy rood, thou know'st it well. thou cam'st on earth to make the earth my hell. a grievous burden was thy birth to me; thy school days frightful, desp'rate, wild, and furious; thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous; thy age confirmed, proud, subtle, sly, and bloody, more mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred. that ever graced me in thy company?
by his great authority; which often hath no less prevail'd than so on your command.
i am sorry to find you thus. i have been to seek you.
faith, none but humfrey hower, that called your grace to breakfast once, forth of my company. if i be so disgracious in your eye, strike up the drum.
give me the boy: i am glad you did not nurse him: though he does bear some signs of me, yet you have too much blood in him.
lend me a garter. so., oh, for a chair,
i prithee, hear me speak.
what is this? sport?
alas, he faints! o cassio, cassio, cassio!
you speak too bitterly.
away with him! and let her sport herself with that she's big with; for 'tis polixenes has made thee swell thus.
gentlemen all, i do suspect this trash to be a party in this injury., patience awhile, good cassio., come, come, alas, my friend and my dear countryman roderigo! no, yes, sure! yes, 'tis roderigo.
hear me a word, for i shall never speak to thee again.
but i'ld say he had not, howe'er you lean to the nayward.
what, of venice?
so.
you, my lords, look on her, mark her well; be but about to say 'she is a goodly lady,' and 'tis pity she's not honest, honourable:' praise her but for this her without-door form, which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight the shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands that mercy does, for calumny will sear virtue itself: these shrugs, these hums and ha's, when you have said 'she's goodly,' come between ere you can say 'she's honest:' but be 't known, she's an adulteress.
even he, sir. did you know him?
ere from this war thou turn a conqueror, or i with grief and extreme age shall perish and nevermore behold thy face again. therefore take with thee my most grievous curse, than all the complete armor that thou wear'st. my prayers on the adverse party fight, and there the little souls of edward's children whisper the spirits of thine enemies bloody thou art; bloody will be thy end. shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.
should a villain say so, the most replenish'd villain in the world, he were as much more villain: you, my lord,
know him? ay.
though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse abides in me. i say amen to her.
you have mistook, my lady, polixenes for leontes: o thou thing! which i'll not call a creature of thy place, lest barbarism, making me the precedent, and mannerly distinguishment leave out betwixt the prince and beggar: i have said she's an adulteress; i have said with whom: more, she's a traitor and camillo is what she should shame to know herself but with her most vile principal, that she's a bed-swerver, even as bad as those that vulgars give bold'st titles, ay, and privy
signior gratiano? i cry you gentle pardon, these bloody accidents must excuse my manners that so neglected you.
stay, madam. i must talk a word with you.
no, by my life. privy to none of this. how will this grieve you, when you shall come to clearer knowledge, that you thus have publish'd me! gentle my lord, you did mistake.
i am glad to see you.
i have no more sons of the royal blood for thee to slaughter. for my daughters, richard, they shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens, and therefore level not to hit their lives.
no; if i mistake in those foundations which i build upon, the centre is not big enough to bear he who shall speak for her is afar off guilty but that he speaks.
how do you, cassio?, oh, a chair, a chair!
virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.
there's some ill planet reigns: i must be patient till the heavens look i am not prone to weeping, as our sex commonly are; the want of which vain dew perchance shall dry your pities: but i have that honourable grief lodged here which burns with thoughts so qualified as your charities shall best instruct you, measure me; and so the king's will be perform'd!
roderigo!
and must she die for this? o, let her live, and i'll corrupt her manners, stain her beauty, slander myself as false to edward's bed, so she may live unscarred of bleeding slaughter, i will confess she was not edward's daughter.
shall i be heard?
he, he, 'tis he.
wrong not her birth. she is a royal princess.
my women may be with me; for you see my plight requires it. do not weep, good fools; there is no cause: when you shall know your mistress has deserved prison, then abound in tears is for my better grace. adieu, my lord: i never wish'd to see you sorry; now i trust i shall. my women, come; you have leave.
oh, that's well said, the chair! some good man bear him carefully from hence. i'll fetch the general's surgeon., (to bianca) for you, mistress, save you your labor., he that lies slain here, cassio,
to save her life, i'll say she is not so.
go, do our bidding; hence!
none in the world, nor do i know the man.
her life is safest only in her birth.
beseech your highness, call the queen again.
(to bianca) what, look you pale?, oh, bear him out o' the air., 
and only in that safety died her brothers.
be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice prove violence; in the which three great ones suffer, yourself, your queen, your son.
do you perceive the gastness of her eye?, stay you, good gentlemen., look you pale, mistress?, behold her well. i pray you, look upon her. do you see, gentlemen? nay, guiltiness will speak, though tongues were out of use.
lo, at their births good stars were opposite.
i dare my life lay down and will do't, sir, please you to accept it, that the queen is spotless i' the eyes of heaven and to you; i mean, in this which you accuse her.
alas, what is the matter? what is the matter, husband?
no, to their lives ill friends were contrary.
she's otherwise, i'll keep my stables where i lodge my wife; i'll go in couples with her; than when i feel and see her no farther trust her; for every inch of woman in the world,
by roderigo and fellows that are 'scaped. he's almost slain, and roderigo dead.
all unavoided is the doom of destiny.
hold your peaces.
alas, good gentleman! alas, good cassio!
my babes were destined to a fairer death if grace had blessed thee with a fairer life.
good my lord,, 
this is the fruits of whoring. prithee, emilia, (to bianca) what, do you shake at that?
you speak as if that i had slain my cousins.
it is for you we speak, not for ourselves: you are abused and by some putter-on i would land-damn him. be she honour-flaw'd, i have three daughters; the eldest is eleven the second and the third, nine, and some five; if this prove true, they'll pay for't: i'll geld 'em all; fourteen they shall not see, to bring false generations: they are co-heirs; and i had rather glib myself than they should not produce fair issue.
he supped at my house, but i therefore shake not.
cousins, indeed, and by their uncle cozened whose hand soever launched their tender hearts, thy head, all indirectly, gave direction. no doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart, but that still use of grief makes wild grief tame, my tongue should to thy ears not name my boys till that my nails were anchored in thine eyes, and i, in such a desp'rate bay of death, rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.
you smell this business with a sense as cold as is a dead man's nose: but i do see't and feel't as you feel doing thus; and see withal the instruments that feel.
oh, did he so? i charge you, go with me.
madam, so thrive i in my enterprise and dangerous success of bloody wars as i intend more good to you and yours
we need no grave to bury honesty: there's not a grain of it the face to sweeten of the whole dungy earth.
oh, fie upon thee, strumpet!
what good is covered with the face of heaven, to be discovered, that can do me good?
what! lack i credit?
as you that thus abuse me.
the advancement of your children, gentle lady.
upon this ground; and more it would content me to have her honour true than your suspicion, be blamed for't how you might.
as i! fie upon thee!
up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads.
why, what need we our forceful instigation? our prerogative calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness imparts this; which if you, or stupefied or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not we need no more of your advice: the matter, the loss, the gain, the ordering on't, is all properly ours.
kind gentlemen, let's go see poor cassio dressed., come, mistress, you must tell 's another tale. emilia, run you to the citadel will you go on afore? (aside) this is the night that either makes me or fordoes me quite.
the high imperial type of this earth's glory.
and i wish, my liege, without more overture.
it is the cause, it is the cause, my soul. let me not name it to you, you chaste stars, it is the cause. yet i'll not shed her blood, nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow yet she must die, else she'll betray more men. put out the light, and then put out the light. if i quench thee, thou flaming minister, i can again thy former light restore thou cunning'st pattern of excelling nature, i know not where is that promethean heat that can thy light relume. when i have plucked thy rose i cannot give it vital growth again, oh, balmy breath, that dost almost persuade justice to break her sword! one more, one more. be thus when thou art dead and i will kill thee and love thee after. (kissing her) one more, and that's the last. but they are cruel tears. this sorrow's heavenly, it strikes where it doth love. she wakes.
flatter my sorrow with report of it. tell me what state, what dignity, what honor, canst thou demise to any child of mine?
how could that be? either thou art most ignorant by age, or thou wert born a fool. camillo's flight, which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture, that lack'd sight only, nought for approbation but only seeing, all other circumstances made up to the deed, doth push on this proceeding: for in an act of this importance 'twere most piteous to be wild, i have dispatch'd in post to sacred delphos, to apollo's temple, cleomenes and dion, whom you know they will bring all; whose spiritual counsel had, shall stop or spur me. have i done well?
who's there? othello?
will i withal endow a child of thine; so in the lethe of thy angry soul thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs which thou supposest i have done to thee.
well done, my lord.
ay, desdemona.
last longer telling than thy kindness' date.
though i am satisfied and need no more give rest to the minds of others, such as he whose ignorant credulity will not come up to the truth. so have we thought it good from our free person she should be confined, be left her to perform. come, follow us; we are to speak in public; for this business will raise us all.
will you come to bed, my lord?
then know that from my soul i love thy daughter.
[aside] if the good truth were known.
have you prayed tonight, desdemon?
my daughter's mother thinks it with her soul.
the keeper of the prison, call to him; let him have knowledge who i am.
ay, my lord.
what do you think?
good lady, no court in europe is too good for thee;
if you bethink yourself of any crime unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace,
so from thy soul's love didst thou love her brothers, and from my heart's love i do thank thee for it.
now, good sir, you know me, do you not?
alack, my lord, what do you mean by that?
be not so hasty to confound my meaning. i mean that with my soul i love thy daughter
for a worthy lady and one whom much i honour.
well, do it, and be brief. i will walk by. i would not kill thy unpreparèd spirit. no, heavens forfend, i would not kill thy soul!
well then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?
conduct me to the queen.
talk you of killing?
even he that makes her queen. who else should be?
i may not, madam: to the contrary i have express commandment.
ay, i do.
what, thou?
here's ado, the access of gentle visitors! is't lawful, pray you, to see her women? any of them? emilia?
then heaven have mercy on me!
even so. how think you of it?
so please you, madam, shall bring emilia forth.
amen, with all my heart.
how canst thou woo her?
i pray now, call her. withdraw yourselves.
if you say, i hope you will not kill me.
that would i learn of you, as one being best acquainted with her humor.
and, madam,
humh!
and wilt thou learn of me?
well, be't so, prithee.
when your eyes roll so. why i should fear i know not, since guiltiness i know not. but yet i feel i fear.
madam, with all my heart.
here's such ado to make no stain a stain as passes colouring.
think on thy sins.
send to her, by the man that slew her brothers, "edward" and "york." then haply she will weep. therefore present to her, as sometime margaret did to thy father, steeped in rutland's blood, a handkerchief, which say to her did drain and bid her wipe her weeping eyes withal. if this inducement move her not to love, send her a letter of thy noble deeds; tell her thou mad'st away her uncle clarence, mad'st quick conveyance with her good aunt anne.
dear gentlewoman,
they are loves i bear to you.
you mock me, madam. this is not the way to win your daughter.
as well as one so great and so forlorn may hold together: on her frights and griefs, which never tender lady hath born greater, she is something before her time deliver'd.
ay, and for that thou diest.
there is no other way, unless thou couldst put on some other shape
a boy?
that death's unnatural that kills for loving. alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip? some bloody passion shakes your very frame. these are portents, but yet i hope, i hope
say that i did all this for love of her.
a daughter, and a goodly babe, lusty and like to live: the queen receives much comfort in't; says 'my poor prisoner, i am innocent as you.'
peace, and be still.
nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee, having bought love with such a bloody spoil.
these dangerous unsafe lunes i' the king, beshrew them! he must be told on't, and he shall: the office becomes a woman best; i'll take't upon me: and never to my red-look'd anger be the trumpet any more. pray you, emilia, commend my best obedience to the queen: if she dares trust me with her little babe, her advocate to the loud'st. we do not know how he may soften at the sight o' the child: the silence often of pure innocence persuades when speaking fails.
i will so. what's the matter?
look what is done cannot be now amended. which after-hours give leisure to repent. if i did take the kingdom from your sons, to make amends i'll give it to your daughter. if i have killed the issue of your womb, mine issue of your blood upon your daughter. a grandam's name is little less in love than is the doting title of a mother. they are as children but one step below, of all one pain, save for a night of groans endured of her for whom you bid like sorrow. your children were vexation to your youth, but mine shall be a comfort to your age. and by that loss your daughter is made queen. i cannot make you what amends i would; therefore accept such kindness as i can. dorset your son, that with a fearful soul this fair alliance quickly shall call home to high promotions and great dignity. the king that calls your beauteous daughter wife familiarly shall call thy dorset brother. and all the ruins of distressful times repaired with double riches of content. what, we have many goodly days to see! the liquid drops of tears that you have shed advantaging their love with interest of ten times double gain of happiness. go then, my mother; to thy daughter go.
your honour and your goodness is so evident that your free undertaking cannot miss a thriving issue: there is no lady living so meet for this great errand. please your ladyship acquaint the queen of your most noble offer; who but to-day hammer'd of this design, but durst not tempt a minister of honour, lest she should be denied.
that handkerchief which i so loved and gave thee, thou gav'st to cassio.
make bold her bashful years with your experience; put in her tender heart th' aspiring flame of golden sovereignty; acquaint the princess with the sweet silent hours of marriage joys; and when this arm of mine hath chastisèd bound with triumphant garlands will i come and lead thy daughter to a conqueror's bed, to whom i will retail my conquest won, and she shall be sole victoress, caesar's caesar.
i'll use that tongue i have: if wit flow from't as boldness from my bosom, let 't not be doubted i shall do good.
send for the man and ask him.
would be her lord? or shall i say her uncle? or he that slew her brothers and her uncles? under what title shall i woo for thee, that god, the law, my honor and her love
now be you blest for it! come something nearer.
sweet soul, take heed, take heed of perjury. thou art on thy deathbed.
infer fair england's peace by this alliance.
madam, if't please the queen to send the babe, i know not what i shall incur to pass it, having no warrant.
ay, but not yet to die!
which she shall purchase with still-lasting war.
this child was prisoner to the womb and is by law and process of great nature thence freed and enfranchised, not a party to the anger of the king nor guilty of,
therefore confess thee freely of thy sin, for to deny each article with oath cannot remove nor choke the strong conception that i do groan withal. thou art to die.
tell her the king, that may command, entreats, 
i do believe it.
oh, heaven have mercy on me!
that, at her hands, which the king's king forbids.
do not you fear: upon mine honour, i will stand betwixt you and danger.
i say "amen."
say she shall be a high and mighty queen.
nor night nor day no rest: it is but weakness to bear the matter thus; mere weakness. if the cause were not in being,, part o' the cause, she the adulteress; for the harlot king and level of my brain, plot-proof; but she i can hook to me: say that she were gone, given to the fire, a moiety of my rest might come to me again. who's there?
and have you mercy too! i never did offend you in my life, never loved cassio but with such general warranty of heaven as i might love. i never gave him token.
to vail the title, as her mother doth.
my lord?
o perjured woman, thou dost stone my heart, and mak'st me call what i intend to do a murder, which i thought a sacrifice! i saw the handkerchief.
say i will love her everlastingly.
how does the boy?
he found it then, let him confess a truth.
but how long shall that title "ever" last?
he took good rest to-night; 'tis hoped his sickness is discharged.
he hath confessed.
sweetly in force unto her fair life's end.
to see his nobleness! he straight declined, droop'd, took it deeply, fasten'd and fix'd the shame on't in himself, threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep, and downright languish'd. leave me solely: go,
what, my lord?
but how long fairly shall her sweet life last?
fie, fie! no thought of him: the thought of my revenges that way recoil upon me: in himself too mighty, and in his parties, his alliance; let him be take it on her. camillo and polixenes laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow: they should not laugh if i could reach them, nor shall she within my power.
that he hath usèd thee.
as long as heaven and nature lengthens it.
you must not enter.
how? unlawfully?
as long as hell and richard likes of it.
nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me: fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas, than the queen's life? a gracious innocent soul, more free than he is jealous.
ay.
say i, her sovereign, am her subject low.
that's enough.
he will not say so.
but she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.
madam, he hath not slept tonight; commanded none should come at him.
no, his mouth is stopped. honest iago hath ta'en order for 't.
be eloquent in my behalf to her.
not so hot, good sir: i come to bring him sleep. 'tis such as you, at each his needless heavings, such as you nourish the cause of his awaking: i do come with words as medicinal as true, honest as either, to purge him of that humour
oh! my fear interprets. what, is he dead?
an honest tale speeds best being plainly told.
what noise there, ho?
had all his hairs been lives
then plainly to her tell my loving tale.
no noise, my lord; but needful conference about some gossips for your highness.
alas, he is betrayed and i undone.
plain and not honest is too harsh a style.
how! i charged thee that she should not come about me: i knew she would.
out, strumpet! weep'st thou for him to my face?
your reasons are too shallow and too quick.
i told her so, my lord, on your displeasure's peril and on mine,
oh, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!
too deep and dead, poor infants, in their graves.
what, canst not rule her?
down, strumpet!
harp not on that string, madam; that is past.
from all dishonesty he can: in this, unless he take the course that you have done, commit me for committing honour, trust it,
kill me tomorrow, let me live tonight!
harp on it still shall i till heart-strings break.
la you now, you hear: when she will take the rein i let her run; but she'll not stumble.
nay, if you strive, 
now by my george, my garter, and my crown, 
good my liege, i come; myself your loyal servant, your physician, your most obedient counsellor, yet that dare less appear so in comforting your evils, than such as most seem yours: i say, i come
but half an hour!
profaned, dishonored, and the third usurped.
good queen!
being done, there is no pause.
i swear, 
good queen, my lord, good queen; i say good queen; and would by combat make her good, so were i
but while i say one prayer!
by nothing, for this is no oath. thy george, profaned, hath lost his lordly honor; thy garter, blemished, pawned his knightly virtue; thy crown, usurped, disgraced his kingly glory. swear then by something that thou hast not wronged.
force her hence.
it is too late. (he smothers her)
then, by myself, 
let him that makes but trifles of his eyes first hand me: on mine own accord i'll off; but first i'll do my errand. the good queen, here 'tis; commends it to your blessing.
(within) my lord , my lord! what, ho! my lord, my lord!
thyself is self-misused.
out! a mankind witch! hence with her, out o' door: a most intelligencing bawd!
what noise is this?, not dead? not yet quite dead? i that am cruel am yet merciful, i would not have thee linger in thy pain.
now, by the world, 
i am as ignorant in that as you in so entitling me, and no less honest than you are mad; which is enough, i'll warrant, as this world goes, to pass for honest.
(within) what, ho! my lord, my lord!
'tis full of thy foul wrongs.
will you not push her out? give her the bastard. thou dotard! thou art woman-tired, unroosted by thy dame partlet here. take up the bastard; take't up, i say; give't to thy crone.
who's there?
my father's death, 
unvenerable be thy hands, if thou takest up the princess by that forced baseness which he has put upon't!
(within) o good my lord, i would speak a word with you!
thy life hath it dishonored.
he dreads his wife.
yes, 'tis emilia., (to emilia) by and by., she's dead., 'tis like she comes to speak of cassio's death, still as the grave. shall she come in? were 't good? i think she stirs again, no. what's best to do? if she come in, she'll sure speak to my wife, my wife! my wife! what wife? i have no wife. methinks it should be now a huge eclipse of sun and moon, and that th' affrighted globe should yawn at alteration.
why then, by god.
you'ld call your children yours.
(within) i do beseech you
god's wrong is most of all. if thou didst fear to break an oath by him, the unity the king my husband made thou hadst not broken, nor my brothers died. if thou hadst feared to break an oath by him, had graced the tender temples of my child, and both the princes had been breathing here, which now, two tender bedfellows for dust, thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms.
a nest of traitors!
i had forgot thee, oh, come in, emilia. soft, by and by. let me the curtains draw. where art thou?
the time to come.
i am none, by this good light.
what's the matter with thee now?
that thou hast wrongèd in the time o'erpast; for i myself have many tears to wash hereafter time, for time past wronged by thee. the children live whose fathers thou hast slaughtered, the parents live whose children thou hast butchered, old barren plants, to wail it with their age. swear not by time to come, for that thou hast misused ere used, by times ill-used o'erpast.
nor i, nor any the sacred honour of himself, his queen's, his hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander, whose sting is sharper than the sword's; and will not, he cannot be compell'd to't, once remove the root of his opinion, which is rotten as ever oak or stone was sound.
o my good lord, yonder's foul murders done!
so thrive i in my dangerous affairs of hostile arms! myself myself confound, heaven and fortune bar me happy hours, day, yield me not thy light, nor night thy rest, to my proceedings if, with dear heart's love, immaculate devotion, holy thoughts, i tender not thy beauteous princely daughter. in her consists my happiness and thine. herself, the land, and many a christian soul, death, desolation, ruin and decay. it cannot be avoided but by this; it will not be avoided but by this. be the attorney of my love to her: plead what i will be, not what i have been; not my deserts, but what i will deserve. urge the necessity and state of times,
a callat and now baits me! this brat is none of mine; it is the issue of polixenes: hence with it, and together with the dam commit them to the fire!
what, now?
shall i be tempted of the devil thus?
and, might we lay the old proverb to your charge, so like you, 'tis the worse. behold, my lords, although the print be little, the whole matter and copy of the father, eye, nose, lip, the pretty dimples of his chin and cheek, his smiles, the very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger: and thou, good goddess nature, which hast made it the ordering of the mind too, 'mongst all colours no yellow in't, lest she suspect, as he does, her children not her husband's!
but now, my lord.
ay, if the devil tempt you to do good.
[to antigonus] a gross hag that wilt not stay her tongue.
it is the very error of the moon, she comes more nearer earth than she was wont and makes men mad.
shall i forget myself to be myself?
hang all the husbands that cannot do that feat, you'll leave yourself hardly one subject.
called roderigo.
ay, if your self's remembrance wrong yourself.
once more, take her hence.
roderigo killed? and cassio killed!
yet thou didst kill my children.
a most unworthy and unnatural lord can do no more.
no, cassio is not killed.
but in your daughter's womb i bury them, where, in that nest of spicery, they will breed selves of themselves, to your recomforture.
i'll ha' thee burnt.
not cassio killed! then murder's out of tune, and sweet revenge grows harsh.
shall i go win my daughter to thy will?
i care not: not she which burns in't. i'll not call you tyrant; but this most cruel usage of your queen, not able to produce more accusation than your own weak-hinged fancy, something savours yea, scandalous to the world.
oh, falsely, falsely murdered!
and be a happy mother by the deed.
on your allegiance, out of the chamber with her! were i a tyrant, where were her life? she durst not call me so,
alas, what cry is that?
i go. write to me very shortly, and you shall understand from me her mind.
i pray you, do not push me; i'll be gone. look to your babe, my lord; 'tis yours: jove send her a better guiding spirit! what needs these hands? will never do him good, not one of you. so, so: farewell; we are gone.
that? what?
bear her my true love's kiss; and so, farewell.
[to antigonus] thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this. my child? away with't! even thou, that hast and see it instantly consumed with fire; even thou and none but thou. take it up straight: within this hour bring me word 'tis done, and by good testimony, or i'll seize thy life, and wilt encounter with my wrath, say so; the bastard brains with these my proper hands shall i dash out. go, take it to the fire; for thou set'st on thy wife.
out and alas, that was my lady's voice.
relenting fool and shallow, changing woman!
these lords, my noble fellows, if they please, can clear me in't.
help! help, ho, help! o lady, speak again!
how now, what news?
we can: my royal liege, he is not guilty of her coming hither.
a guiltless death i die.
most mighty sovereign, on the western coast rideth a puissant navy. to our shores throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends, unarmed and unresolved to beat them back. and there they hull, expecting but the aid of buckingham to welcome them ashore.
you're liars all.
oh, who hath done this deed?
some light-foot friend post to the duke of norfolk, ratcliffe, thyself, or catesby. where is he?
beseech your highness, give us better credit: we have always truly served you, and beseech you so to esteem of us, and on our knees we beg, as recompense of our dear services which being so horrible, so bloody, must lead on to some foul issue: we all kneel.
nobody. i myself. farewell. commend me to my kind lord. oh, farewell!
here, my good lord.
i am a feather for each wind that blows: shall i live on to see this bastard kneel than curse it then. but be it; let it live. it shall not neither. you, sir, come you hither; you that have been so tenderly officious with lady margery, your midwife there, so sure as this beard's grey, , what will you adventure to save this brat's life?
why, how should she be murdered?
catesby, fly to the duke.
any thing, my lord, and nobleness impose: at least thus much: i'll pawn the little blood which i have left to save the innocent: any thing possible.
alas, who knows?
i will, my lord, with all convenient haste.
it shall be possible. swear by this sword
you heard her say herself it was not i.
ratcliffe, come hither. post to salisbury. when thou com'st thither why stay'st thou here and go'st not to the duke?
i will, my lord.
she said so. i must needs report the truth.
first, mighty liege, tell me your highness' pleasure, what from your grace i shall deliver to him.
mark and perform it, see'st thou! for the fail of any point in't shall not only be death to thyself but to thy lewd-tongued wife, as thou art liege-man to us, that thou carry this female bastard hence and that thou bear it to some remote and desert place quite out of our dominions, and that there thou leave it, and favour of the climate. as by strange fortune it came to us, i do in justice charge thee, on thy soul's peril and thy body's torture, that thou commend it strangely to some place
she's like a liar gone to burning hell. 'twas i that killed her.
o true, good catesby. bid him levy straight and meet me suddenly at salisbury.
i swear to do this, though a present death had been more merciful. come on, poor babe: some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens to be thy nurses! wolves and bears, they say like offices of pity. sir, be prosperous in more than this deed does require! and blessing against this cruelty fight on thy side, poor thing, condemn'd to loss!
oh, the more angel she,
i go.
another's issue.
she turned to folly, and she was a whore.
what, may it please you, shall i do at salisbury?
please your highness, posts from those you sent to the oracle are come an hour since: cleomenes and dion, hasting to the court.
thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.
why, what wouldst thou do there before i go?
so please you, sir, their speed hath been beyond account.
she was false as water.
your highness told me i should post before.
twenty-three days the great apollo suddenly will have the truth of this appear. prepare you, lords; summon a session, that we may arraign our most disloyal lady, for, as she hath a just and open trial. while she lives my heart will be a burthen to me. leave me, and think upon my bidding.
thou art rash as fire, to say that she was false. oh, she was heavenly true!
my mind is changed.
the climate's delicate, the air most sweet, fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing the common praise it bears.
oh, i were damned beneath all depth in hell, but that i did proceed upon just grounds to this extremity. thy husband knew it all.
stanley, what news with you?
i shall report, methinks i so should term them, and the reverence of the grave wearers. o, the sacrifice! how ceremonious, solemn and unearthly it was i' the offering!
my husband!
none good, my liege, to please you with the hearing, nor none so bad but well may be reported.
and the ear-deafening voice o' the oracle, kin to jove's thunder, so surprised my sense. that i was nothing.
thy husband.
hoyday, a riddle! neither good nor bad. when thou mayst tell thy tale the nearest way? once more, what news?
if the event o' the journey as it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy, the time is worth the use on't.
that she was false to wedlock?
richmond is on the seas.
great apollo turn all to the best! these proclamations, i little like.
if heaven would make me such another world of one entire and perfect chrysolite, i'd not have sold her for it.
there let him sink, and be the seas on him! white-livered runagate, what doth he there?
the violent carriage of it will clear or end the busine when the oracle, thus by apollo's great divine seal'd up, even then will rush to knowledge. go: fresh horses! and gracious be the issue! exeunt.
my husband?
i know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.
this sessions, to our great grief we pronounce, even pushes 'gainst our heart: the party tried the daughter of a king, our wife, and one of us too much beloved. let us be clear'd proceed in justice, which shall have due course, even to the guilt or the purgation. produce the prisoner.
ay, 'twas he that told me on her first. that sticks on filthy deeds.
well, as you guess?
it is his highness' pleasure that the queen
my husband!
stirred up by dorset, buckingham, and morton, he makes for england, here to claim the crown.
read the indictment.
what needs this iterance, woman? i say thy husband.
is the chair empty? is the sword unswayed? what heir of york is there alive but we? and who is england's king but great york's heir? then tell me, what makes he upon the seas?
[reads] hermione, queen to the worthy leontes, king of sicilia, thou art here accused and arraigned of high treason, in committing adultery with camillo to take away the life of our sovereign lord the king, thy royal husband: the pretence whereof being by circumstances partly laid open, thou, hermione, contrary to the faith and allegiance their better safety, to fly away by night.
o mistress, villainy hath made mocks with love! my husband say that she was false!
unless for that, my liege, i cannot guess.
since what i am to say must be but that which contradicts my accusation and the testimony on my part no other to say 'not guilty:' mine integrity being counted falsehood, shall, as i express it, be so received. but thus: if powers divine behold our human actions, as they do, false accusation blush and tyranny tremble at patience. you, my lord, best know, who least will seem to do so, my past life hath been as continent, as chaste, as true, than history can pattern, though devised and play'd to take spectators. for behold me a fellow of the royal bed, which owe a moiety of the throne a great king's daughter, to prate and talk for life and honour 'fore who please to come and hear. for life, i prize it as i weigh grief, which i would spare: for honour, 'tis a derivative from me to mine, to your own conscience, sir, before polixenes came to your court, how i was in your grace, how merited to be so; since he came, with what encounter so uncurrent i the bound of honour, or in act or will that way inclining, harden'd be the hearts of all that hear me, and my near'st of kin cry fie upon my grave!
he, woman. my friend, thy husband, honest, honest iago.
you cannot guess wherefore the welshman comes. thou wilt revolt and fly to him, i fear.
that any of these bolder vices wanted less impudence to gainsay what they did than to perform it first.
if he say so, may his pernicious soul rot half a grain a day! he lies to th' heart. she was too fond of her most filthy bargain.
no, my good lord. therefore mistrust me not.
that's true enough;
ha!
where is thy power, then, to beat him back? are they not now upon the western shore, safe-conducting the rebels from their ships?
you will not own it.
do thy worst. this deed of thine is no more worthy heaven than thou wast worthy her.
no, my good lord. my friends are in the north.
more than mistress of which comes to me in name of fault, i must not at all acknowledge. for polixenes, i loved him as in honour he required, with such a kind of love as might become a lady like me, with a love even such, so and no other, as yourself commanded: both disobedience and ingratitude to you and toward your friend, whose love had spoke, even since it could speak, from an infant, freely that it was yours. now, for conspiracy, for me to try how: all i know of it is that camillo was an honest man; and why he left your court, the gods themselves, wotting no more than i, are ignorant.
peace, you were best.
cold friends to me. what do they in the north
what you have underta'en to do in's absence.
thou hast not half that power to do me harm as ignorant as dirt! thou hast done a deed, i care not for thy sword, i'll make thee known
they have not been commanded, mighty king. pleaseth your majesty to give me leave, i'll muster up my friends and meet your grace where and what time your majesty shall please.
sir, you speak a language that i understand not: my life stands in the level of your dreams,
though i lost twenty lives., help! help, ho! help! the moor hath killed my mistress! murder, murder!
but i'll not trust thee.
your actions are my dreams; you had a bastard by polixenes, and i but dream'd it. as you were past all shame,, those of your fact are so, so past all truth: thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself, no father owning it,, which is, indeed, more criminal in thee than it,, so thou shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage
what is the matter? how now, general?
most mighty sovereign, you have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful. i never was nor never will be false.
sir, spare your threats: the bug which you would fright me with i seek. to me can life be no commodity: the crown and comfort of my life, your favour, but know not how it went. my second joy and first-fruits of my body, from his presence i am barr'd, like one infectious. my third comfort starr'd most unluckily, is from my breast, haled out to murder: myself on every post proclaimed a strumpet: with immodest hatred the child-bed privilege denied, which 'longs to women of all fashion; lastly, hurried i have got strength of limit. now, my liege, tell me what blessings i have here alive, that i should fear to die? therefore proceed. but yet hear this: mistake me not; no life, which i would free, if i shall be condemn'd upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else but what your jealousies awake, i tell you 'tis rigor and not law. your honours all, apollo be my judge!
oh, are you come, iago? you have done well, that men must lay their murders on your neck.
go then and muster men, but leave behind or else his head's assurance is but frail.
this your request is altogether just: therefore bring forth, and in apollos name, his oracle.
what is the matter?
so deal with him as i prove true to you.
o that he were alive, and here beholding his daughter's trial! that he did but see the flatness of my misery, yet with eyes of pity, not revenge!
(to iago) disprove this villain, if thou be'st a man. i know thou didst not, thou'rt not such a villain. speak, for my heart is full.
my gracious sovereign, now in devonshire, as i by friends am well advertisèd, bishop of exeter, his elder brother, with many more confederates are in arms.
that you, cleomenes and dion, have been both at delphos, and from thence have brought the seal'd-up oracle, by the hand deliver'd of great apollo's priest; and that, since then, nor read the secrets in't.
i told him what i thought, and told no more than what he found himself was apt and true.
in kent, my liege, the guilfords are in arms, and every hour more competitors
all this we swear.
but did you ever tell him she was false?
my lord, the army of great buckingham, 
break up the seals and read.
i did.
out on you, owls! nothing but songs of death. he striketh him there, take thou that till thou bring better news.
[reads] hermione is chaste; a jealous tyrant; his innocent babe truly begotten; and the king shall live without an heir, if that which is lost be not found.
you told a lie, an odious, damnèd lie. upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie. she false with cassio! did you say with cassio?
is that by sudden floods and fall of waters buckingham's army is dispersed and scattered, and he himself wandered away alone, no man knows whither.
now blessed be the great apollo!
with cassio, mistress. go to, charm your tongue.
i cry thee mercy. he gives money hath any well-advisèd friend proclaimed reward to him that brings the traitor in?
praised!
i will not charm my tongue, i am bound to speak. my mistress here lies murdered in her bed, 
such proclamation hath been made, my lord.
hast thou read truth?
oh, heavens forfend!
'tis said, my liege, in yorkshire are in arms. but this good comfort bring i to your highness: the breton navy is dispersed by tempest. richmond, in dorsetshire, sent out a boat if they were his assistants, yea or no, who answered him they came from buckingham upon his party. he, mistrusting them, hoisted sail and made his course for brittany.
ay, my lord; even so as it is here set down.
and your reports have set the murder on.
if not to fight with foreign enemies, yet to beat down these rebels here at home.
there is no truth at all i' the oracle:
nay, stare not, masters, it is true, indeed.
my liege, the duke of buckingham is taken. that is the best news. that the earl of richmond is colder tidings, yet they must be told.
my lord the king, the king!
'tis a strange truth.
away towards salisbury! while we reason here, a royal battle might be won and lost. someone take order buckingham be brought
what is the business?
oh, monstrous act!
sir christopher, tell richmond this from me: that in the sty of the most deadly boar my son george stanley is franked up in hold; if i revolt, off goes young george's head; so get three gone. commend me to thy lord. withal, say that the queen hath heartily consented he should espouse elizabeth her daughter. but, tell me, where is princely richmond now?
o sir, i shall be hated to report it! the prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
villainy, villainy, villainy! i think upon 't, i think i smell 't, oh, villainy! i thought so then, i'll kill myself for grief.
at pembroke, or at ha'rfordwest in wales.
how! gone!
what, are you mad? i charge you, get you home.
what men of name resort to him?
is dead.
good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak. 'tis proper i obey him, but not now. perchance, iago, i will ne'er go home.
sir walter herbert, a renownèd soldier; sir gilbert talbot, sir william stanley, oxford, redoubted pembroke, sir james blunt, and many other of great name and worth; and towards london they do bend their power, if by the way they be not fought withal.
apollo's angry; and the heavens themselves do strike at my injustice.
oh! oh! oh!
(gives him a paper) well, hie thee to thy lord. farewell.
how now there!
nay, lay thee down and roar, for thou hast killed the sweetest innocent that e'er did lift up eye.
will not king richard let me speak with him?
this news is mortal to the queen: look down and see what death is doing.
oh, she was foul!, i scarce did know you, uncle. there lies your niece, whose breath, indeed, these hands have newly stopped.
no, my good lord. therefore be patient.
take her hence: her heart is but o'ercharged; she will recover: beseech you, tenderly apply to her some remedies for life.
poor desdemon! i am glad thy father's dead, thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief shore his old thread in twain. did he live now,
hastings and edward's children, grey and rivers, holy king henry and thy fair son edward, by underhand, corrupted, foul injustice, if that your moody, discontented souls do through the clouds behold this present hour, even for revenge mock my destruction., 
apollo, pardon my great profaneness 'gainst thine oracle! new woo my queen, recall the good camillo, whom i proclaim a man of truth, of mercy; for, being transported by my jealousies to bloody thoughts and to revenge, i chose my friend polixenes: which had been done, but that the good mind of camillo tardied my swift command, though i with death and with reward did threaten and encourage him, and fill'd with honour, to my kingly guest unclasp'd my practise, quit his fortunes here, which you knew great, and to the hazard of all encertainties himself commended, thorough my rust! and how his pity does my deeds make the blacker!
this sight would make him do a desperate turn, and fall to reprobation.
it is.
woe the while! o, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,
'tis pitiful, but yet iago knows that she with cassio hath the act of shame a thousand times committed. cassio confessed it, with that recognizance and pledge of love which i first gave her. i saw it in his hand, it was a handkerchief, an antique token my father gave my mother.
why, then all souls' day is my body's doomsday. this is the day which, in king edward's time, i wished might fall on me when i was found this is the day wherein i wished to fall by the false faith of him who most i trusted. this, this all souls' day to my fearful soul is the determined respite of my wrongs. hath turned my feignèd prayer on my head and given in earnest what i begged in jest.
what fit is this, good lady?
oh, heaven! oh, heavenly powers!
thus doth he force the swords of wicked men to turn their own points in their masters' bosoms. "when he," quoth she, "shall split thy heart with sorrow, remember margaret was a prophetess.", come, lead me, officers, to the block of shame. wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.
what studied torments, tyrant, hast for me? what wheels? racks? fires? what flaying? boiling? in leads or oils? what old or newer torture to taste of thy most worst? thy tyranny together working with thy jealousies, fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle for girls of nine, o, think what they have done thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it. that thou betray'dst polixenes, 'twas nothing; that did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant and damnable ingrateful: nor was't much, to have him kill a king: poor trespasses, more monstrous standing by: whereof i reckon the casting forth to crows thy baby-daughter to be or none or little; though a devil nor is't directly laid to thee, the death of the young prince, whose honourable thoughts, thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart that could conceive a gross and foolish sire laid to thy answer: but the last,, o lords, when i have said, cry 'woe!' the queen, the queen, the sweet'st, dear'st creature's dead, and vengeance for't
zounds, hold your peace.
fellows in arms, and my most loving friends, bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny, have we marched on without impediment, thus far into the bowels of the land lines of fair comfort and encouragement. the wretched, bloody, and usurping boar, that spoiled your summer fields and fruitful vines, swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough is now even in the center of this isle, near to the town of leicester, as we learn. from tamworth thither is but one day's march. in god's name, cheerly on, courageous friends, by this one bloody trial of sharp war.
the higher powers forbid!
'twill out, 'twill out., i peace? no, i will speak as liberal as the north. let heaven and men and devils, let them all, all, all cry shame against me, yet i'll speak.
every man's conscience is a thousand men, to fight against this guilty homicide.
i say she's dead; i'll swear't. if word nor oath prevail not, go and see: if you can bring tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye, as i would do the gods. but, o thou tyrant! do not repent these things, for they are heavier than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee to nothing but despair. a thousand knees upon a barren mountain and still winter in storm perpetual, could not move the gods to look that way thou wert.
be wise, and get you home.
i doubt not but his friends will turn to us.
go on, go on all tongues to talk their bitterest.
i will not.
which in his dearest need will fly from him.
say no more: howe'er the business goes, you have made fault i' the boldness of your speech.
fie! your sword upon a woman?
all for our vantage. then, in god's name, march. true hope is swift, and flies with swallow's wings. kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.
all faults i make, when i shall come to know them, i do repent. alas! i have show'd too much the rashness of a woman: he is touch'd to the noble heart. what's gone and what's past help at my petition; i beseech you, rather let me be punish'd, that have minded you of what you should forget. now, good my liege sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman: i'll speak of her no more, nor of your children; i'll not remember you of my own lord, who is lost too: take your patience to you, and i'll say nothing.
o thou dull moor! that handkerchief thou speak'st of i found by fortune and did give my husband. more than indeed belonged to such a trifle, he begged of me to steal it.
here pitch our tent, even here in bosworth field., my lord of surrey, why look you so sad?
when most the truth; which i receive much better than to be pitied of thee. prithee, bring me to the dead bodies of my queen and son: one grave shall be for both: upon them shall our shame perpetual. once a day i'll visit the chapel where they lie, and tears shed there shall be my recreation: so long as nature will bear up with this exercise, so long unto these sorrows. exeunt
villainous whore!
my heart is ten times lighter than my looks.
thou art perfect then, our ship hath touch'd upon the deserts of bohemia?
she give it cassio? no, alas, i found it and i did give 't my husband.
my lord of norfolk, 
ay, my lord: and fear we have landed in ill time: the skies look grimly the heavens with that we have in hand are angry and frown upon 's.
filth, thou liest!
here, most gracious liege.
their sacred wills be done! go, get aboard; look to thy bark: i'll not be long before
(to othello) o murderous coxcomb! what should such a fool do with so good a wife?
norfolk, we must have knocks, ha, must we not?
make your best haste, and go not too far i' the land: 'tis like to be loud weather; besides, this place is famous for the creatures of prey that keep upon't.
are there no stones in heaven but what serve for the thunder?, precious villain!
we must both give and take, my loving lord.
i'll follow instantly.
the woman falls! sure he hath killed his wife.
up with my tent!, here will i lie tonight. but where tomorrow? well, all's one for that.
i am glad at heart to be so rid o' the business.
ay, ay. oh, lay me by my mistress' side.
six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
come, poor babe: the spirits o' the dead may walk again: if such thing be, thy mother appear'd to me last night, for ne'er was dream so like a waking. to me comes a creature, i never saw a vessel of like sorrow, so fill'd and so becoming: in pure white robes, like very sanctity, she did approach my cabin where i lay; thrice bow'd before me, became two spouts: the fury spent, anon did this break-from her: 'good antigonus, since fate, against thy better disposition, hath made thy person for the thrower-out places remote enough are in bohemia, there weep and leave it crying; and, for the babe is counted lost for ever, perdita, i prithee, call't. for this ungentle business thy wife paulina more.' and so, with shrieks she melted into air. affrighted much, i did in time collect myself and thought this was so and no slumber. dreams are toys: i will be squared by this. i do believe hermione hath suffer'd death, and that apollo would, this being indeed the issue of king polixenes, it should here be laid, of its right father. blossom, speed thee well! there lie, and there thy character: there these; which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty, and still rest thine. the storm begins; poor wretch, to loss and what may follow! weep i cannot, but my heart bleeds; and most accursed am i to be by oath enjoin'd to this. farewell! the day frowns more and more: thou'rt like to have the heavens so dim by day. a savage clamour! well may i get aboard! this is the chase: i am gone for ever.
he's gone, but his wife's killed.
why, our battalia trebles that account. besides, the king's name is a tower of strength which they upon the adverse party want. let us survey the vantage of the ground. call for some men of sound direction. let's lack no discipline, make no delay, for, lords, tomorrow is a busy day.
i would there were no age between sixteen and rest; for there is nothing in the between but getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry, stealing, fighting, hark you now! would any but these boiled brains of nineteen and two-and-twenty best sheep, which i fear the wolf will sooner find than the master: if any where i have them, 'tis by the seaside, browsing of ivy. good luck, an't be thy will what have we here! mercy on 's, a barne a very pretty one; a very pretty one: sure, some 'scape: though i am not bookish, yet i can read waiting-gentlewoman in the 'scape. this has been some stair-work, some trunk-work, some than the poor thing is here. i'll take it up for pity: yet i'll tarry till my son come; he hallooed but even now. whoa, ho, hoa!
'tis a notorious villain. take you this weapon, which i have recovered from the moor. but kill him rather. i'll after that same villain, for 'tis a damnèd slave.
and by the bright track of his fiery car, gives token of a goodly day tomorrow., sir william brandon, you shall bear my standard., give me some ink and paper in my tent; limit each leader to his several charge, and part in just proportion our small power. my lord of oxford, you, sir william brandon, and you, sir walter herbert, stay with me. good captain blunt, bear my goodnight to him, and by the second hour in the morning desire the earl to see me in my tent. yet one thing more, good captain, do for me.
hilloa, loa!
i am not valiant neither, but ever puny whipster gets my sword. but why should honor outlive honesty?
unless i have mista'en his colors much, which well i am assured i have not done, his regiment lies half a mile, at least, south from the mighty power of the king.
on when thou art dead and rotten, come hither. what ailest thou, man?
what did thy song bode, lady? hark, canst thou hear me? i will play the swan. and die in music. (singing) willow, willow, willow, moor, she was chaste, she loved thee, cruel moor. so come my soul to bliss, as i speak true.
sweet blunt, make some good means to speak with him, and give him from me this most needful note.
i have seen two such sights, by sea and by land! but i am not to say it is a sea, for it is now the a bodkin's point.
i have another weapon in this chamber, it was a sword of spain, the ice-brook's temper. oh, here it is. uncle, i must come forth.
upon my life, my lord, i'll undertake it. and so god give you quiet rest tonight!
why, boy, how is it?
(within) if thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear.
good night, good captain blunt.
i would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages, how it takes up the shore! but that's not the sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em; now the ship boring the moon with her main-mast, and anon swallowed with yest and froth, as you'ld thrust a cork into a hogshead. and then for the shoulder-bone; how he cried to me for help and said his name was antigonus, a nobleman. but to make an end of the ship, to see how the sea flap-dragoned it: but, first, how the poor souls roared, and the and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than the sea or weather.
look in upon me then and speak with me, or, naked as i am, i will assault thee.
come, gentlemen, let us consult upon tomorrow's business into my tent. the dew is raw and cold.
name of mercy, when was this, boy?
what is the matter?
what is "t o"clock?
now, now: i have not winked since i saw these the bear half dined on the gentleman: he's at it now.
behold, i have a weapon. a better never did itself sustain
it's suppertime, my lord. it's nine o'clock.
would i had been by, to have helped the old man!
that with this little arm and this good sword i have made my way through more impediments than twenty times your stop. but, oh, vain boast! who can control his fate? 'tis not so now. here is my journey's end, here is my butt, and very sea-mark of my utmost sail. do you go back dismayed? 'tis a lost fear. man but a rush against othello's breast, now, how dost thou look now? o ill-starred wench, pale as thy smock! when we shall meet at compt this look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven and fiends will snatch at it. cold, cold, my girl, whip me, ye devils, from the possession of this heavenly sight! blow me about in winds, roast me in sulfur, wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!, 
i will not sup tonight. give me some ink and paper. what, is my beaver easier than it was? and all my armor laid into my tent?
i would you had been by the ship side, to have
where is this rash and most unfortunate man?
it is, my liege, and all things are in readiness.
heavy matters! heavy matters! but look thee here, boy. now bless thyself: thou mettest with things dying, i with things newborn. here's a sight for thee; look thee, a bearing-cloth for a squire's open't. so, let's see: it was told me i should be rich by the fairies. this is some changeling: open't. what's within, boy?
that's he that was othello. here i am.
use careful watch. choose trusty sentinels.
you're a made old man: if the sins of your youth
where is that viper? bring the villain forth.
i go, my lord.
this is fairy gold, boy, and 'twill prove so: up with't, keep it close: home, home, the next way. we are lucky, boy; and to be so still requires nothing but secrecy. let my sheep go: come, good
i look down towards his feet, but that's a fable.
stir with the lark tomorrow, gentle norfolk.
go you the next way with your findings. i'll go see if the bear be gone from the gentleman and how much he hath eaten: they are never curst but when they are hungry: if there be any of him left, i'll bury
wrench his sword from him.
i warrant you, my lord.
that's a good deed. if thou mayest discern by that which is left of him what he is, fetch me to the sight of him.
i bleed, sir, but not killed.
catesby.
marry, will i; and you shall help to put him i' the ground.
i am not sorry neither. i'd have thee live, for in my sense 'tis happiness to die.
my lord.
'tis a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds on't.
o thou othello, thou was once so good, what shall be said to thee?
send out a pursuivant-at-arms to stanley's regiment. bid him bring his power before sunrising, lest his son george fall
i, that please some, try all, both joy and terror of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error, now take upon me, in the name of time, to use my wings. impute it not a crime o'er sixteen years and leave the growth untried of that wide gap, since it is in my power to o'erthrow law and in one self-born hour to plant and o'erwhelm custom. let me pass or what is now received: i witness to the times that brought them in; so shall i do to the freshest things now reigning and make stale the glistering of this present, as my tale i turn my glass and give my scene such growing as you had slept between: leontes leaving, the effects of his fond jealousies so grieving that he shuts up himself, imagine me, in fair bohemia, and remember well, i mentioned a son o' the king's, which florizel i now name to you; and with speed so pace to speak of perdita, now grown in grace i list not prophecy; but let time's news be known when 'tis brought forth. a shepherd's daughter, and what to her adheres, which follows after, if ever you have spent time worse ere now; if never, yet that time himself doth say he wishes earnestly you never may.
why, anything. an honorable murderer, if you will, for naught i did in hate, but all in honor.
(to soldiers) fill me a bowl of wine. give me a watch. saddle white surrey for the field to-morrow. look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy., ratcliffe.
i pray thee, good camillo, be no more importunate: 'tis a sickness denying thee any thing; a death to grant this.
this wretch hath part confessed his villainy.
my lord.
it is sixteen years since i saw my country: though desire to lay my bones there. besides, the penitent king, my master, hath sent for me; to whose feeling sorrows i might be some allay, or i o'erween to think so, which is another spur to my departure.
ay.
sawst thou the melancholy lord northumberland?
thy services by leaving me now: the need i have of thee thine own goodness hath made; better not to have had thee than thus to want thee: thou, having made me businesses which none without thee can them thyself or take away with thee the very services thou hast done; which if i have not enough considered, as too much i cannot, to be more thankful to thee shall be my study, and my profit country, sicilia, prithee speak no more; whose very naming punishes me with the remembrance of that penitent, as thou callest him, and reconciled king, my brother; whose loss of his most precious queen say to me, when sawest thou the prince florizel, my son? kings are no less unhappy, their issue not being gracious, than they are in losing them when they have approved their virtues.
dear general, i never gave you cause.
thomas the earl of surrey and himself, much about cockshut time, from troop to troop went through the army cheering up the soldiers.
his happier affairs may be, are to me unknown: but i have missingly noted, he is of late much retired from court and is less frequent to his princely exercises than formerly he hath appeared.
i do believe it, and i ask your pardon. will you, i pray, demand that demi-devil
i have not that alacrity of spirit nor cheer of mind that i was wont to have. set it down. is ink and paper ready?
care; so far that i have eyes under my service which look upon his removedness; from whom i have this intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a most homely shepherd; a man, they say, that from neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.
demand me nothing. what you know, you know. from this time forth i never will speak word.
it is, my lord.
i have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath a daughter of most rare note: the report of her is extended more than can be thought to begin from such a cottage.
what, not to pray?
ratcliffe, about the mid of night come to my tent and help to arm me. leave me, i say.
fear, the angle that plucks our son thither. thou shalt accompany us to the place; where we will, not appearing what we are, have some question with the shepherd; from whose simplicity i think it not prithee, be my present partner in this business, and lay aside the thoughts of sicilia.
torments will ope your lips.
fortune and victory sit on thy helm!
i willingly obey your command.
well, thou dost best.
all comfort that the dark night can afford tell me, how fares our loving mother?
my best camillo! we must disguise ourselves.
sir, you shall understand what hath befall'n, which, as i think, you know not. here is a letter found in the pocket of the slain roderigo, and here another. the one of them imports by roderigo.
i, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother, who prays continually for richmond's good. so much for that. the silent hours steal on, in brief, for so the season bids us be, prepare thy battle early in the morning, and put thy fortune to the arbitrament of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war. with best advantage will deceive the time, and aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms. but on thy side i may not be too forward, lest, being seen, thy brother, tender george, farewell. the leisure and the fearful time cuts off the ceremonious vows of love and ample interchange of sweet discourse, which so-long-sundered friends should dwell upon. once more, adieu. be valiant, and speed well.
when daffodils begin to peer, with heigh! the doxy over the dale, why, then comes in the sweet o' the year; for the red blood reigns in the winter's pale. with heigh! the sweet birds, o, how they sing! doth set my pugging tooth on edge; for a quart of ale is a dish for a king. the lark, that tirra-lyra chants, are summer songs for me and my aunts, while we lie tumbling in the hay. i have served prince florizel and in my time wore three-pile; but now i am out of service: the pale moon shines by night: and when i wander here and there, i then do most go right. if tinkers may have leave to live, then my account i well may, give, and in the stocks avouch it. my traffic is sheets; when the kite builds, look to lesser linen. my father named me autolycus; who a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles. with die and drab i purchased this caparison, and my revenue is the silly cheat. gallows and knock are too powerful on the highway: beating and hanging are terrors to of it. a prize! a prize!
oh, villain!
good lords, conduct him to his regiment: i'll strive with troubled thoughts to take a nap, lest leaden slumber peise me down tomorrow, once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
let me see: every 'leven wether tods; every tod yields pound and odd shilling; fifteen hundred shorn. what comes the wool to?
most heathenish and most gross!
o thou, whose captain i account myself, look on my forces with a gracious eye. put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath, the usurping helmets of our adversaries! make us thy ministers of chastisement, that we may praise thee in the victory! to thee i do commend my watchful soul, sleeping and waking, o, defend me still! sleeps
if the springe hold, the cock's mine.
now here's another discontented paper roderigo meant to have sent this damnèd villain but that, belike, iago in the interim came in and satisfied him.
(to richard) let me sit heavy on thy soul tomorrow! think how thou stabbed'st me in my prime of youth (to richmond) be cheerful, richmond, for the wrongèd souls of butchered princes fight in thy behalf. king henry's issue, richmond, comforts thee.
i cannot do't without counters. let me see; what am i to buy for our sheep-shearing feast? three pound of sugar, five pound of currants, rice,, what will hath made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it on. she hath made me four and twenty nose-gays for the shearers, three-man-song-men all, and very good ones; but they are most of them means and bases; but horn-pipes. i must have saffron to colour the warden pies; mace; dates?, none, that's out of my note; nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that i may beg; four pound of prunes, and as many of
o thou pernicious caitiff! that was my wife's?
by thee was punchèd full of deadly holes. think on the tower and me. despair, and die! harry the sixth bids thee despair and die. (to richmond) harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be king, doth comfort thee in thy sleep. live and flourish.
o that ever i was born!
i found it in my chamber, and he himself confessed but even now that there he dropped it for a special purpose which wrought to his desire.
(to richard) let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow, i, that was washed to death with fulsome wine, tomorrow in the battle think on me, and fall thy edgeless sword. despair, and die! (to richmond) thou offspring of the house of lancaster, the wrongèd heirs of york do pray for thee
i' the name of me, 
o fool! fool! fool!
(to richard) let me sit heavy in thy soul tomorrow, rivers, that died at pomfret. despair, and die!
o, help me, help me! pluck but off these rags; and then, death, death!
how he upbraids iago, that he made him brave me upon the watch, whereon it came that i was cast. and even but now he spake, after long seeming dead, iago hurt him,
(to richard) think upon grey, and let thy soul despair!
on thee, rather than have these off.
(to othello) you must forsake this room and go with us. your power and your command is taken off and cassio rules in cyprus. for this slave, if there be any cunning cruelty it shall be his. you shall close prisoner rest till that the nature of your fault be known to the venetian state., come, bring him away.
(to richard) let fall thy lance. despair, and die!
o sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me more than the stripes i have received, which are mighty ones and millions.
soft you, a word or two before you go. no more of that. i pray you, in your letters, when you shall these unlucky deeds relate, speak of me as i am. nothing extenuate, nor set down aught in malice. then must you speak of one not easily jealous, but being wrought, perplexed in the extreme. of one whose hand, like the base indian, threw a pearl away richer than all his tribe. of one whose subdued eyes, drop tears as fast as the arabian trees their medicinal gum. set you down this,
(to richmond) awake, and think our wrongs in richard's bosom will conquer him! awake, and win the day.
great matter.
and say besides that in aleppo once, where a malignant and a turbaned turk i took by the throat the circumcisèd dog, and smote him, thus.
dream on thy cousins smothered in the tower. let us be lead within thy bosom, richard, and weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death. thy nephews' souls bid thee despair and die. sleep, richmond, sleep in peace and wake in joy. good angels guard thee from the boar's annoy. live, and beget a happy race of kings. edward's unhappy sons do bid thee flourish.
i am robbed, sir, and beaten; my money and apparel ta'en from me, and these detestable things put upon me.
oh, bloody period!
and in a bloody battle end thy days. think on lord hastings. despair and die! (to richmond) quiet, untroubled soul, awake, awake. arm, fight, and conquer for fair england's sake.
what, by a horseman, or a footman?
all that is spoke is marred.
richard, thy wife, that wretched anne thy wife, that never slept a quiet hour with thee, now fills thy sleep with perturbations. tomorrow, in the battle, think on me, (to richmond) thou quiet soul, sleep thou a quiet sleep. dream of success and happy victory. thy adversary's wife doth pray for thee.
a footman, sweet sir, a footman.
i kissed thee ere i killed thee. no way but this, killing myself, to die upon a kiss.
(to richard) the last was i that helped thee to the crown; o, in the battle think on buckingham, and die in terror of thy guiltiness. dream on, dream on, of bloody deeds and death. fainting, despair; despairing, yield thy breath. but cheer thy heart, and be thou not dismayed. god and good angels fight on richmond's side, and richard fall in height of all his pride.
indeed, he should be a footman by the garments he has left with thee: if this be a horseman's coat, it hath seen very hot service. lend me thy hand,
this did i fear, but thought he had no weapon, for he was great of heart.
give me another horse! bind up my wounds! o coward conscience, how dost thou afflict me! the lights burn blue. it is now dead midnight. cold fearful drops stand on my trembling flesh. what do i fear? myself? there's none else by. is there a murderer here? no. yes, i am. then fly! what, from myself? great reason why: lest i revenge. what, myself upon myself? alack, i love myself. wherefore? for any good o, no! alas, i rather hate myself for hateful deeds committed by myself. i am a villain. yet i lie. i am not. fool, of thyself speak well. fool, do not flatter.
o, good sir, tenderly, o!
o spartan dog, more fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea, look on the tragic loading of this bed. this is thy work. the object poisons sight, let it be hid., gratiano, keep the house for they succeed on you., to you, lord governor, remains the censure of this hellish villain: the time, the place, the torture. oh, enforce it! myself will straight aboard, and to the state
and every tongue brings in a several tale, and every tale condemns me for a villain. perjury, perjury, in the highest degree; murder, stern murder, in the direst degree; throng to the bar, crying all, "guilty! guilty!" i shall despair. there is no creature loves me, and if i die no soul will pity me. and wherefore should they, since that i myself methought the souls of all that i had murdered came to my tent, and every one did threat tomorrow's vengeance on the head of richard.
alas, poor soul!
my lord.
o, good sir, softly, good sir! i fear, sir, my shoulder-blade is out.
oh, for a muse of fire that would ascend the brightest heaven of invention! a kingdom for a stage, princes to act, and monarchs to behold the swelling scene! assume the port of mars, and at his heels, leashed in like hounds, should famine, sword, and fire crouch for employment. but pardon, gentles all, the flat unraisèd spirits that hath dared so great an object. can this cockpit hold the vasty fields of france? or may we cram within this wooden o the very casques that did affright the air at agincourt? attest in little place a million, and let us, ciphers to this great account, on your imaginary forces work. suppose within the girdle of these walls whose high uprearèd and abutting fronts the perilous narrow ocean parts asunder. piece out our imperfections with your thoughts. into a thousand parts divide one man, think, when we talk of horses, that you see them printing their proud hoofs i' th' receiving earth, for 'tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings, carry them here and there, jumping o'er times,
zounds, who is there?
how now! canst stand?
into an hour-glass; for the which supply, admit me chorus to this history; who, prologue-like, your humble patience pray gently to hear, kindly to judge our play.
ratcliffe, my lord, 'tis i. the early village cock hath twice done salutation to the morn. your friends are up and buckle on their armor.
[picking his pocket] softly, dear sir; good sir, softly. you ha' done me a charitable office.
my lord, i'll tell you that self bill is urged which in th' eleventh year of the last king's reign was like, and had indeed against us passed but that the scambling and unquiet time
o ratcliffe, i have dreamed a fearful dream!
dost lack any money? i have a little money for thee.
but how, my lord, shall we resist it now?
no doubt, my lord.
a kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence, unto whom i was going; i shall there have money, or any thing i want: offer me no money, i pray you; that kills my heart.
it must be thought on. if it pass against us, we lose the better half of our possession, for all the temporal lands which men devout would they strip from us, being valued thus: "as much as would maintain, to the king's honor, full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights, six thousand and two hundred good esquires; of indigent faint souls past corporal toil, a hundred almshouses right well supplied; and to the coffers of the king besides, a thousand pounds by th' year." thus runs the bill.
o ratcliffe, i fear, i fear.
what manner of fellow was he that robbed you?
this would drink deep.
nay, good my lord, be not afraid of shadows.
a fellow, sir, that i have known to go about with troll-my-dames; i knew him once a servant of the prince: i cannot tell, good sir, for which of his virtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of the court.
'twould drink the cup and all.
by the apostle paul, shadows tonight than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers armed in proof and led by shallow richmond. 'tis not yet near day. come, go with me; under our tents i'll play the eavesdropper
out of the court: they cherish it to make it stay there; and yet it will no more but abide.
but what prevention?
good morrow, richmond.
vices, i would say, sir. i know this man well: he hath been since an ape-bearer; then a motion of the prodigal son, and married a tinker's wife within a mile where my land and living lies; and, having flown over many knavish professions, he settled only in rogue: some call him autolycus.
the king is full of grace and fair regard.
cry mercy, lords and watchful gentlemen, that you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here.
wakes, fairs and bear-baitings.
and a true lover of the holy church.
how have you slept, my lord?
very true, sir; he, sir, he; that's the rogue that put me into this apparel.
the breath no sooner left his father's body but that his wildness, mortified in him, seemed to die too. yea, at that very moment consideration like an angel came leaving his body as a paradise t' envelop and contain celestial spirits. never was such a sudden scholar made, never came reformation in a flood nor never hydra-headed willfulness so soon did lose his seat, and all at once, as in this king.
that ever entered in a drowsy head have i since your departure had, my lords. methought their souls whose bodies richard murdered came to my tent and cried on victory. in the remembrance of so fair a dream. how far into the morning is it, lords?
not a more cowardly rogue in all bohemia: if you had
we are blessèd in the change.
upon the stroke of four.
i must confess to you, sir, i am no fighter: i am false of heart that way; and that he knew, i warrant him.
and, all-admiring, with an inward wish, you would desire the king were made a prelate. hear him debate of commonwealth affairs, you would say it hath been all in all his study. a fearful battle rendered you in music. turn him to any cause of policy, the gordian knot of it he will unloose familiar as his garter; that, when he speaks, and the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears to steal his sweet and honeyed sentences; so that the art and practic part of life must be the mistress to this theoric; since his addiction was to courses vain, his companies unlettered, rude, and shallow, his hours filled up with riots, banquets, sports, and never noted in him any study, from open haunts and popularity.
why, then 'tis time to arm and give direction. more than i have said, loving countrymen, the leisure and enforcement of the time forbids to dwell upon. yet remember this:
how do you now?
the strawberry grows underneath the nettle, and wholesome berries thrive and ripen best neighbored by fruit of baser quality; under the veil of wildness, which, no doubt, grew like the summer grass, fastest by night, unseen yet crescive in his faculty.
god and our good cause fight upon our side. like high-reared bulwarks, stand before our faces. richard except, those whom we fight against had rather have us win than him they follow. for what is he they follow? truly, gentlemen, one raised in blood, and one in blood established; one that made means to come by what he hath, and slaughtered those that were the means to help him; a base foul stone, made precious by the foil one that hath ever been god's enemy. then if you fight against god's enemy, god will, in justice, ward you as his soldiers. if you do sweat to put a tyrant down, if you do fight against your country's foes, your country's fat shall pay your pains the hire. if you do fight in safeguard of your wives, your wives shall welcome home the conquerors. your children's children quits it in your age. then, in the name of god and all these rights, advance your standards. draw your willing swords. for me, the ransom of my bold attempt but if i thrive, the gain of my attempt the least of you shall share his part thereof. sound drums and trumpets boldly and cheerfully; god and saint george! richmond and victory!
walk: i will even take my leave of you, and pace softly towards my kinsman's.
it must be so, for miracles are ceased, how things are perfected.
what said northumberland as touching richmond?
shall i bring thee on the way?
but, my good lord, how now for mitigation of this bill urged by the commons? doth his majesty
that he was never trainèd up in arms.
no, good-faced sir; no, sweet sir.
he seems indifferent, or rather swaying more upon our part than cherishing th' exhibitors against us; for i have made an offer to his majesty, and in regard of causes now in hand, which i have opened to his grace at large, as touching france, to give a greater sum than ever at one time the clergy yet
he said the truth. and what said surrey then?
sheep-shearing.
how did this offer seem received, my lord?
he smiled and said "the better for our purpose."
prosper you, sweet sir!
with good acceptance of his majesty, save that there was not time enough to hear, as i perceived his grace would fain have done, of his true titles to some certain dukedoms, and generally to the crown and seat of france, derived from edward, his great-grandfather.
he was in the right, and so indeed it is.
your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice. i'll be with you at your sheep-shearing too: if i shearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled and my name put in the book of virtue!
what was th' impediment that broke this off?
he looks in an almanac who saw the sun today?
jog on, jog on, the foot-path way, and merrily hent the stile-a: your sad tires in a mile-a.
craved audience. and the hour, i think, is come to give him hearing. is it four o'clock?
not i, my lord.
these your unusual weeds to each part of you do give a life: no shepherdess, but flora peering in april's front. this your sheep-shearing is as a meeting of the petty gods,
it is.
then he disdains to shine, for by the book a black day will it be to somebody. ratcliffe!
sir, my gracious lord, to chide at your extremes it not becomes me: o, pardon, that i name them! your high self, the gracious mark o' the land, you have obscured most goddess-like prank'd up: but that our feasts in every mess have folly and the feeders digest it with a custom, i should blush to see you so attired, swoon, i think,
then go we in to know his embassy, before the frenchman speak a word of it.
my lord.
i bless the time when my good falcon made her flight across thy father's ground.
i'll wait upon you, and i long to hear it.
the sun will not be seen today. the sky doth frown and lour upon our army. not shine today? why, what is that to me more than to richmond, for the selfsame heaven that frowns on me looks sadly upon him.
now jove afford you cause! hath not been used to fear. even now i tremble to think your father, by some accident, should pass this way as you did: o, the fates! how would he look, to see his work so noble should i, in these my borrow'd flaunts, behold the sternness of his presence?
where is my gracious lord of canterbury?
arm, arm, my lord. the foe vaunts in the field.
apprehend nothing but jollity. the gods themselves, the shapes of beasts upon them: jupiter became a bull, and bellow'd; the green neptune a ram, and bleated; and the fire-robed god, golden apollo, a poor humble swain, were never for a piece of beauty rarer, nor in a way so chaste, since my desires run not before mine honour, nor my lusts burn hotter than my faith.
not here in presence.
call up lord stanley; bid him bring his power., i will lead forth my soldiers to the plain, and thus my battle shall be orderèd: my foreward shall be drawn out all in length, our archers shall be placèd in the midst. john duke of norfolk, thomas earl of surrey, shall have the leading of this foot and horse. they thus directed, we will follow shall be well wingèd with our chiefest horse. this, and saint george to boot, what think'st thou, norfolk?
your resolution cannot hold, when 'tis opposed, as it must be, by the power of the king: one of these two must be necessities, which then will speak, that you must or i my life.
send for him, good uncle.
a good direction, warlike sovereign.
thou dearest perdita, with these forced thoughts, i prithee, darken not the mirth o' the feast. or i'll be thine, my fair, mine own, nor any thing to any, if i be not thine. to this i am most constant, though destiny say no. be merry, gentle; strangle such thoughts as these with any thing lift up your countenance, as it were the day of celebration of that nuptial which we two have sworn shall come.
shall we call in th' ambassador, my liege?
this found i on my tent this morning.
o lady fortune,
before we hear him, of some things of weight that task our thoughts concerning us and france.
(reads) jockey of norfolk, be not so bold. for dickon thy master is bought and sold. a thing devisèd by the enemy., let not our babbling dreams affright our souls. conscience is but a word that cowards use, devised at first to keep the strong in awe. our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law.
see, your guests approach: address yourself to entertain them sprightly, and let's be red with mirth.
god and his angels guard your sacred throne and make you long become it.
if not to heaven, then hand in hand to hell. his oration to his army what shall i say more than i have inferred? remember whom you are to cope withal, a scum of bretons and base lackey peasants, whom their o'er-cloyèd country vomits forth to desperate ventures and assured destruction. you sleeping safe, they bring to you unrest; they would restrain the one, distain the other. and who doth lead them but a paltry fellow, long kept in brittany at our mother's cost, a milksop, one that never in his life let's whip these stragglers o'er the seas again, lash hence these overweening rags of france, these famished beggars weary of their lives, who, but for dreaming on this fond exploit, if we be conquered, let men conquer us, and not these bastard bretons, whom our fathers have in their own land beaten, bobbed, and thumped, and in record, left them the heirs of shame. ravish our daughters?
fie, daughter! when my old wife lived, upon both dame and servant; welcomed all, served all; would sing her song and dance her turn; now here, at upper end o' the table, now i' the middle; on his shoulder, and his; her face o' fire she would to each one sip. you are retired, as if you were a feasted one and not the hostess of the meeting: pray you, bid these unknown friends to's welcome; for it is come, quench your blushes and present yourself that which you are, mistress o' the feast: come on, and bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing, as your good flock shall prosper.
my learnèd lord, we pray you to proceed and justly and religiously unfold why the law salic that they have in france or should or should not bar us in our claim. that you should fashion, wrest, or bow your reading, or nicely charge your understanding soul with opening titles miscreate, whose right suits not in native colors with the truth; shall drop their blood in approbation
hark! i hear their drum. fight, gentlemen of england., fight, bold yeomen., draw, archers, draw your arrows to the head., amaze the welkin with your broken staves, 
it is my father's will i should take on me the hostess-ship o' the day.
of what your reverence shall incite us to. therefore take heed how you impawn our person, how you awake our sleeping sword of war. for never two such kingdoms did contend without much fall of blood, whose guiltless drops are every one a woe, a sore complaint 'gainst him whose wrong gives edge unto the swords under this conjuration, speak, my lord, for we will hear, note, and believe in heart that what you speak is in your conscience washed as pure as sin with baptism.
what says lord stanley? will he bring his power?
you're welcome, sir. give me those flowers there, dorcas. reverend sirs, seeming and savour all the winter long: grace and remembrance be to you both, and welcome to our shearing!
that owe yourselves, your lives, and services to this imperial throne. there is no bar to make against your highness' claim to france but this, which they produce from pharamond: (no woman shall succeed in salic land), which salic land the french unjustly gloze to be the realm of france, and pharamond the founder of this law and female bar. that the land salic is in germany, between the floods of sala and of elbe, where charles the great, having subdued the saxons, there left behind and settled certain french, for some dishonest manners of their life, established then this law: to wit, no female should be inheritrix in salic land, which "salic," as i said, 'twixt elbe and sala
my lord, he doth deny to come.
shepherdess, with flowers of winter.
then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers that owe yourselves, your lives, and services to this imperial throne. there is no bar to make against your highness' claim to france "in terram salicam mulieres ne succedant" (no woman shall succeed in salic land), which salic land the french unjustly gloze to be the realm of france, and pharamond yet their own authors faithfully affirm that the land salic is in germany, between the floods of sala and of elbe, where charles the great, having subdued the saxons, who, holding in disdain the german women for some dishonest manners of their life, established then this law: to wit, no female should be inheritrix in salic land, is at this day in germany called meissen. then doth it well appear the salic law was not devisèd for the realm of france, nor did the french possess the salic land after defunction of king pharamond, idly supposed the founder of this law; who died within the year of our redemption four hundred twenty-six; and charles the great beyond the river sala in the year eight hundred five. besides, their writers say, king pepin, which deposèd childeric, did, as heir general, being descended make claim and title to the crown of france. hugh capet also, who usurped the crown of charles the duke of lorraine, sole heir male of the true line and stock of charles the great, though in pure truth it was corrupt and naught, conveyed himself as th' heir to th' lady lingare, daughter to charlemagne, who was the son to lewis the emperor, and lewis the son who was sole heir to the usurper capet, could not keep quiet in his conscience, wearing the crown of france, till satisfied that fair queen isabel, his grandmother, daughter to charles the foresaid duke of lorraine, by the which marriage the line of charles the great was reunited to the crown of france. so that, as clear as is the summer's sun, king lewis his satisfaction, all appear to hold in right and title of the female.
off with his son george's head!
sir, the year growing ancient, not yet on summer's death, nor on the birth of trembling winter, the fairest are our carnations and streak'd gillyvors, which some call nature's bastards: of that kind our rustic garden's barren; and i care not to get slips of them.
so do the kings of france unto this day, howbeit they would hold up this salic law and rather choose to hide them in a net than amply to imbar their crooked titles usurped from you and your progenitors.
after the battle let george stanley die.
do you neglect them?
may i with right and conscience make this claim?
a thousand hearts are great within my bosom. advance our standards. set upon our foes. our ancient word of courage, fair saint george, upon them! victory sits on our helms.
for i have heard it said there is an art which in their piedness shares with great creating nature.
for in the book of numbers is it writ: "when the man dies, let the inheritance descend unto the daughter." gracious lord, stand for your own, unwind your bloody flag, go, my dread lord, to your great-grandsire's tomb, from whom you claim. invoke his warlike spirit and your great-uncle's, edward the black prince, who on the french ground played a tragedy, whiles his most mighty father on a hill stood smiling to behold his lion's whelp forage in blood of french nobility. o noble english, that could entertain and let another half stand laughing by, all out of work and cold for action!
rescue, my lord of norfolk, rescue, rescue! the king enacts more wonders than a man, daring an opposite to every danger. his horse is slain, and all on foot he fights, rescue, fair lord, or else the day is lost!
yet nature is made better by no mean but nature makes that mean: so, over that art which you say adds to nature, is an art that nature makes. you see, sweet maid, we marry and make conceive a bark of baser kind by bud of nobler race: this is an art which does mend nature, change it rather, but the art itself is nature.
awake remembrance of these valiant dead and with your puissant arm renew their feats. the blood and courage that renownèd them runs in your veins; and my thrice-puissant liege is in the very may-morn of his youth, ripe for exploits and mighty enterprises.
a horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!
so it is.
do all expect that you should rouse yourself as did the former lions of your blood.
withdraw, my lord. i'll help you to a horse.
then make your garden rich in gillyvors, and do not call them bastards.
they know your grace hath cause and means and might; so hath your highness. never king of england whose hearts have left their bodies here in england and lie pavilioned in the fields of france.
slave, i have set my life upon a cast, i think there be six richmonds in the field; five have i slain today instead of him. a horse, a horse, my kingdom for a horse!
i'll not put the dibble in earth to set one slip of them; this youth should say 'twere well and only therefore desire to breed by me. here's flowers for you; hot lavender, mints, savoury, marjoram; the marigold, that goes to bed wi' the sun of middle summer, and i think they are given to men of middle age. you're very welcome.
oh, let their bodies follow, my dear liege, with blood and sword and fire to win your right, will raise your highness such a mighty sum as never did the clergy at one time bring in to any of your ancestors.
god and your arms be praised, victorious friends! the day is ours; the bloody dog is dead.
i should leave grazing, were i of your flock, and only live by gazing.
we must not only arm t' invade the french, against the scot, who will make road upon us with all advantages.
(offering him the crown) courageous richmond, well hast thou acquit thee. from the dead temples of this bloody wretch have i plucked off, to grace thy brows withal. wear it, enjoy it, and make much of it.
you'd be so lean, that blasts of january would blow you through and through. now, my fair'st friend, i would i had some flowers o' the spring that might that wear upon your virgin branches yet your maidenheads growing: o proserpina, for the flowers now, that frighted thou let'st fall from dis's waggon! daffodils, the winds of march with beauty; violets dim, but sweeter than the lids of juno's eyes or cytherea's breath; pale primroses that die unmarried, ere they can behold most incident to maids; bold oxlips and the crown imperial; lilies of all kinds, the flower-de-luce being one! o, these i lack, to make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,
they of those marches, gracious sovereign, shall be a wall sufficient to defend
great god of heaven, say amen to all!
what, like a corse?
we do not mean the coursing snatchers only, but fear the main intendment of the scot, who hath been still a giddy neighbor to us. for you shall read that my great-grandfather but that the scot on his unfurnished kingdom came pouring like the tide into a breach with ample and brim fullness of his force, galling the gleanèd land with hot assays, that england, being empty of defense, hath shook and trembled at th' ill neighborhood.
he is, my lord, and safe in leicester town, whither, if it please you, we may now withdraw us.
no, like a bank for love to lie and play on; not like a corse; or if, not to be buried, but quick and in mine arms. come, take your flowers: in whitsun pastorals: sure this robe of mine does change my disposition.
she hath been then more feared than harmed, my liege, for hear her but exampled by herself: and she a mourning widow of her nobles, she hath herself not only well defended but taken and impounded as a stray the king of scots, whom she did send to france and make her chronicle as rich with praise as is the ooze and bottom of the sea with sunken wrack and sumless treasuries.
what men of name are slain on either side?
what you do still betters what is done. when you speak, sweet. i'ld have you buy and sell so, so give alms, pray so; and, for the ordering your affairs, to sing them too: when you do dance, i wish you a wave o' the sea, that you might ever do and own no other function: each your doing, so singular in each particular, crowns what you are doing in the present deed, that all your acts are queens.
but there's a saying very old and true: then with scotland first begin." for once the eagle england being in prey, to her unguarded nest the weasel scot comes sneaking and so sucks her princely eggs, to 'tame and havoc more than she can eat.
john duke of norfolk, walter, lord ferrers,
your praises are too large: but that your youth, and the true blood which peepeth fairly through't, do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd, with wisdom i might fear, my doricles,
it follows, then, the cat must stay at home. yet that is but a crushed necessity, since we have locks to safeguard necessaries while that the armèd hand doth fight abroad, th' advisèd head defends itself at home. for government, though high and low and lower, put into parts, doth keep in one consent, like music.
inter their bodies as becomes their births. proclaim a pardon to the soldiers fled that in submission will return to us. and then, as we have ta'en the sacrament,
i think you have as little skill to fear as i have purpose to put you to't. but come; our dance, i pray: your hand, my perdita: so turtles pair,
therefore doth heaven divide the state of man in diverse functions, setting endeavor in continual motion, to which is fixèd as an aim or butt creatures that by a rule in nature teach the act of order to a peopled kingdom. they have a king and officers of sorts, where some like magistrates correct at home, others like soldiers armèd in their stings make boot upon the summer's velvet buds, which pillage they with merry march bring home to the tent royal of their emperor, the singing masons building roofs of gold, the civil citizens kneading up the honey, the poor mechanic porters crowding in their heavy burdens at his narrow gate, delivering o'er to executors pale the lazy yawning drone. i this infer: that many things, having full reference to one consent, may work contrariously, come to one mark, as many ways meet in one town, as many fresh streams meet in one salt sea, as many lines close in the dial's center, so may a thousand actions, once afoot, without defeat. therefore to france, my liege! divide your happy england into four, whereof take you one quarter into france, and you withal shall make all gallia shake.
smile heaven upon this fair conjunction, that long have frowned upon their enmity. what traitor hears me and says not "amen?" england hath long been mad and scarred herself. the father rashly slaughtered his own son. the son, compelled, been butcher to the sire. all this divided york and lancaster, divided, in their dire division. the true succeeders of each royal house, by god's fair ordinance conjoin together, and let their heirs, god, if thy will be so. enrich the time to come with smooth-faced peace, abate the edge of traitors, gracious lord, that would reduce these bloody days again, and make poor england weep in streams of blood! let them not live to taste this land's increase, now civil wounds are stopped, peace lives again. that she may long live here, god say amen.
i'll swear for 'em.
cannot defend our own doors from the dog, let us be worried, and our nation lose the name of hardiness and policy.
this is the prettiest low-born lass that ever ran on the green-sward: nothing she does or seems but smacks of something greater than herself,
call in the messengers sent from the dauphin.
as i remember, adam, it was upon this fashion bequeathed me by will but poor a thousand crowns, and, as thou sayest, charged my brother on his blessing to breed me well. and there begins my sadness. my brother jaques he keeps at school, and report speaks goldenly of his profit. for my part, he keeps me rustically at home or, to speak more properly, stays me here at home unkept; for call you that "keeping" for a gentleman of my birth that differs not from the stalling of an ox? his horses are bred better, for, besides that they are fair with their feeding, they are taught their manage and, to that end, riders dearly hired. but i, his brother, gain nothing under him but growth, for the which his animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him as i. besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives me, the something that nature gave me his countenance seems to take from me. he lets me feed with his hinds, bars me the place of a brother, and, as much as in him lies, mines my gentility with my education. this is it, adam, that grieves me, and the spirit of my father, which i think is within me, begins to mutiny against this servitude. i will no longer endure it, though yet i know no wise remedy how to avoid it.
he tells her something that makes her blood look out: good sooth, she is the queen of curds and cream.
and yours, the noble sinews of our power, france being ours, we'll bend it to our awe or break it all to pieces. or there we'll sit, ruling in large and ample empery or lay these bones in an unworthy urn, tombless, with no remembrance over them. either our history shall with full mouth speak freely of our acts, or else our grave, not worshipped with a waxen epitaph.
yonder comes my master, your brother.
come on, strike up!
now are we well prepared to know the pleasure of our fair cousin dauphin, for we hear your greeting is from him, not from the king.
go apart, adam, and thou shalt hear how he will shake me up.
to mend her kissing with!
freely to render what we have in charge, or shall we sparingly show you far off the dauphin's meaning and our embassy?
now, sir, what make you here?
now, in good time!
we are no tyrant, but a christian king, as is our wretches fettered in our prisons. therefore with frank and with uncurbèd plainness tell us the dauphin's mind.
nothing. i am not taught to make anything.
not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners. come, strike up!
thus, then, in few: did claim some certain dukedoms in the right of your great predecessor, king edward the third; in answer of which claim, the prince our master says that you savor too much of your youth that can be with a nimble galliard won. you cannot revel into dukedoms there. he therefore sends you, meeter for your spirit, this tun of treasure, and, in lieu of this, hear no more of you. this the dauphin speaks.
what mar you then, sir?
which dances with your daughter?
what treasure, uncle?
marry, sir, i am helping you to mar that which god made, a poor unworthy brother of yours, with idleness.
they call him doricles; and boasts himself to have a worthy feeding: but i have it upon his own report and i believe it; i think so too; for never gazed the moon upon the water as he'll stand and read as 'twere my daughter's eyes: and, to be plain, i think there is not half a kiss to choose
tennis balls, my liege.
marry, sir, be better employed, and be naught awhile.
she dances featly.
his present and your pains we thank you for. when we have matched our rackets to these balls, we will in france, by god's grace, play a set shall strike his father's crown into the hazard. that all the courts of france will be disturbed with chases. and we understand him well, how he comes o'er us with our wilder days, not measuring what use we made of them.
shall i keep your hogs and eat husks with them? what prodigal portion have i spent that i should come to such penury?
so she does any thing; though i report it, that should be silent: if young doricles do light upon her, she shall bring him that
and therefore, living hence, did give ourself to barbarous license, as 'tis ever common that men are merriest when they are from home. but tell the dauphin i will keep my state, when i do rouse me in my throne of france, for that i have laid by my majesty and plodded like a man for working days. but i will rise there with so full a glory yea, strike the dauphin blind to look on us. and tell the pleasant prince this mock of his hath turned his balls to gun-stones, and his soul shall stand sore chargèd for the wasteful vengeance shall this his mock mock out of their dear husbands, mock mothers from their sons, mock castles down, and some are yet ungotten and unborn that shall have cause to curse the dauphin's scorn. to whom i do appeal, and in whose name tell you the dauphin i am coming on, to venge me as i may and to put forth my rightful hand in a well-hallowed cause. his jest will savor but of shallow wit when thousands weep more than did laugh at it. , convey them with safe conduct., fare you well.
know you where you are, sir?
o master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the door, you would never dance again after a tabour and pipe; no, the bagpipe could not move you: he sings several tunes faster than you'll tell money; he ears grew to his tunes.
this was a merry message.
o sir, very well: here in your orchard.
he could never come better; he shall come in. i love a ballad but even too well, if it be doleful matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant thing
we hope to make the sender blush at it. that may give furth'rance to our expedition; for we have now no thought in us but france, save those to god, that run before our business. therefore let our proportions for these wars that may with reasonable swiftness add more feathers to our wings. for, god before, we'll chide this dauphin at his father's door. therefore let every man now task his thought,
know you before whom, sir?
he hath songs for man or woman, of all sizes; no milliner can so fit his customers with gloves: he has the prettiest love-songs for maids; so without bawdry, which is strange; with such delicate her;' and where some stretch-mouthed rascal would, as it were, mean mischief and break a foul gap into the matter, he makes the maid to answer 'whoop, do me no harm, good man;' puts him off, slights him, with
now all the youth of england are on fire, and silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies. now thrive the armorers, and honor's thought reigns solely in the breast of every man. following the mirror of all christian kings with wingèd heels, as english mercurys. for now sits expectation in the air and hides a sword, from hilts unto the point, promised to harry and his followers. the french, advised by good intelligence of this most dreadful preparation, shake in their fear, and with pale policy o england, model to thy inward greatness, like little body with a mighty heart, what might'st thou do, that honor would thee do, were all thy children kind and natural! a nest of hollow bosoms, which he fills with treacherous crowns, and three corrupted men, one, richard, earl of cambridge, and the second, henry, lord scroop of masham, and the third, have, for the gilt of france (oh, guilt indeed!), confirmed conspiracy with fearful france, and by their hands this grace of kings must die, if hell and treason hold their promises,
ay, better than him i am before knows me. i know you are my eldest brother, and in the gentle condition of blood you should so know me. the courtesy of nations allows you my better, in that you are the first-born, but the same tradition takes not away my blood, were there twenty brothers betwixt us. i have as much of my father in me as you, albeit, i confess, your coming before me is nearer to his reverence.
this is a brave fellow.
linger your patience on, and we'll digest th' abuse of distance, force a play. the sum is paid, the traitors are agreed, the king is set from london, and the scene there is the playhouse now, there must you sit, and thence to france shall we convey you safe and bring you back, charming the narrow seas to give you gentle pass; for, if we may, but, till the king come forth, and not till then, unto southampton do we shift our scene.
what, boy! (strikes him)
believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited fellow. has he any unbraided wares?
well met, corporal nym.
come, come, elder brother, you are too young in this. (seizes him)
he hath ribbons of an the colours i' the rainbow; learnedly handle, though they come to him by the gro inkles, caddisses, cambrics, lawns: why, he sings 'em over as they were gods or goddesses; you would think a smock were a she-angel, he so chants
good morrow, lieutenant bardolph.
wilt thou lay hands on me, villain?
prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.
what, are ancient pistol and you friends yet?
i am no villain. i am the youngest son of sir rowland de boys. he was my father, and he is thrice a villain that says such a father begot villains. wert thou not my brother, i would not take this hand from thy throat till this other had pulled out thy tongue for saying so. thou hast railed on thyself.
forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in 's tunes.
for my part, i care not. i say little, but when time shall serve, there shall be smiles; but that shall be as it may. i dare not fight, but i will wink and hold out mine iron. it is a simple one, but what though? it will toast cheese, and it will endure cold as another man's sword will, and there's an end.
sweet masters, be patient. for your father's remembrance, be at accord.
you have of these pedlars, that have more in them than you'ld think, sister.
i will bestow a breakfast to make you friends; and we'll be all three sworn brothers to france. let 't be so, good corporal nym.
let me go, i say.
ay, good brother, or go about to think.
faith, i will live so long as i may, that's the certain of it. and when i cannot live any longer, i will do as i may. that is my rest; that is the rendezvous of it.
i will not till i please. you shall hear me. my father charged you in his will to give me good education. you have trained me like a peasant, obscuring and hiding from me all gentlemanlike qualities. the spirit of my father grows strong in me, and i will no longer endure it. therefore allow me such exercises as may become a gentleman, or give me the poor allottery my father left me by testament. with that i will go buy my fortunes.
lawn as white as driven snow; cyprus black as e'er was crow; gloves as sweet as damask roses; masks for faces and for noses; perfume for a lady's chamber; golden quoifs and stomachers, for my lads to give their dears: pins and poking-sticks of steel, come buy of me, come; come buy, come buy; buy lads, or else your lasses cry: come buy.
it is certain, corporal, that he is married to nell quickly, and certainly she did you wrong, for you were troth-plight to her.
and what wilt thou do, beg when that is spent? well, sir, get you in. i will not long be troubled with you. you shall have some part of your will. i pray you leave me.
if i were not in love with mopsa, thou shouldst take no money of me; but being enthralled as i am, it
i cannot tell. things must be as they may. men may sleep, and they may have their throats about them at that time, and some say knives have edges. it must be as it may. though patience be a tired mare, yet she will plod. there must be conclusions. well, i cannot tell.
i will no further offend you than becomes me for my good.
i was promised them against the feast; but they come not too late now.
here comes ancient pistol and his wife. good corporal, be patient here., how now, mine host pistol?
get you with him, you old dog.
he hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.
now, by this hand, i swear, i scorn the term, nor shall my nell keep lodgers.
is "old dog" my reward? most true, i have lost my teeth in your service. god be with my old master. he would not have spoke such a word.
he hath paid you all he promised you; may be, he has
no, by my troth, not long, for we cannot lodge and board a dozen or fourteen gentlewomen that live honestly by the prick of their needles but it will be thought we keep a bawdy house straight.
is it even so? begin you to grow upon me? i will physic your rankness and yet give no thousand crowns neither., holla, dennis!
is there no manners left among maids? will they wear their plackets where they should bear their faces? is there not milking-time, when you are going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle off these our guests? 'tis well they are whispering: clamour your tongues, and not a word more.
oh, well-a-day, lady! if he be not hewn now, we shall see willful adultery and murder committed.
calls your worship?
i have done. come, you promised me a tawdry-lace and a pair of sweet gloves.
good lieutenant, good corporal, offer nothing here.
was not charles, the duke's wrestler, here to speak with me?
and lost all my money?
pish!
so please you, he is here at the door and importunes access to you.
and indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad; therefore it behoves men to be wary.
pish for thee, iceland dog, thou prick-eared cur of iceland!
call him in.
fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose nothing here.
good corporal nym, show thy valor and put up your sword.
'twill be a good way, and tomorrow the wrestling is.
i hope so, sir; for i have about me many parcels of charge.
will you shog off? (to pistol) i would have you solus.
good morrow to your worship.
what hast here? ballads?
"solus," egregious dog? o viper vile, the solus in thy most marvelous face, the solus in thy teeth and in thy throat and in thy hateful lungs, yea, in thy maw, perdy, i do retort the solus in thy bowels, for i can take, and pistol's cock is up, and flashing fire will follow.
good monsieur charles, what's the new news at the new court?
pray now, buy some: i love a ballad in print o' life, for then we are sure they are true.
i am not barbason; you cannot conjure me. i have an humor to knock you indifferently well. if you grow foul with me, pistol, i will scour you with my rapier, as i may, in fair terms. if you would walk off, i would prick your guts a little in good terms, as i may, and that's the humor of it.
there's no news at the court, sir, but the old news. that is, the old duke is banished by his younger brother the new duke, and three or four loving lords have put themselves into voluntary exile with him, whose lands and revenues enrich the new duke. therefore he gives them good leave to wander.
here's one to a very doleful tune, how a usurer's burthen and how she longed to eat adders' heads and toads carbonadoed.
o braggart vile and damnèd furious wight, therefore exhale.
can you tell if rosalind, the duke's daughter, be banished with her father?
is it true, think you?
hear me, hear me what i say: he that strikes the first stroke, i'll run him up to the hilts, as i am a soldier. (draws)
oh, no, for the duke's daughter her cousin so loves her, being ever from their cradles bred together, that she would have followed her exile or have died to stay behind her. she is at the court, and no less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter, and never two ladies loved as they do.
very true, and but a month old.
an oath of mickle might, and fury shall abate. thy spirits are most tall.
where will the old duke live?
bless me from marrying a usurer!
i will cut thy throat one time or other in fair terms, that is the humor of it.
they say he is already in the forest of arden, and a many merry men with him; and there they live like the old robin hood of england. they say many young gentlemen flock to him every day and fleet the time carelessly, as they did in the golden world.
here's the midwife's name to't, one mistress tale-porter, and five or six honest wives that were present. why should i carry lies abroad?
couple à gorge, that is the word. i defy thee again. no, to the spital go, and from the powd'ring tub of infamy fetch forth the lazar kite of cressid's kind, doll tearsheet she by name, and her espouse.
what, you wrestle tomorrow before the new duke?
pray you now, buy it.
for the only she, and, pauca, there's enough. go to.
marry, do i, sir, and i came to acquaint you with a matter. i am given, sir, secretly to understand that your younger brother orlando hath a disposition to come in disguised against me to try a fall. tomorrow, sir, i wrestle for my credit, and he that escapes me without some broken limb shall acquit him well. your brother is but young and tender, and, for your love i would be loath to foil him, as i must for my own honor if he come in. therefore, out of my love to you, i came hither to acquaint you withal, that either you might stay him from his intendment or brook such disgrace well as he shall run into, in that it is a thing of his own search and altogether against my will.
ballads; we'll buy the other things anon.
mine host pistol, you must come to my master and your hostess. he is very sick and would to bed., good bardolph, put thy face between his sheets, and do the office of a warming-pan. faith, he's very ill.
charles, i thank thee for thy love to me, which thou shalt find i will most kindly requite. i had myself notice of my brother's purpose herein and have by underhand means labored to dissuade him from it; but he is resolute. i'll tell thee, charles: it is the stubbornest young fellow of france, full of ambition, an envious emulator of every man's good parts, a secret and villainous contriver against me his natural brother. therefore use thy discretion. i had as lief thou didst break his neck as his finger. and thou wert best look to 't, for if thou dost him any slight disgrace or if he do not mightily grace himself on thee, he will practice against thee by poison, entrap thee by some treacherous device and never leave thee till he hath ta'en thy life by some indirect means or other. for i assure thee, and almost with tears i speak it, there is not one so young and so villainous this day living. i speak but brotherly of him, but should i anatomize him to thee as he is, i must blush and weep, and thou must look pale and wonder.
here's another ballad of a fish, that appeared upon the coast on wednesday the four-score of april, forty thousand fathom above water, and sung this thought she was a woman and was turned into a cold fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that loved her: the ballad is very pitiful and as true.
away, you rogue!
i am heartily glad i came hither to you. if he come tomorrow, i'll give him his payment. if ever he go alone again, i'll never wrestle for prize more. and so god keep your worship.
is it true too, think you?
by my troth, he'll yield the crow a pudding one of these days. the king has killed his heart. good husband, come home presently.
farewell, good charles.
my pack will hold.
come, shall i make you two friends? we must to france together. why the devil should we keep knives to cut one another's throats?
now will i stir this gamester. i hope i shall see an end of him, for my soul, yet i know not why, hates nothing more than he. yet he's gentle, never schooled and yet learned, full of noble device, of all sorts enchantingly beloved, and indeed so much in the heart of the world and especially of my own people, who best know him, that i am altogether misprized. but it shall not be so long; this wrestler shall clear all. nothing remains but that i kindle the boy thither, which now i'll go about.
lay it by too: another.
let floods o'erswell and fiends for food howl on!
i pray thee, rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.
this is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.
you'll pay me the eight shillings i won of you at betting?
dear celia, i show more mirth than i am mistress of, and would you yet i were merrier? unless you could teach me to forget a banished father, you must not learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure.
let's have some merry ones.
base is the slave that pays.
herein i see thou lov'st me not with the full weight that i love thee. if my uncle, thy banished father, had banished thy uncle, the duke my father, so thou hadst been still with me, i could have taught my love to take thy father for mine. so wouldst thou, if the truth of thy love to me were so righteously tempered as mine is to thee.
the tune of 'two maids wooing a man:' there's scarce a maid westward but she sings it; 'tis in request, i can tell you.
that now i will have, that's the humor of it.
well, i will forget the condition of my estate to rejoice in yours.
we can both sing it: if thou'lt bear a part, thou
as manhood shall compound. push home.
you know my father hath no child but i, nor none is like to have, and, truly, when he dies, thou shalt be his heir, for what he hath taken away from thy father perforce, i will render thee again in affection. by mine honor i will, and when i break that oath, let me turn monster. therefore, my sweet rose, my dear rose, be merry.
we had the tune on't a month ago.
by this sword, he that makes the first thrust, i'll kill him. by this sword, i will.
from henceforth i will, coz, and devise sports. let me see, what think you of falling in love?
i can bear my part; you must know 'tis my occupation; have at it with you.
"sword" is an oath, and oaths must have their course.
marry, i prithee do, to make sport withal, but love no man in good earnest, nor no further in sport neither than with safety of a pure blush thou mayst in honor come off again.
get you hence, for i must go
corporal nym, an thou wilt be friends, be friends; an thou wilt not, why then be enemies with me too. prithee, put up.
what shall be our sport, then?
whither?
a noble shalt thou have, and present pay, and liquor likewise will i give to thee, i'll live by nym, and nym shall live by me. is not this just? for i shall subtler be unto the camp, and profits will accrue. give me thy hand.
let us sit and mock the good housewife fortune from her wheel, that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally.
o, whither?
i shall have my noble?
i would we could do so, for her benefits are mightily misplaced, and the bountiful blind woman doth most mistake in her gifts to women.
whither?
in cash, most justly paid.
'tis true, for those that she makes fair she scarce makes honest, and those that she makes honest she makes very ill- favoredly.
it becomes thy oath full well,
well, then, that's the humor of 't.
nay, now thou goest from fortune's office to nature's. nature.
me too, let me go thither.
as ever you come of women, come in quickly to sir john. ah, poor heart, he is so shaked of a burning quotidian tertian that it is most lamentable to behold. sweet men, come to him.
no? when nature hath made a fair creature, may she not by fortune fall into the fire? though nature hath given us wit to flout at fortune, hath not fortune sent in this fool to cut off the argument?
or thou goest to the orange or mill.
the king hath run bad humors on the knight, that's the even of it.
indeed, there is fortune too hard for nature, when fortune makes nature's natural the cutter-off of nature's wit.
if to either, thou dost ill.
nym, thou hast spoke the right.
peradventure this is not fortune's work neither, but nature's, who perceiveth our natural wits too dull to reason of such goddesses, and hath sent this natural for our whetstone, for always the dullness of the fool is the whetstone of the wits. how now, wit, whither wander you?
neither.
the king is a good king, but it must be as it may. he passes some humors and careers.
mistress, you must come away to your father.
what, neither?
let us condole the knight, for, lambkins, we will live.
were you made the messenger?
neither.
'fore god, his grace is bold to trust these traitors.
no, by mine honor, but i was bid to come for you.
thou hast sworn my love to be.
they shall be apprehended by and by.
where learned you that oath, fool?
thou hast sworn it more to me: then whither goest? say, whither?
how smooth and even they do bear themselves, as if allegiance in their bosoms sat
of a certain knight that swore by his honor they were good pancakes, and swore by his honor the mustard was naught. now, i'll stand to it, the pancakes were naught and the mustard was good, and yet was not the knight forsworn.
father and the gentlemen are in sad talk, and we'll not trouble them. come, bring away thy pack after me. wenches, i'll buy for you both. pedlar, let's have the first choice. follow me, girls.
the king hath note of all that they intend, by interception which they dream not of.
how prove you that in the great heap of your knowledge?
and you shall pay well for 'em.
nay, but the man that was his bedfellow, whom he hath dulled and cloyed with gracious favors, his sovereign's life to death and treachery!
ay, marry, now unmuzzle your wisdom.
will you buy any tape, or lace for your cape, my dainty duck, my dear-a? any silk, any thread, of the new'st and finest, finest wear-a? come to the pedlar; money's a medler. that doth utter all men's ware-a.
now sits the wind fair, and we will aboard. , my lord of cambridge, and my kind lord of masham, and you, my gentle knight, give me your thoughts. will cut their passage through the force of france, doing the execution and the act for which we have in head assembled them?
stand you both forth now: stroke your chins and swear by your beards that i am a knave.
three neat-herds, three swine-herds, that have made themselves all men of hair, they call themselves saltiers, and they have a dance which the wenches say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are be not too rough for some that know little but bowling, it will please plentifully.
no doubt, my liege, if each man do his best.
by our beards (if we had them), thou art.
away! we'll none on 't: here has been too much homely foolery already. i know, sir, we weary you.
we carry not a heart with us from hence that grows not in a fair consent with ours, nor leave not one behind that doth not wish success and conquest to attend on us.
by my knavery (if i had it), then i were. but if you swear by that that is not, you are not forsworn. no more was this knight swearing by his honor, for he never had any; or if he had, he had sworn it away before ever he saw those pancakes or that mustard.
these four threes of herdsmen.
than is your majesty. there's not, i think, a subject that sits in heart-grief and uneasiness under the sweet shade of your government.
prithee, who is 't that thou mean'st?
one three of them, by their own report, sir, hath danced before the king; and not the worst of the three but jumps twelve foot and a half by the squier.
true. those that were your father's enemies with hearts create of duty and of zeal.
one that old frederick, your father, loves.
pleased, let them come in; but quickly now.
we therefore have great cause of thankfulness and shall forget the office of our hand sooner than quittance of desert and merit
my father's love is enough to honor him. enough. speak no more of him; you'll be whipped for taxation one of these days.
why, they stay at door, sir.
so service shall with steelèd sinews toil, and labor shall refresh itself with hope to do your grace incessant services.
the more pity that fools may not speak wisely what wise men do foolishly.
o, father, you'll know more of that hereafter.
we judge no less., uncle of exeter, that railed against our person. we consider it was excess of wine that set him on, and on his more advice we pardon him.
by my troth, thou sayest true. for, since the little wit that fools have was silenced, the little foolery that wise men have makes a great show. here comes monsieur le beau.
is it not too far gone? 'tis time to part them.
that's mercy, but too much security. breed, by his sufferance, more of such a kind.
with his mouth full of news.
how now, fair shepherd! your heart is full of something that does take your mind from feasting. sooth, when i was young and handed love as you do, i was wont the pedlar's silken treasury and have pour'd it to her acceptance; you have let him go and nothing marted with him. if your lass interpretation should abuse and call this for a reply, at least if you make a care of happy holding her.
oh, let us yet be merciful.
which he will put on us as pigeons feed their young.
old sir, i know she prizes not such trifles as these are: up in my heart; which i have given already, but not deliver'd. o, hear me breathe my life before this ancient sir, who, it should seem, hath sometime loved! i take thy hand, this hand, or ethiopian's tooth, or the fann'd snow that's bolted by the northern blasts twice o'er.
so may your highness, and yet punish, too.
then shall we be news-crammed.
what follows this? the hand was fair before! i have put you out: but to your protestation; let me hear what you profess.
sir, you show great mercy if you give him life
all the better. we shall be the more marketable., bonjour,
do, and be witness to 't.
alas, your too much love and care of me are heavy orisons 'gainst this poor wretch. if little faults proceeding on distemper shall not be winked at, how shall we stretch our eye appear before us? we'll yet enlarge that man, though cambridge, scroop, and grey, in their dear care and tender preservation of our person, would have him punished. and now to our french causes.
fair princess, you have lost much good sport.
and this my neighbour too?
i one, my lord. your highness bade me ask for it today.
sport? of what color?
and he, and more than he, and men, the earth, the heavens, and all: that, were i crown'd the most imperial monarch, thereof most worthy, were i the fairest youth more than was ever man's, i would not prize them without her love; for her employ them all; commend them and condemn them to her service or to their own perdition.
so did you me, my liege.
what color, madam? how shall i answer you?
fairly offer'd.
and i, my royal sovereign.
as wit and fortune will.
this shows a sound affection.
, there yours, lord scroop of masham. , and, sir knight, grey of northumberland, this same is yours. (gives each of them a paper) , read them, and know i know your worthiness. we will aboard tonight., why, how now, gentlemen? what see you in those papers, that you lose so much complexion?, look you, how they change. their cheeks are paper., why, what read you there out of appearance?
or as the destinies decrees.
but, my daughter, say you the like to him?
i do confess my fault, and do submit me to your highness' mercy.
well said. that was laid on with a trowel.
i cannot speak by the pattern of mine own thoughts i cut out the purity of his.
to which we all appeal.
nay, if i keep not my rank, 
take hands, a bargain! and, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to 't: her portion equal his.
by your own counsel is suppressed and killed. you must not dare, for shame, to talk of mercy, for your own reasons turn into your bosoms, as dogs upon their masters, worrying you. these english monsters. my lord of cambridge here, you know how apt our love was to accord to furnish him with all appurtenants belonging to his honor, and this man and sworn unto the practices of france, to kill us here in hampton; to the which this knight, no less for bounty bound to us than cambridge is, hath likewise sworn., but oh, ingrateful, savage, and inhuman creature? thou that didst bear the key of all my counsels, that knew'st the very bottom of my soul, that almost mightst have coined me into gold, may it be possible that foreign hire could out of thee extract one spark of evil that might annoy my finger? 'tis so strange that, though the truth of it stands off as gross treason and murder ever kept together as two yoke-devils sworn to either's purpose, working so grossly in a natural cause that admiration did not whoop at them.
thou losest thy old smell.
o, that must be i' the virtue of your daughter: one being dead, i shall have more than you can dream of yet; contract us 'fore these witnesses.
wonder to wait on treason and on murder, and whatsoever cunning fiend it was that wrought upon thee so preposterously hath got the voice in hell for excellence. do botch and bungle up damnation with patches, colors, and with forms being fetched from glist'ring semblances of piety. but he that tempered thee bade thee stand up, unless to dub thee with the name of traitor. if that same demon that hath gulled thee thus should with his lion gait walk the whole world, he might return to vasty tartar back a soul so easy as that englishman's." oh, how hast thou with jealousy infected the sweetness of affiance! show men dutiful? why, so didst thou. seem they grave and learnèd? why, so didst thou. seem they religious? why, so didst thou. or are they spare in diet, free from gross passion or of mirth or anger, constant in spirit, not swerving with the blood, not working with the eye without the ear, and but in purgèd judgment trusting neither? such and so finely bolted didst thou seem. and thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot with some suspicion. i will weep for thee, for this revolt of thine methinks is like another fall of man., their faults are open. arrest them to the answer of the law,
you amaze me, ladies. i would have told you of good wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.
come, your hand; and, daughter, yours.
i arrest thee of high treason, by the name of richard, earl of cambridge. , i arrest thee of high treason, by the name of henry, lord scroop of masham. thomas grey, knight, of northumberland.
you tell us the manner of the wrestling.
soft, swain, awhile, beseech you;
our purposes god justly hath discovered, and i repent my fault more than my death, which i beseech your highness to forgive,
i will tell you the beginning, and if it please your ladyships, you may see the end, for the best is yet to do, and here, where you are, they are coming to perform it.
i have: but what of him?
for me, the gold of france did not seduce, although i did admit it as a motive the sooner to effect what i intended; but god be thankèd for prevention, beseeching god and you to pardon me.
well, the beginning that is dead and buried.
knows he of this?
never did faithful subject more rejoice at the discovery of most dangerous treason than i do at this hour joy o'er myself, my fault, but not my body, pardon, sovereign.
there comes an old man and his three sons, 
he neither does nor shall.
god quit you in his mercy. hear your sentence: you have conspired against our royal person, joined with an enemy proclaimed, and from his coffers wherein you would have sold your king to slaughter, his princes and his peers to servitude, his subjects to oppression and contempt, and his whole kingdom into desolation. but we our kingdom's safety must so tender, whose ruin you have sought, that to her laws we do deliver you. get you therefore hence, poor miserable wretches, to your death, you patience to endure, and true repentance of all your dear offences., bear them hence.
i could match this beginning with an old tale.
methinks a father that best becomes the table. pray you once more, is not your father grown incapable of reasonable affairs? is he not stupid with age and altering rheums? can he speak? hear? lies he not bed-rid? and again does nothing but what he did being childish?
now, lords, for france, the enterprise whereof shall be to you as us, like glorious. since god so graciously hath brought to light this dangerous treason lurking in our way to hinder our beginnings. we doubt not now but every rub is smoothèd on our way. our puissance into the hand of god, putting it straight in expedition. cheerly to sea. the signs of war advance. no king of england if not king of france.
three proper young men of excellent growth and presence.
no, good sir; he has his health and ampler strength indeed
prithee, honey-sweet husband, let me bring thee to staines.
with bills on their necks: "be it known unto all men by these presents."
by my white beard, you offer him, if this be so, a wrong something unfilial: reason my son should choose himself a wife, but as good reason but fair posterity, should hold some counsel in such a business.
no; for my manly heart doth earn., bardolph, be blithe., nym, rouse thy vaunting veins., boy, bristle thy courage up. for falstaff, he is dead, and we must earn therefore.
the eldest of the three wrestled with charles, the duke's wrestler, which charles in a moment threw him and broke three of his ribs, that there is little hope of life in him. so he served the second, and so the third. yonder they lie, the poor old man their father making such pitiful dole over them that all the beholders take his part with weeping.
i yield all this; but for some other reasons, my grave sir, my father of this business.
would i were with him, wheresome'er he is, either in heaven or in hell.
alas!
let him know't.
nay, sure, he's not in hell! he's in arthur's bosom, if ever man went to arthur's bosom. he made a finer end, and went away an it had been any christom child. he parted ev'n just between twelve and one, ev'n at the turning o' th' tide; for after i saw him fumble with the sheets and play with flowers and smile upon his finger's end, i knew there was but one way, for his nose was as sharp as a pen, and he told of green fields. "how now, sir john?" quoth i. "what, man, be o' good cheer!" so he cried out "god, god, god!" three or four times. now i, to comfort him, bid him he should not think of god. i hoped there was no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet. so he bade me lay more clothes on his feet. i put my hand into the bed and felt them, and they were as cold as any stone. then i felt to his knees, and so upward and upward, and all was as cold as any stone.
but what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies have lost?
he shall not.
they say he cried out of sack.
why, this that i speak of.
prithee, let him.
ay, that he did.
thus men may grow wiser every day. it is the first time that ever i heard breaking of ribs was sport for ladies.
no, he must not.
and of women.
or i, i promise thee.
let him, my son: he shall not need to grieve at knowing of thy choice.
nay, that he did not.
but is there any else longs to see this broken music in his sides? is there yet another dotes upon rib-breaking? shall we see this wrestling, cousin?
come, come, he must not. mark our contract.
yes, that he did, and said they were devils incarnate.
you must if you stay here, for here is the place appointed for the wrestling, and they are ready to perform it.
mark your divorce, young sir,
'a could never abide carnation. 'twas a color he never liked.
yonder sure they are coming. let us now stay and see it.
whom son i dare not call; thou art too base to be acknowledged: thou a sceptre's heir, that thus affect'st a sheep-hook! [to the shepherd] thou old traitor, i am sorry that by hanging thee i can of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know the royal fool thou copest with,, 
he said once the devil would have him about women.
come on. since the youth will not be entreated, his own peril on his forwardness.
o, my heart!
he did in some sort, indeed, handle women, but then he was rheumatic, and talked of the whore of babylon.
is yonder the man?
i'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers, and made if i may ever know thou dost but sigh that thou no more shalt see this knack, as never i mean thou shalt, we'll bar thee from succession; not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin, follow us to the court. thou churl, for this time, though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee from the dead blow of it. and you, enchantment., worthy enough a herdsman: yea, him too, unworthy thee,, if ever henceforth thou these rural latches to his entrance open, or hoop his body more with thy embraces, i will devise a death as cruel for thee
do you not remember he saw a flea stick upon bardolph's nose, and he said it was a black soul burning in hell?
even he, madam.
even here undone! i was not much afeard; for once or twice i was about to speak and tell him plainly, the selfsame sun that shines upon his court looks on alike. will't please you, sir, be gone? i told you what would come of this: beseech you, of your own state take care: this dream of mine,, being now awake, i'll queen it no inch farther,
well, the fuel is gone that maintained that fire. that's all the riches i got in his service.
alas, he is too young. yet he looks successfully.
why, how now, father! speak ere thou diest.
shall we shog? the king will be gone from southampton.
how now, daughter and cousin? are you crept hither to see the wrestling?
i cannot speak, nor think nor dare to know that which i know. o sir! that thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea, to die upon the bed my father died, to lie close by his honest bones: but now some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me that knew'st this was the prince, and wouldst adventure to mingle faith with him! undone! undone! if i might die within this hour, i have lived
come, let's away., my love, give me thy lips. look to my chattels and my movables. trust none, for oaths are straws, men's faiths are wafer-cakes, and holdfast is the only dog, my duck. therefore, caveto be thy counselor. go, clear thy crystals., yoke-fellows in arms, to suck, to suck, the very blood to suck.
ay, my liege, so please you give us leave.
why look you so upon me? i am but sorry, not afeard; delay'd, but nothing alter'd: what i was, i am; more straining on for plucking back, not following
and that's but unwholesome food, they say.
you will take little delight in it, i can tell you, there is such odds in the man. in pity of the challenger's youth, i would fain dissuade him, but he will not be entreated. speak to him, ladies; see if you can move him.
gracious my lord, you know your father's temper: at this time he will allow no speech, which i do guess you do not purpose to him; and as hardly then, till the fury of his highness settle, come not before him.
touch her soft mouth, and march.
call him hither, good monsieur le beau.
i not purpose it. i think, camillo?
farewell, hostess. (kissing her)
do so. i'll not be by.
even he, my lord.
i cannot kiss, that is the humor of it. but adieu.
monsieur the challenger, the princess calls for you.
how often have i told you 'twould be thus! how often said, my dignity would last but till 'twere known!
let housewifery appear. keep close, i thee command.
i attend them with all respect and duty.
it cannot fail but by let nature crush the sides o' the earth together and mar the seeds within! lift up thy looks: from my succession wipe me, father; i am heir to my affection.
farewell. adieu.
young man, have you challenged charles the wrestler?
be advised.
thus comes the english with full power upon us, and more than carefully it us concerns therefore the dukes of berri and of brittany, of brabant and of orléans, shall make forth, and you, prince dauphin, with all swift dispatch, to line and new-repair our towns of war for england his approaches makes as fierce as waters to the sucking of a gulf. it fits us then to be as provident as fear may teach us out of late examples upon our fields.
no, fair princess. he is the general challenger. i come but in as others do, to try with him the strength of my youth.
i am, and by my fancy: if my reason will thereto be obedient, i have reason; if not, my senses, better pleased with madness, do bid it welcome.
to view the sick and feeble parts of france. and let us do it with no show of fear, no, with no more than if we heard that england for, my good liege, she is so idly kinged, her scepter so fantastically borne by a vain, giddy, shallow, humorous youth, that fear attends her not. it is most meet we arm us 'gainst the foe, for peace itself should not so dull a kingdom, though war nor no known quarrel were in question, but that defenses, musters, preparations, as were a war in expectation. therefore i say 'tis meet we all go forth
young gentleman, your spirits are too bold for your years. you have seen cruel proof of this man's strength. if you saw yourself with your eyes or knew yourself with your judgment, the fear of your adventure would counsel you to a more equal enterprise. we pray you for your own sake to embrace your own safety and give over this attempt.
this is desperate, sir.
oh peace, prince dauphin! you are too much mistaken in this king. with what great state he heard their embassy, how well supplied with noble counselors, how modest in exception, and withal how terrible in constant resolution, were but the outside of the roman brutus, covering discretion with a coat of folly, as gardeners do with ordure hide those roots that shall first spring and be most delicate.
do, young sir. your reputation shall not therefore be misprized. we will make it our suit to the duke that the wrestling might not go forward.
so call it: but it does fulfil my vow; i needs must think it honesty. camillo, not for bohemia, nor the pomp that may be thereat glean'd, for all the sun sees or in unknown fathoms, will i break my oath to this my fair beloved: therefore, i pray you, as you have ever been my father's honour'd friend, when he shall miss me,, as, in faith, i mean not upon his passion; let myself and fortune tug for the time to come. this you may know and so deliver, i am put to sea with her whom here i cannot hold on shore; a vessel rides fast by, but not prepared for this design. what course i mean to hold shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor concern me the reporting.
but though we think it so, it is no matter. in cases of defense 'tis best to weigh the enemy more mighty than he seems. so the proportions of defense are filled, doth, like a miser, spoil his coat with scanting a little cloth.
i beseech you, punish me not with your hard thoughts, wherein i confess me much guilty to deny so fair and excellent ladies anything. but let your fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my trial, wherein, if i be foiled, there is but one shamed that was never gracious; if killed, but one dead that was willing to be so. i shall do my friends no wrong, for i have none to lament me; the world no injury, for in it i have nothing. only in the world i fill up a place which may be better supplied when i have made it empty.
i would your spirit were easier for advice, or stronger for your need.
think we king harry strong, and, princes, look you strongly arm to meet him. and he is bred out of that bloody strain that haunted us in our familiar paths. witness our too-much-memorable shame when cressy battle fatally was struck of that black name, edward, black prince of wales, whiles that his mountain sire, on mountain standing
the little strength that i have, i would it were with you.
hark, perdita.
up in the air, crowned with the golden sun, saw his heroical seed and smiled to see him the patterns that by god and by french fathers had twenty years been made. this is a stem of that victorious stock, and let us fear the native mightiness and fate of him.
and mine, to eke out hers.
i'll hear you by and by.
do crave admittance to your majesty.
fare you well. pray heaven i be deceived in you.
resolved for flight. now were i happy, if his going i could frame to serve my turn, save him from danger, do him love and honour, purchase the sight again of dear sicilia i so much thirst to see.
we'll give them present audience. go, and bring them.
your heart's desires be with you.
now, good camillo; i am so fraught with curious business that i leave out ceremony.
you see this chase is hotly followed, friends.
come, where is this young gallant that is so desirous to lie with his mother earth?
you have heard of my poor services, i' the love that i have borne your father?
turn head and stop pursuit, for coward dogs runs far before them. good my sovereign, take up the english short, and let them know of what a monarchy you are the head. self-love, my liege, is not so vile a sin
ready, sir; but his will hath in it a more modest working.
very nobly have you deserved: it is my father's music to have them recompensed as thought on.
from our brother england?
you shall try but one fall.
well, my lord, if you may please to think i love the king and through him what is nearest to him, which is if your more ponderous and settled project may suffer alteration, on mine honour, i'll point you where you shall have such receiving as shall become your highness; where you may there's no disjunction to be made, but by, as heavens forefend!, your ruin; marry her, and, with my best endeavours in your absence, your discontenting father strive to qualify
from him, and thus he greets your majesty: he wills you, in the name of god almighty, that you divest yourself and lay apart
no, i warrant your grace you shall not entreat him to a second, that have so mightily persuaded him from a first.
how, camillo, may this, almost a miracle, be done? that i may call thee something more than man and after that trust to thee.
by law of nature and of nations, 'longs to him and to his heirs, namely, the crown and all wide-stretchèd honors that pertain by custom and the ordinance of times 'tis no sinister nor no awkward claim picked from the wormholes of long-vanished days, nor from the dust of old oblivion raked, he sends you this most memorable line, willing you overlook this pedigree, and when you find him evenly derived from his most famed of famous ancestors, edward the third, he bids you then resign from him, the native and true challenger.
you mean to mock me after, you should not have mocked me before. but come your ways.
a place whereto you'll go?
or else what follows?
now hercules be thy speed, young man!
not any yet: but as the unthought-on accident is guilty to what we wildly do, so we profess of every wind that blows.
bloody constraint, for if you hide the crown even in your hearts, there will he rake for it. in thunder and in earthquake like a jove, that, if requiring fail, he will compel, and bids you, in the bowels of the lord, deliver up the crown and to take mercy opens his vasty jaws, and on your head turning the widows' tears, the orphans' cries, the dead men's blood, the pining maidens' groans, for husbands, fathers, and betrothèd lovers, this is his claim, his threat'ning, and my message, unless the dauphin be in presence here, to whom expressly i bring greeting too.
i would i were invisible, to catch the strong fellow by the leg.
then list to me: this follows, if you will not change your purpose but undergo this flight, make for sicilia, for so i see she must be, 'fore leontes: she shall be habited as it becomes the partner of your bed. methinks i see leontes opening his free arms and weeping as 'twere i' the father's person; kisses the hands of your fresh princess; o'er and o'er divides him 'twixt his unkindness and his kindness; the one he chides to hell and bids the other grow
for us, we will consider of this further. back to our brother england.
o excellent young man!
worthy camillo, what colour for my visitation shall i hold up before him?
for the dauphin, i stand here for him. what to him from england?
if i had a thunderbolt in mine eye, i can tell who should down.
sent by the king your father the manner of your bearing towards him, with what you as from your father shall deliver, things known betwixt us three, i'll write you down: the which shall point you forth at every sitting but that you have your father's bosom there and speak his very heart.
scorn and defiance, slight regard, contempt, the mighty sender, doth he prize you at. thus says my king: an if your father's highness do not, in grant of all demands at large, sweeten the bitter mock you sent his majesty, that caves and womby vaultages of france shall chide your trespass and return your mock in second accent of his ordinance.
no more, no more.
i am bound to you: there is some sap in this.
say, if my father render fair return, nothing but odds with england. to that end, as matching to his youth and vanity, i did present him with the paris balls.
yes, i beseech your grace. i am not yet well breathed.
than a wild dedication of yourselves to unpath'd waters, undream'd shores, most certain to miseries enough; no hope to help you, but as you shake off one to take another; do their best office, if they can but stay you where you'll be loath to be: besides you know prosperity's the very bond of love, whose fresh complexion and whose heart together
he'll make your paris louvre shake for it, and be assured you'll find a difference, as we his subjects have in wonder found, between the promise of his greener days and these he masters now. now he weighs time in your own losses, if he stay in france.
how dost thou, charles?
one of these is true: i think affliction may subdue the cheek, but not take in the mind.
tomorrow shall you know our mind at full.
he cannot speak, my lord.
yea, say you so? seven years be born another such.
dispatch us with all speed, lest that our king come here himself to question our delay,
bear him away. what is thy name, young man?
my good camillo, she is as forward of her breeding as
you shall be soon dispatched with fair conditions. a night is but small breath and little pause to answer matters of this consequence.
orlando, my liege, the youngest son of sir rowland de
i cannot say 'tis pity she lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress to most that teach.
thus with imagined wing our swift scene flies in motion of no less celerity than that of thought. suppose that you have seen the well-appointed king at hampton pier with silken streamers the young phoebus fanning. play with your fancies and in them behold, upon the hempen tackle, shipboys climbing. hear the shrill whistle, which doth order give borne with th' invisible and creeping wind, draw the huge bottoms through the furrowed sea, breasting the lofty surge. oh, do but think you stand upon the rivage and behold for so appears this fleet majestical holding due course to harfleur. follow, follow! grapple your minds to sternage of this navy and leave your england, as dead midnight still, either past or not arrived to pith and puissance, for who is he whose chin is but enriched with one appearing hair that will not follow these culled and choice-drawn cavaliers to france? behold the ordnance on their carriages, with fatal mouths gaping on girded harfleur. suppose th' ambassador from the french comes back, tells harry that the king doth offer him
i would thou hadst been son to some man else. the world esteemed thy father honorable, but i did find him still mine enemy. thou shouldst have better pleased me with this deed but fare thee well. thou art a gallant youth. i would thou hadst told me of another father.
your pardon, sir; for this
some petty and unprofitable dukedoms. the offer likes not, and the nimble gunner with linstock now the devilish cannon touches,
were i my father, coz, would i do this?
my prettiest perdita! but o, the thorns we stand upon! camillo, preserver of my father, now of me, the medicine of our house, how shall we do? nor shall appear in sicilia.
and down goes all before them. still be kind
i am more proud to be sir rowland's son, to be adopted heir to frederick.
my lord, fear none of this: i think you know my fortunes do all lie there: it shall be so my care the scene you play were mine. for instance, sir, that you may know you shall not want, one word.
once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more, or close the wall up with our english dead! in peace there's nothing so becomes a man as modest stillness and humility, then imitate the action of the tiger: stiffen the sinews, summon up the blood, disguise fair nature with hard-favored rage, then lend the eye a terrible aspect, like the brass cannon, let the brow o'erwhelm it as fearfully as doth a gallèd rock o'erhang and jutty his confounded base, swilled with the wild and wasteful ocean. hold hard the breath and bend up every spirit to his full height. on, on, you noblest english, whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof, fathers that, like so many alexanders, and sheathed their swords for lack of argument. dishonor not your mothers. now attest that those whom you called fathers did beget you. be copy now to men of grosser blood, whose limbs were made in england, show us here the mettle of your pasture. let us swear that you are worth your breeding, which i doubt not,
my father loved sir rowland as his soul, and all the world was of my father's mind. had i before known this young man his son, ere he should thus have ventured.
ha, ha! what a fool honesty is! and trust, his sworn brother, a very simple gentleman! i have sold ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, table-book, ballad, knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring, to keep my pack from fasting: they throng who should buy first, as if my trinkets had been by which means i saw whose purse was best in picture; and what i saw, to my good use i remembered. my clown, who wants but something to be a reasonable man, grew so in love with the till he had both tune and words; which so drew the rest of the herd to me that all their other senses stuck in ears: you might have pinched a placket, it was senseless; 'twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a chains: no hearing, no feeling, but my sir's song, and admiring the nothing of it. so that in this time of lethargy i picked and cut most of their festival purses; and had not the old man come in son and scared my choughs from the chaff, i had not left a purse alive in the whole army.
for there is none of you so mean and base i see you stand like greyhounds in the slips, straining upon the start. the game's afoot. follow your spirit, and upon this charge cry "god for harry, england, and saint george!"
gentle cousin, let us go thank him and encourage him. my father's rough and envious disposition if you do keep your promises in love but justly, as you have exceeded all promise, your mistress shall be happy.
nay, but my letters, by this means being there so soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.
on, on, on, on, on! to the breach, to the breach!
gentleman, wear this for me, one out of suits with fortune that could give more but that her hand lacks means. , shall we go, coz?
and those that you'll procure from king leontes, 
pray thee, corporal, stay. the knocks are too hot, and, for mine own part, i have not a case of lives. the humor of it is too hot; that is the very plainsong of it.
ay., fare you well, fair gentleman.
shall satisfy your father.
(sings) knocks go and come. god's vassals drop and die, and sword and shield in bloody field doth win immortal fame.
are all thrown down, and that which here stands up is but a quintain, a mere lifeless block.
happy be you! all that you speak shows fair.
would i were in an alehouse in london! i would give all my fame for a pot of ale, and safety.
he calls us back. my pride fell with my fortunes. i'll ask him what he would., did you call, sir? more than your enemies.
who have we here?
and i. if wishes would prevail with me, my purpose should not fail with me, but thither would i hie.
will you go, coz?
nothing may give us aid.
(sings) as duly, but not as truly, as bird doth sing on bough.
have with you. fare you well.
if they have overheard me now, why, hanging.
up to the breach, you dogs! avaunt, you cullions!
what passion hangs these weights upon my tongue? o poor orlando! thou art overthrown. or charles or something weaker masters thee.
how now, good fellow! why shakest thou so? fear not, man; here's no harm intended to thee.
be merciful, great duke, to men of mold. abate thy rage, abate thy manly rage, abate thy rage, great duke. good bawcock, 'bate thy rage. use lenity, sweet chuck.
good sir, i do in friendship counsel you to leave this place. albeit you have deserved yet such is now the duke's condition that he misconsters all that you have done. the duke is humorous. what he is indeed more suits you to conceive than i to speak of.
i am a poor fellow, sir.
these be good humors. your honor wins bad humors.
which of the two was daughter of the duke that here was at the wrestling?
why, be so still; here's nobody will steal that from thee: yet for the outside of thy poverty we must make an exchange; therefore discase thee instantly, , thou must think there's a necessity in't,, and pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee, there's some boot.
as young as i am, i have observed these three swashers. i am boy to them all three, but all they three, though they would serve me, could not be man to me. for indeed three such antics do not amount to a man: for bardolph, he is white-livered and red-faced, by the means whereof he faces it out but fights not; for pistol, he hath a killing tongue and a quiet sword, by the means whereof he breaks words and keeps whole weapons; for nym, he hath heard that men of few words are the best men, and therefore he scorns to say his prayers, lest he should be thought a coward, but his few bad words are matched with as few good deeds, for he never broke any man's head but his own, and that was against a post when he was drunk. they will steal anything and call it purchase. bardolph stole a lute case, bore it twelve leagues, and sold it for three halfpence. nym and bardolph are sworn brothers in filching, and in calais they stole a fire shovel. i knew by that piece of service the men would carry coals. they would have me as familiar with men's pockets as their gloves or their handkerchers, which makes much against my manhood, if i should take from another's pocket to put into mine, for it is plain pocketing up of wrongs. i must leave them and seek some better service. their villainy goes against my weak stomach, and therefore i must cast it up.
neither his daughter, if we judge by manners, but yet indeed the smaller is his daughter and here detained by her usurping uncle to keep his daughter company, whose loves are dearer than the natural bond of sisters. but i can tell you that of late this duke grounded upon no other argument but that the people praise her for her virtues and pity her for her good father's sake; and, on my life, his malice 'gainst the lady hereafter, in a better world than this, i shall desire more love and knowledge of you.
i am a poor fellow, sir. [aside]
captain fluellen, you must come presently to the mines; the duke of gloucester would speak with you.
i rest much bounden to you. fare you well.
nay, prithee, dispatch: the gentleman is half flayed already.
to the mines? tell you the duke it is not so good to come to the mines, for, look you, the mines is not according to the disciplines of the war. the concavities of it is not sufficient, for, look you, th' athversary, you may discuss unto the duke, look you, is digt himself four yard under the countermines. by cheshu, i think he will plow up all if there is not better directions.
thus must i from the smoke into the smother, but heavenly rosalind!
are you in earnest, sir? [aside]
the duke of gloucester, to whom the order of the siege is given, is altogether directed by an irishman, a very valiant gentleman, i' faith.
why, cousin! why, rosalind! cupid have mercy, not a word?
dispatch, i prithee.
it is captain macmorris, is it not?
not one to throw at a dog.
indeed, i have had earnest: but i cannot with conscience take it.
i think it be.
no, thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs.
unbuckle, unbuckle.
by cheshu, he is an ass, as in the world. i will verify as much in his beard. he has no more directions in the true disciplines of the wars, look you, of the roman disciplines, than is a puppy dog.
then there were two cousins laid up, when the one should be lamed with reasons and the other mad without any.
come home to ye!, you must retire yourself into some covert: take your sweetheart's hat and pluck it o'er your brows, muffle your face, dismantle you, and, as you can, disliken for i do fear eyes over, to shipboard get undescried.
here he comes, and the scots captain, captain jamy, with him.
but is all this for your father?
i see the play so lies that i must bear a part.
captain jamy is a marvelous falorous gentleman, that is certain, and of great expedition and knowledge in th' aunchient wars, upon my particular knowledge of his directions. by cheshu, he will maintain his argument as well as any military man in the world in the disciplines of the pristine wars of the romans.
no, some of it is for my child's father. oh, how full of briers is this working-day world!
have you done there?
i say gudday, captain fluellen.
they are but burs, cousin, thrown upon thee in holiday foolery. if we walk not in the trodden paths our very petticoats will catch them.
should i now meet my father, he would not call me son.
godden to your worship, good captain james.
i could shake them off my coat. these burs are in my heart.
nay, you shall have no hat.
how now, captain macmorris, have you quit the mines?
hem them away.
come, lady, come. farewell, my friend.
by chrish, la, 'tish ill done. the work ish give over. the trompet sound the retreat. by my hand i swear, and my father's soul, the work ish ill done. it ish give over. i would have blowed up the town, so chrish save me, la, in an hour. oh, 'tish ill done, 'tish ill done, by my hand, 'tish ill done.
i would try, if i could cry "hem" and have him.
adieu, sir.
captain macmorris, i beseech you now, will you voutsafe me, look you, a few disputations with you as partly touching or concerning the disciplines of the war, the roman wars? in the way of argument, look you, and friendly communication, partly to satisfy my opinion, and partly for the satisfaction, look you, of my mind, as touching the direction of the military discipline, that is the point.
come, come, wrestle with thy affections.
o perdita, what have we twain forgot! pray you, a word.
it sall be vary gud, gud feith, gud captens bath, and i sall quit you with gud leve, as i may pick occasion, that sall i, marry.
oh, they take the part of a better wrestler than myself.
[aside] what i do next, shall be to tell the king wherein my hope is i shall so prevail to force him after: in whose company i shall review sicilia, for whose sight i have a woman's longing.
it is no time to discourse, so chrish save me. the day is hot, and the weather, and the wars, and the king, and the dukes. it is no time to discourse. the town is beseeched, and the trumpet call us to the breach, and we talk and, be chrish, do nothing, 'tis shame for us all. so god sa' me, 'tis shame to stand still. it is shame, by my hand. and there is throats to be cut and works to be done, and there ish nothing done, so chrish sa' me, la.
oh, a good wish upon you. you will try in time, in despite of a fall. but turning these jests out of service, let us talk in good earnest. is it possible on such a sudden you should fall into so strong a liking with old sir rowland's youngest son?
thus we set on, camillo, to the sea-side.
by the mess, ere theise eyes of mine take themselves to slomber, ay'll de gud service, or i'll lig i' th' grund for it, ay, or go to death. and i'll pay 't as valorously as i may, that sall i suerly do, that is the breff and the long. marry, i wad full fain heard some question 'tween you tway.
the duke my father loved his father dearly.
the swifter speed the better.
captain macmorris, i think, look you, under your correction, there is not many of your nation, 
doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son dearly? by this kind of chase i should hate him, for my father hated his father dearly. yet i hate not orlando.
i understand the business, i hear it: to have an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is also, to smell out work for the other senses. i see this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive. what an exchange had this been without boot! what a boot is here with this exchange! sure the gods do extempore. the prince himself is about a piece of iniquity, stealing away from his father with his clog at his heels: if i thought it were a piece of honesty to acquaint the king withal, i would not and therein am i constant to my profession.
of my nation? what ish my nation? ish a villain and a basterd and a knave and a rascal. what ish my nation? who talks of my nation?
no, faith, hate him not, for my sake.
aside, aside; here is more matter for a hot brain: every lane's end, every shop, church, session, hanging, yields a careful man work.
look you, if you take the matter otherwise than is meant, captain macmorris, peradventure i shall think you do not use me with that affability as, in discretion, you ought to use me, look you, being as good a man as yourself, both in the disciplines of war and in the derivation of my birth and in other particularities.
why should i not? doth he not deserve well?
there is no other way but to tell the king she's a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.
i do not know you so good a man as myself. so chrish save me, i will cut off your head.
let me love him for that, and do you love him because i do.
nay, but hear me.
gentlemen both, you will mistake each other.
with his eyes full of anger.
nay, but hear me.
ah, that's a foul fault.
mistress, dispatch you with your safest haste, and get you from our court.
go to, then.
the town sounds a parley.
me, uncle?
she being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh and blood has not offended the king; and so your flesh and blood is not to be punished by him. show those things you found about her, those secret done, let the law go whistle: i warrant you.
captain macmorris, when there is more better opportunity to be required, look you, i will be so bold as to tell you i know the disciplines of war, and there is an end.
within these ten days if that thou beest found so near our public court as twenty miles, thou diest for it.
i will tell the king all, every word, yea, and his son's pranks too; who, i may say, is no honest man, neither to his father nor to me, to go about to make
how yet resolves the governor of the town? this is the latest parle we will admit. therefore to our best mercy give yourselves or, like to men proud of destruction, a name that in my thoughts becomes me best, if i begin the batt'ry once again, i will not leave the half-achieved harfleur till in her ashes she lie burièd. and the fleshed soldier, rough and hard of heart, in liberty of bloody hand, shall range with conscience wide as hell, mowing like grass your fresh fair virgins and your flow'ring infants. arrayed in flames like to the prince of fiends, do with his smirched complexion all fell feats enlinked to waste and desolation? what is 't to me, when you yourselves are cause, of hot and forcing violation? what rein can hold licentious wickedness when down the hill he holds his fierce career? we may as bootless spend our vain command as send precepts to the leviathan to come ashore. therefore, you men of harfleur, take pity of your town and of your people whiles yet my soldiers are in my command,
i do beseech your grace, if with myself i hold intelligence or have acquaintance with mine own desires, if that i do not dream or be not frantic, as i do trust i am not, then, dear uncle, did i offend your highness.
indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you could have been to him and then your blood had been the dearer by i know how much an ounce.
o'erblows the filthy and contagious clouds of heady murder, spoil, and villainy. if not, why, in a moment look to see the blind and bloody soldier with foul hand your fathers taken by the silver beards and their most reverend heads dashed to the walls, your naked infants spitted upon pikes whiles the mad mothers with their howls confused at herod's bloody-hunting slaughtermen. what say you? will you yield and this avoid or, guilty in defense, be thus destroyed?
thus do all traitors. if their purgation did consist in words, they are as innocent as grace itself.
[aside] very wisely, puppies!
our expectation hath this day an end. returns us that his powers are yet not ready to raise so great a siege. therefore, great king, we yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy. enter our gates, dispose of us and ours,
yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor. tell me whereon the likelihood depends.
fardel will make him scratch his beard.
open your gates.
thou art thy father's daughter. there's enough.
[aside] i know not what impediment this complaint may be to the flight of my master.
come, uncle exeter, go you and enter harfleur. there remain and fortify it strongly 'gainst the french. the winter coming on and sickness growing upon our soldiers, we will retire to calais. tonight in harfleur will we be your guest; tomorrow for the march are we addressed.
so was i when your highness took his dukedom. treason is not inherited, my lord, or if we did derive it from our friends, what's that to me? my father was no traitor. then, good my liege, mistake me not so much
pray heartily he be at palace.
alice, tu as été en angleterre, et tu parles bien le langage.
dear sovereign, hear me speak.
sometimes by chance: let me pocket up my pedlar's excrement.
un peu, madame.
ay, celia, we stayed her for your sake. else had she with her father ranged along.
how now, rustics! whither are you bound?
je te prie, m'enseignez. il faut que j'apprenne à parler. comment appelez-vous la main en anglais?
i did not then entreat to have her stay. i was too young that time to value her, but now i know her. if she be a traitor, why so am i. we still have slept together, rose at an instant, learned, played, eat together, still we went coupled and inseparable.
to the palace, an it like your worship.
la main? elle est appelée "de hand."
she is too subtle for thee, and her smoothness, her very silence and her patience speak to the people, and they pity her. and thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous when she is gone. then open not thy lips. firm and irrevocable is my doom which i have passed upon her. she is banished.
your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition names, your ages, of what having, breeding, and any thing that is fitting to be known, discover.
"de hand." et les doigts?
i cannot live out of her company.
we are but plain fellows, sir.
les doigts? ma foi, j'oublie les doigts; mais je me souviendrai. les doigts? je pense qu'ils sont appelés "de fingres"; oui, "de fingres."
you are a fool., you, niece, provide yourself. if you outstay the time, upon mine honor and in the greatness of my word, you die.
a lie; you are rough and hairy. let me have no often give us soldiers the lie: but we pay them for it with stamped coin, not stabbing steel; therefore they do not give us the lie.
la main, "de hand"; les doigts, "de fingres." je pense que je suis le bon écolier. j'ai gagné deux mots d'anglais vitement. comment appelez-vous les ongles?
wilt thou change fathers? i will give thee mine. i charge thee, be not thou more grieved than i am.
your worship had like to have given us one, if you
les ongles? nous les appelons "de nails."
i have more cause.
are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?
"de nails." écoutez. dites-moi si je parle bien: "de hand, de fingres, et de nails."
thou hast not, cousin. hath banished me, his daughter?
whether it like me or no, i am a courtier. seest thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings? hath not my gait in it the measure of the court? not on thy baseness court-contempt? thinkest thou, for that i insinuate, or toaze from thee thy business, i am therefore no courtier? i am courtier cap-a-pe; and one that will either push on or pluck open thy affair.
c'est bien dit, madame. il est fort bon anglais.
that he hath not.
my business, sir, is to the king.
dites-moi l'anglais pour le bras.
no, hath not? rosalind lacks then the love which teacheth thee that thou and i am one. no, let my father seek another heir. therefore devise with me how we may fly, whither to go, and what to bear with us, and do not seek to take your change upon you, for, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale, say what thou canst, i'll go along with thee.
what advocate hast thou to him?
"de arme," madame.
why, whither shall we go?
i know not, an't like you.
et le coude?
to seek my uncle in the forest of arden.
have none.
"d'elbow."
maids as we are, to travel forth so far? beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold.
none, sir; i have no pheasant, cock nor hen.
"d'elbow." je m'en fais la répétition de tous les mots que vous m'avez appris dés à présent.
i'll put myself in poor and mean attire and with a kind of umber smirch my face. and never stir assailants.
how blessed are we that are not simple men! yet nature might have made me as these are,
il est trop difficile, madame, comme je pense.
were it not better, because that i am more than common tall, that i did suit me all points like a man? a boar-spear in my hand, and in my heart lie there what hidden woman's fear there will, we'll have a swashing and a martial outside, as many other mannish cowards have
this cannot be but a great courtier.
excusez-moi, alice. écoutez: "de hand, de fingres, de nails, de arma, de bilbow."
what shall i call thee when thou art a man?
his garments are rich, but he wears them not handsomely.
"d'elbow," madame.
i'll have no worse a name than jove's own page, and therefore look you call me ganymede. but what will you be called?
he seems to be the more noble in being fantastical: on's teeth.
ô seigneur dieu! je m'en oublie; "d'elbow." comment appelez-vous le col?
no longer celia, but aliena.
the fardel there? what's i' the fardel? wherefore that box?
"de nick," madame.
but, cousin, what if we assayed to steal the clownish fool out of your father's court? would he not be a comfort to our travel?
sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box, shall know within this hour, if i may come to the speech of him.
"de nick." et le menton?
leave me alone to woo him. let's away and get our jewels and our wealth together, devise the fittest time and safest way to hide us from pursuit that will be made to liberty, and not to banishment.
age, thou hast lost thy labour.
"de chin."
now, my co-mates and brothers in exile, hath not old custom made this life more sweet than that of painted pomp? are not these woods more free from peril than the envious court? the seasons' difference, as the icy fang and churlish chiding of the winter's wind, which, when it bites and blows upon my body, even till i shrink with cold, i smile and say, that feelingly persuade me what i am." sweet are the uses of adversity, which, like the toad, ugly and venomous, wears yet a precious jewel in his head. finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, sermons in stones, and good in everything.
why, sir?
"de sin." le col, "de nick"; le menton, "de sin."
i would not change it. happy is your grace, that can translate the stubbornness of fortune
new ship to purge melancholy and air himself: for, if thou beest capable of things serious, thou must know the king is full of grief.
oui. sauf votre honneur, en vérité, vous prononcez les mots aussi droit que les natifs d'angleterre.
come, shall we go and kill us venison? and yet it irks me the poor dappled fools, being native burghers of this desert city, should in their own confines with forkèd heads
so 'tis said, sir; about his son, that should have
je ne doute point d'apprendre, par la grâce de dieu, et en peu de temps.
indeed, my lord, the melancholy jaques grieves at that, and in that kind swears you do more usurp than doth your brother that hath banished you. did steal behind him as he lay along under an oak, whose antique root peeps out upon the brook that brawls along this wood, to the which place a poor sequestered stag did come to languish. and indeed, my lord, the wretched animal heaved forth such groans that their discharge did stretch his leathern coat almost to bursting, and the big round tears in piteous chase. and thus the hairy fool, much markèd of the melancholy jaques, stood on th' extremest verge of the swift brook, augmenting it with tears.
if that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly: the curses he shall have, the tortures he shall feel, will break the back of man, the heart of monster.
n'avez vous pas déjà oublié ce que je vous ai enseigné?
did he not moralize this spectacle?
think you so, sir?
non, je réciterai à vous promptement: "de hand, de fingre, de nails, "
oh, yes, into a thousand similes. first, for his weeping into the needless stream: "poor deer," quoth he, "thou mak'st a testament to that which had too much." then, being there alone, left and abandoned of his velvet friend, "'tis right," quoth he. "thus misery doth part the flux of company." anon a careless herd, and never stays to greet him. "ay," quoth jaques, "sweep on, you fat and greasy citizens. 'tis just the fashion. wherefore do you look upon that poor and broken bankrupt there?" the body of the country, city, court, yea, and of this our life, swearing that we are mere usurpers, tyrants, and what's worse, to fright the animals and to kill them up
and vengeance bitter; but those that are germane to him, though removed fifty times, shall all come under the hangman: which though it be great pity, yet it is necessary. an old sheep-whistling rogue a grace! some say he shall be stoned; but that death is too soft for him, say i draw our throne into a sheep-cote! all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.
"de nails," madame.
and did you leave him in this contemplation?
has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear, an't
"de nails, de arme, de ilbow."
we did, my lord, weeping and commenting upon the sobbing deer.
he has a son, who shall be flayed alive; then 'nointed over with honey, set on the head of a wasp's nest; then stand till he be three quarters and a dram dead; then recovered again with he is, and in the hottest day prognostication proclaims, shall he be set against a brick-wall, the sun looking with a southward eye upon him, where he is to behold him with flies blown to death. but what are to be smiled at, their offences being so capital? tell me, for you seem to be honest plain men, what you have to the king: being something gently considered, i'll bring you where he is whisper him in your behalfs; and if it be in man besides the king to effect your suits, here is man shall do it.
sauf votre honneur, "d'elbow."
show me the place. for then he's full of matter.
he seems to be of great authority: close with him, bear, yet he is oft led by the nose with gold: show the inside of your purse to the outside of his hand, and no more ado. remember 'stoned,' and 'flayed alive.'
ainsi dis-je: "d'elbow, de nick, et de sin." comment appelez-vous le pied et la robe?
i'll bring you to him straight.
an't please you, sir, to undertake the business for more and leave this young man in pawn till i bring it you.
"le foot," madame, et "le count."
can it be possible that no man saw them? it cannot be. some villains of my court are of consent and sufferance in this.
after i have done what i promised?
"le foot" et "de count." ô seigneur dieu! ils sont mots de son mauvais, corruptible, gros, et impudique, et non pour les dames d'honneur d'user. je ne voudrais prononcer ces mots devant les seigneurs de france pour tout le monde. foh! "le foot" et "le count"! néanmoins, je réciterai une autre fois ma leçon ensemble: "d' hand, de fingre, de nails, d' arme, d'elbow, de nick, de sin, de foot, le count."
i cannot hear of any that did see her. saw her abed, and in the morning early they found the bed untreasured of their mistress.
ay, sir.
excellent, madame!
my lord, the roinish clown, at whom so oft your grace was wont to laugh, is also missing. confesses that she secretly o'erheard your daughter and her cousin much commend the parts and graces of the wrestler that did but lately foil the sinewy charles, that youth is surely in their company.
well, give me the moiety. are you a party in this business?
c'est assez pour une fois: allons-nous à d"ner.
send to his brother. fetch that gallant hither. if he be absent, bring his brother to me. i'll make him find him. do this suddenly, to bring again these foolish runaways.
one, i hope i shall not be flayed out of it.
'tis certain he hath passed the river somme.
who's there?
o, that's the case of the shepherd's son: hang him, he'll be made an example.
an if he be not fought withal, my lord, let us not live in france. let us quit all and give our vineyards to a barbarous people.
what, my young master, o my gentle master, o my sweet master, o you memory of old sir rowland! why, what make you here? and wherefore are you gentle, strong, and valiant? why would you be so fond to overcome the bonny prizer of the humorous duke? your praise is come too swiftly home before you. their graces serve them but as enemies? no more do yours. your virtues, gentle master, are sanctified and holy traitors to you. oh, what a world is this when what is comely
comfort, good comfort! we must to the king and show daughter nor my sister; we are gone else. sir, i will give you as much as this old man does when the business is performed, and remain, as he says, your pawn till it be brought you.
the emptying of our fathers' luxury, our scions, put in wild and savage stock, spurt up so suddenly into the clouds and overlook their grafters?
why, what's the matter?
go on the right hand: i will but look upon the hedge and follow you.
mort de ma vie, if they march along unfought withal, but i will sell my dukedom to buy a slobb'ry and a dirty farm in that nook-shotten isle of albion.
o unhappy youth, come not within these doors. within this roof the enemy of all your graces lives. yet not the son, i will not call him son, of him i was about to call his father hath heard your praises, and this night he means to burn the lodging where you use to lie, he will have other means to cut you off. i overheard him and his practices. this is no place, this house is but a butchery. abhor it, fear it, do not enter it.
we are blest in this man, as i may say, even blest.
is not their climate foggy, raw, and dull, on whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale, killing their fruit with frowns? can sodden water, a drench for sur-reined jades, their barley broth,
why, whither, adam, wouldst thou have me go?
let's before as he bids us: he was provided to do us good.
and shall our quick blood, spirited with wine, seem frosty? oh, for honor of our land, let us not hang like roping icicles upon our houses' thatch, whiles a more frosty people "poor" we may call them in their native lords.
no matter whither, so you come not here.
not suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth. i am courted now with a double occasion, gold and a means to do the prince my master good; which who knows how that may turn back to my advancement? i will bring think it fit to shore them again and that the complaint they have to the king concerns him nothing, let him call me rogue for being so far officious; for i am proof against that title and them: there may be matter in it.
by faith and honor, our madams mock at us and plainly say our mettle is bred out and they will give to new-store france with bastard warriors.
what, wouldst thou have me go and beg my food, or with a base and boist'rous sword enforce a thievish living on the common road? yet this i will not do, do how i can. i rather will subject me to the malice of a diverted blood and bloody brother.
sir, you have done enough, and have perform'd a saint-like sorrow: no fault could you make, which you have not redeem'd; indeed, paid down more penitence than done trespa at the last, with them forgive yourself.
and teach lavoltas high, and swift corantos, saying our grace is only in our heels and that we are most lofty runaways. english dancing schools.
but do not so. i have five hundred crowns, which i did store to be my foster nurse when service should in my old limbs lie lame and unregarded age in corners thrown. take that, and he that doth the ravens feed, be comfort to my age. here is the gold. all this i give you. let me be your servant. though i look old, yet i am strong and lusty, for in my youth i never did apply nor did not with unbashful forehead woo the means of weakness and debility. therefore my age is as a lusty winter, frosty but kindly. let me go with you. in all your business and necessities.
whilst i remember her and her virtues, i cannot forget my blemishes in them, and so still think of that heirless it hath made my kingdom and destroy'd the sweet'st companion that e'er man bred his hopes out of.
where is montjoy the herald? speed him hence. let him greet england with our sharp defiance. up, princes, and, with spirit of honor edged charles delabreth, high constable of france; you dukes of orléans, bourbon, and of berri, alençon, brabant, bar, and burgundy; jacques chatillon, rambures, vaudemont, foix, lestrale, bouciqualt, and charolois; high dukes, great princes, barons, lords, and knights, for your great seats now quit you of great shames. bar harry england, that sweeps through our land rush on his host, as doth the melted snow upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat the alps doth spit and void his rheum upon. go down upon him, you have power enough, bring him our prisoner.
o good old man, how well in thee appears the constant service of the antique world, when service sweat for duty, not for meed. where none will sweat but for promotion, and having that do choke their service up even with the having. it is not so with thee. but, poor old man, thou prun'st a rotten tree in lieu of all thy pains and husbandry. but come thy ways. we'll go along together, and ere we have thy youthful wages spent, we'll light upon some settled low content.
true, too true, my lord: or from the all that are took something good, to make a perfect woman, she you kill'd would be unparallel'd.
this becomes the great! sorry am i his numbers are so few, his soldiers sick and famished in their march, he'll drop his heart into the sink of fear and for achievement offer us his ransom.
to the last gasp, with truth and loyalty. from seventeen years till now almost fourscore here livèd i, but now live here no more. at seventeen years, many their fortunes seek, yet fortune cannot recompense me better than to die well, and not my master's debtor.
i think so. kill'd! sorely, to say i did; it is as bitter upon thy tongue as in my thought: now, good now, say so but seldom.
therefore, lord constable, haste on montjoy and let him say to england that we send , prince dauphin, you shall stay with us in rouen.
o jupiter, how weary are my spirits!
not at all, good lady: have done the time more benefit and graced your kindness better.
not so, i do beseech your majesty.
i care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.
you are one of those would have him wed again.
be patient, for you shall remain with us. , now forth, lord constable and princes all,
i could find in my heart to disgrace my man's apparel and to cry like a woman, but i must comfort the weaker vessel, as doublet and hose ought to show itself courageous to petticoat. therefore courage, good aliena.
you pity not the state, nor the remembrance of his most sovereign name; consider little what dangers, by his highness' fail of issue, may drop upon his kingdom and devour than to rejoice the former queen is well? what holier than, for royalty's repair, for present comfort and for future good, to bless the bed of majesty again
how now, captain fluellen? come you from the bridge?
i pray you bear with me. i cannot go no further.
there is none worthy, respecting her that's gone. besides, the gods will have fulfill'd their secret purposes; for has not the divine apollo said, that king leontes shall not have an heir till his lost child be found? which that it shall, is all as monstrous to our human reason as my antigonus to break his grave did perish with the infant. 'tis your counsel my lord should to the heavens be contrary, oppose against their wills.
i assure you, there is very excellent services committed at the bridge.
for my part, i had rather bear with you than bear you. yet i should bear no cross if i did bear you, for i think you have no money in your purse.
care not for issue; left his to the worthiest; so his successor was like to be the best.
is the duke of exeter safe?
well, this is the forest of arden.
good paulina, who hast the memory of hermione, had squared me to thy counsel! then, even now, i might have look'd upon my queen's full eyes, have taken treasure from her lips, 
the duke of exeter is as magnanimous as agamemnon, and a man that i love and honor with my soul and my heart and my duty and my life and my living and my uttermost power. he is not, god be praised and blessed, any hurt in the world, but keeps the bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline. there is an aunchient lieutenant there at the pridge. i think in my very conscience he is as valiant a man as mark antony, and he is a man of no estimation in the world, but i did see him do as gallant service.
ay, now am i in arden, the more fool i. when i was at home i was in a better place, but travelers must be content.
and left them
what do you call him?
ay, be so, good touchstone.
thou speak'st truth. no more such wives; therefore, no wife: one worse, and better used, would make her sainted spirit again possess her corpse, and on this stage, and begin, 'why to me?'
he is called aunchient pistol.
look you who comes here, a young man and an old in solemn talk.
had she such power, she had just cause.
i know him not.
that is the way to make her scorn you still.
she had; and would incense me
here is the man.
o corin, that thou knew'st how i do love her!
i should so. were i the ghost that walk'd, i'ld bid you mark her eye, and tell me for what dull part in't you chose her; then i'ld shriek, that even your ears should be 'remember mine.'
captain, i thee beseech to do me favors. the duke of exeter doth love thee well.
i partly guess, for i have loved ere now.
stars, stars, and all eyes else dead coals! fear thou no wife; i'll have no wife, paulina.
ay, i praise god, and i have merited some love at his hands.
though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover as ever sighed upon a midnight pillow. but if thy love were ever like to mine, as sure i think did never man love so, hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy?
never to marry but by my free leave?
bardolph, a soldier firm and sound of heart and of buxom valor, hath, by cruel fate and giddy fortune's furious fickle wheel, that goddess blind
into a thousand that i have forgotten.
never, paulina; so be blest my spirit!
by your patience, aunchient pistol, fortune is painted blind, with a muffler afore her eyes, to signify to you that fortune is blind; and she is painted also with a wheel to signify to you, which is the moral of it, that she is turning and inconstant, and mutability and variation; and her foot, look you, is fixed upon a spherical stone, which rolls and rolls and rolls. in good truth, the poet makes a most excellent description of it. fortune is an excellent moral.
oh, thou didst then ne'er love so heartily. if thou rememb'rest not the slightest folly thou hast not loved. or if thou hast not sat as i do now, wearying thy hearer in thy mistress's praise, thou hast not loved. abruptly, as my passion now makes me, thou hast not loved. o phoebe, phoebe, phoebe!
then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.
fortune is bardolph's foe and frowns on him, a damnèd death! let gallows gape for dog, let man go free, and let not hemp his windpipe suffocate. but exeter hath given the doom of death therefore go speak, the duke will hear thy voice, and let not bardolph's vital thread be cut with edge of penny cord and vile reproach. speak, captain, for his life, and i will thee requite.
alas, poor shepherd, searching of thy wound,
you tempt him over-much.
aunchient pistol, i do partly understand your meaning.
and i mine. i remember when i was in love i broke my sword upon a stone and bid him take that for coming a- night to jane smile. and i remember the kissing of her batler, and the cow's dugs that her pretty chopped hands had milked. and i remember the wooing of a peascod instead of her, from whom i took two cods and, giving her them again, said with weeping tears, "wear these for my sake." we that are true lovers run into strange capers. but as all is mortal in nature, so is all nature in love mortal in folly.
as like hermione as is her picture, affront his eye, 
why then, rejoice therefore.
thou speak'st wiser than thou art ware of.
good madam,, 
certainly, aunchient, it is not a thing to rejoice at, for if, look you, he were my brother, i would desire the duke to use his good pleasure and put him to execution, for discipline ought to be used.
nay, i shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till i break my shins against it.
i have done. no remedy, but you will,, give me the office to choose you a queen: she shall not be so young as was your former; but she shall be such as, walk'd your first queen's ghost, to see her in your arms.
die and be damned, and figo for thy friendship!
jove, jove, this shepherd's passion
my true paulina, we shall not marry till thou bid'st us.
it is well.
and mine, but it grows something stale with me.
that never till then.
the fig of spain!
i pray you, one of you question yond man, if he for gold will give us any food. i faint almost to death.
one that gives out himself prince florizel, son of polixenes, with his princess, she the fairest i have yet beheld, desires access
very good.
(to corin) holla, you clown!
what with him? he comes not like to his father's greatne his approach, so out of circumstance and sudden, tells us 'tis not a visitation framed, but forced
why, this is an arrant counterfeit rascal. i remember him now, a bawd, a cutpurse.
peace, fool. he's not thy kinsman.
but few, and those but mean.
i'll assure you, he uttered as prave words at the pridge as you shall see in a summer's day. but it is very well; what he has spoke to me, that is well, i warrant you, when time is serve.
who calls?
his princess, say you, with him?
why, 'tis a gull, a fool, a rogue, that now and then goes to the wars to grace himself at his return into london under the form of a soldier. and such fellows are perfect in the great commanders' names, and they will learn you by rote where services were done, at such and such a sconce, at such a breach, at such a convoy; who came off bravely, who was shot, who disgraced, what terms the enemy stood on. and this they con perfectly in the phrase of war, which they
your betters, sir.
ay, the most peerless piece of earth, i think,
trick up with new-tuned oaths; and what a beard of the general's cut and a horrid suit of the camp will do among foaming bottles and ale-washed wits is wonderful to be thought on. but you must learn to know such slanders of the age, or else you may be marvelously mistook.
else are they very wretched.
o hermione, as every present time doth boast itself above a better gone, so must thy grave give way to what's seen now! sir, you yourself is colder than that theme, 'she had not been, nor was not to be equall'd;', thus your verse flow'd with her beauty once: 'tis shrewdly ebb'd, to say you have seen a better.
i tell you what, captain gower. i do perceive he is not the man that he would gladly make show to the world he is. if i find a hole in his coat, i will tell him my mind.
peace, i say. , good even to you, friend.
the one i have almost forgot,, your pardon,, the other, when she has obtain'd your eye, will have your tongue too. this is a creature, would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal of who she but bid follow.
hark you, the king is coming, and i must speak with him from the pridge., god pless your majesty.
and to you, gentle sir, and to you all.
how! not women?
how now, fluellen, cam'st thou from the bridge?
i prithee, shepherd, if that love or gold can in this desert place buy entertainment, bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed. here's a young maid with travel much oppressed,
women will love her, that she is a woman more worth than any man; men, that she is
ay, so please your majesty. the duke of exeter has very gallantly maintained the pridge. the french is gone off, look you, and there is gallant and most prave passages. marry, th' athversary was have possession of the pridge, but he is enforced to retire, and the duke of exeter is master of the pridge. i can tell your majesty, the duke is a prave man.
fair sir, i pity her and wish, for her sake more than for mine own, my fortunes were more able to relieve her. but i am shepherd to another man my master is of churlish disposition and little recks to find the way to heaven by doing deeds of hospitality. besides, his cote, his flocks, and bounds of feed by reason of his absence, there is nothing that you will feed on. but what is, come see, and in my voice most welcome shall you be.
go, cleomenes; yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends, bring them to our embracement.
what men have you lost, fluellen?
what is he that shall buy his flock and pasture?
still, 'tis strange
the perdition of th' athversary hath been very great, reasonable great. marry, for my part, i think the duke hath lost never a man, but one that is like to be executed for robbing a church, one bardolph, if your majesty know the man. his face is all bubukles and whelks and knobs and flames o' fire; and his lips blows at his nose, and it is like a coal of fire, sometimes plue and sometimes red, but his nose is executed, and his fire's out.
that little cares for buying anything.
had our prince, jewel of children, seen this hour, he had pair'd well with this lord: there was not full a month between their births.
we would have all such offenders so cut off, and we give express charge that in our marches through the country there be nothing compelled from the villages, nothing taken but paid for, none of the french upbraided or abused in disdainful language; for when lenity and cruelty play for a kingdom, the gentler gamester is the soonest winner.
i pray thee, if it stand with honesty, buy thou the cottage, pasture, and the flock, and thou shalt have to pay for it of us.
he dies to me again when talk'd of: sure, when i shall see this gentleman, thy speeches will bring me to consider that which may unfurnish me of reason. they are come.
you know me by my habit.
and willingly could waste my time in it.
for she did print your royal father off, conceiving you: were i but twenty-one, your father's image is so hit in you, his very air, that i should call you brother, by us perform'd before. most dearly welcome! and your fair princess,, goddess!, o, alas! i lost a couple, that 'twixt heaven and earth might thus have stood begetting wonder as all mine own folly, the society, amity too, of your brave father, whom, though bearing misery, i desire my life once more to look on him.
well then, i know thee. what shall i know of thee?
assuredly the thing is to be sold. go with me. if you like upon report the soil, the profit, and this kind of life, and buy it with your gold right suddenly.
have i here touch'd sicilia and from him give you all greetings that a king, at friend, can send his brother: and, but infirmity which waits upon worn times hath something seized the lands and waters 'twixt your throne and his measured to look upon you; whom he loves, he bade me say so, more than all the sceptres and those that bear them living.
my master's mind.
(sings) under the greenwood tree who loves to lie with me and turn his merry note come hither, come hither, come hither. here shall he see no enemy but winter and rough weather.
good gentleman! the wrongs i have done thee stir afresh within me, and these thy offices, so rarely kind, are as interpreters of my behind-hand slackness. welcome hither, exposed this paragon to the fearful usage, at least ungentle, of the dreadful neptune, to greet a man not worth her pains, much less the adventure of her person?
unfold it.
more, more, i prithee, more.
she came from libya.
thus says my king: "say thou to harry of england, though we seemed dead, we did but sleep. advantage is a better soldier than rashness. tell him we could have rebuked him at harfleur, but that we thought not good to bruise an injury till it were full ripe. now we speak upon our cue, and our voice is imperial. england shall repent his folly, see his
it will make you melancholy, monsieur jaques.
where the warlike smalus, that noble honour'd lord, is fear'd and loved?
weakness, and admire our sufferance. bid him therefore consider of his ransom, which must proportion the losses we have borne, the subjects we have lost, the disgrace we have digested, which, in weight to reanswer, his pettiness would bow under. for our losses, his exchequer is too poor; for th' effusion of our blood, the muster of his kingdom too faint a number; and for our disgrace, his own person, kneeling at our feet but a weak and worthless satisfaction. to this, add defiance, and tell him, for conclusion, he hath betrayed his followers, whose condemnation is pronounced." so far my king and master; so much my office.
i thank it. more, i prithee, more. i can suck melancholy out of a song as a weasel sucks eggs. more, i prithee, more.
most royal sir, from thence; from him, whose daughter a prosperous south-wind friendly, we have cross'd, to execute the charge my father gave me for visiting your highne my best train i have from your sicilian shores dismiss'd; not only my success in libya, sir, but my arrival and my wife's in safety here where we are.
what is thy name? i know thy quality.
my voice is ragged. i know i cannot please you.
the blessed gods do climate here! you have a holy father, a graceful gentleman; against whose person, so sacred as it is, i have done sin: for which the heavens, taking angry note, as he from heaven merits it, with you worthy his goodness. what might i have been, might i a son and daughter now have look'd on, such goodly things as you!
montjoy.
come, more, another stanzo. call you 'em "stanzos"?
that which i shall report will bear no credit, were not the proof so nigh. please you, great sir, bohemia greets you from himself by me; desires you to attach his son, who has, fled from his father, from his hopes, and with a shepherd's daughter.
thou dost thy office fairly. turn thee back, and tell thy king i do not seek him now but could be willing to march on to calais without impeachment, for, to say the sooth, unto an enemy of craft and vantage, my people are with sickness much enfeebled, my numbers lessened, and those few i have almost no better than so many french, i thought upon one pair of english legs did march three frenchmen. yet, forgive me, god, that i do brag thus. this your air of france hath blown that vice in me. i must repent. my ransom is this frail and worthless trunk, my army but a weak and sickly guard, yet, god before, tell him we will come on though france himself and such another neighbor go bid thy master well advise himself: if we may pass, we will; if we be hindered, we shall your tawny ground with your red blood discolor. and so, montjoy, fare you well. we would not seek a battle as we are, nor, as we are, we say we will not shun it. so tell your master.
what you will, monsieur jaques.
where's bohemia? speak.
i shall deliver so. thanks to your highness.
nay, i care not for their names. they owe me nothing. will you sing?
here in your city; i now came from him: my marvel and my message. to your court whiles he was hastening, in the chase, it seems, of this fair couple, meets he on the way the father of this seeming lady and with this young prince.
i hope they will not come upon us now.
more at your request than to please myself.
camillo has betray'd me; whose honour and whose honesty till now endured all weathers.
we are in god's hand, brother, not in theirs. march to the bridge. it now draws toward night. beyond the river we'll encamp ourselves, and on tomorrow bid them march away.
well then, if ever i thank any man, i'll thank you. but that they call "compliment" is like th' encounter of two dog- apes. and when a man thanks me heartily, methinks i have given him a penny and he renders me the beggarly thanks. come, sing. and you that will not, hold your tongues.
he's with the king your father.
tut, i have the best armor of the world. would it were day!
well, i'll end the song., sirs, cover the while; the duke will drink under this tree., he hath been all this day to look you.
who? camillo?
you have an excellent armor, but let my horse have his due.
and i have been all this day to avoid him. he is too disputable for my company. i think of as many matters as he, but i give heaven thanks and make no boast of them. come, warble, come.
camillo, sir; i spake with him; who now has these poor men in question. never saw i forswear themselves as often as they speak: bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them with divers deaths in death.
it is the best horse of europe.
(singing) who doth ambition shun seeking the food he eats and pleased with what he gets, come hither, come hither, come hither. here shall he see but winter and rough weather.
o my poor father! our contract celebrated.
will it never be morning?
i'll give you a verse to this note that i made yesterday in despite of my invention.
you are married?
my lord of orléans, and my lord high constable, you talk of horse and armor?
and i'll sing it. (taking paper fromjaques) thus it goes: that any man turn ass, leaving his wealth and ease a stubborn will to please, ducdame, ducdame, ducdame. gross fools as he, an if he will come to me.
we are not, sir, nor are we like to be; the stars, i see, will kiss the valleys first:
you are as well provided of both as any prince in the world.
what's that "ducdame"?
my lord, is this the daughter of a king?
what a long night is this! i will not change my horse with any that treads but on four pasterns. çà ha! he bounds from the earth, as if his entrails were hairs, le cheval volant, the pegasus, qui a les narines de feu. when i bestride him, i soar; i am a hawk; he trots the air. the earth sings when he touches it. the basest horn of his hoof is more musical than the pipe of hermes.
'tis a greek invocation, to call fools into a circle. i'll go sleep if i can. if i cannot, i'll rail against all the first-born of egypt.
she is, when once she is my wife.
he's of the color of the nutmeg.
and i'll go seek the duke. his banquet is prepared.
will come on very slowly. i am sorry, most sorry, you have broken from his liking where you were tied in duty, and as sorry your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,
and of the heat of the ginger. it is a beast for perseus. he is pure air and fire; and the dull elements of earth and water never appear in him, but only in patient stillness while his rider mounts him. he is indeed a horse, and all other jades you may call beasts.
dear master, i can go no further. oh, i die for food. here lie i down and measure out my grave. farewell, kind master.
dear, look up: though fortune, visible an enemy, should chase us with my father, power no jot hath she to change our loves. beseech you, sir, than i do now: with thought of such affections, step forth mine advocate; at your request my father will grant precious things as trifles.
indeed, my lord, it is a most absolute and excellent horse.
why, how now, adam? no greater heart in thee? live a little, comfort a little, cheer thyself a little. if this uncouth forest yield anything savage, i will either be food for it or bring it for food to thee. thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers. for my sake, be comfortable. hold death awhile at the arm's end. i will here be with thee presently, and if i bring thee not something to eat, i will give thee leave to die. but if thou diest before i come, thou art a mocker of my labor. well said. thou look'st cheerly, and i'll be with thee quickly. yet thou liest in the bleak air. come, i will bear thee to some shelter, and thou shalt not die for lack of a dinner if there live anything in this desert. cheerly, good adam.
would he do so, i'ld beg your precious mistress,
it is the prince of palfreys. his neigh is like the bidding of a monarch, and his countenance enforces homage.
i think he be transformed into a beast, for i can nowhere find him like a man.
sir, my liege, your eye hath too much youth in't: not a month 'fore your queen died, she was more worth such gazes than what you look on now.
no more, cousin.
my lord, he is but even now gone hence. here was he merry, hearing of a song.
even in these looks i made.
nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from the rising of the lark to the lodging of the lamb, vary deserved praise on my palfrey. it is a theme as fluent as the sea. turn the sands into eloquent tongues, and my horse is argument for them all. 'tis a subject for a sovereign to reason on, and for a sovereign's sovereign to ride on, and for the world, familiar to us and unknown, to lay apart their particular functions and wonder at him. i once writ a sonnet in his praise and began thus: "wonder of nature, "
we shall have shortly discord in the spheres. go seek him. tell him i would speak with him.
but your petition is yet unanswer'd. i will to your father: your honour not o'erthrown by your desires, i now go toward him; therefore follow me and mark what way i make: come, good my lord.
i have heard a sonnet begin so to one's mistress.
he saves my labor by his own approach.
beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation?
then did they imitate that which i composed to my courser, for my horse is my mistress.
why, how now, monsieur? what a life is this what, you look merrily.
i was by at the opening of the fardel, heard the old shepherd deliver the manner how he found it: whereupon, after a little amazedness, we were all heard the shepherd say, he found the child.
your mistress bears well.
a fool, a fool, i met a fool i' th' forest, a motley fool. a miserable world! as i do live by food, i met a fool, and railed on lady fortune in good terms, in good set terms, and yet a motley fool. "good morrow, fool," quoth i. "no, sir," quoth he, "call me not 'fool' till heaven hath sent me fortune."
i would most gladly know the issue of it.
me well, which is the prescript praise and perfection of a good and particular mistress.
and, looking on it with lackluster eye, says very wisely, "it is ten o'clock. thus we may see," quoth he, "how the world wags. 'tis but an hour ago since it was nine, and so from hour to hour we ripe and ripe, and then from hour to hour we rot and rot, and thereby hangs a tale." when i did hear the motley fool thus moral on the time, that fools should be so deep-contemplative, and i did laugh sans intermission an hour by his dial. o noble fool! a worthy fool! motley's the only wear.
i make a broken delivery of the business; but the changes i perceived in the king and camillo were staring on one another, to tear the cases of their eyes; there was speech in their dumbness, language in their very gesture; they looked as they had heard of a world ransomed, or one destroyed: a notable beholder, that knew no more but seeing, could not say if the importance were joy or sorrow; but in the extremity of the one, it must needs be.
nay, for methought yesterday your mistress shrewdly shook your back.
what fool is this?
here comes a gentleman that haply knows more.
so perhaps did yours.
o worthy fool!, one that hath been a courtier and says, "if ladies be but young and fair, they have the gift to know it." and in his brain, which is as dry as the remainder biscuit with observation, the which he vents in mangled forms. oh, that i were a fool! i am ambitious for a motley coat.
nothing but bonfires: the oracle is fulfilled; the king's daughter is found: such a deal of wonder is broken out within this hour that ballad-makers cannot be able to express it.
mine was not bridled.
thou shalt have one.
deliver you more. how goes it now, sir? this news which is called true is so like an old tale, that the verity of it is in strong suspicion: has the king found his heir?
oh, then belike she was old and gentle, and you rode, like a kern of ireland, your french hose off and in your straight strossers.
provided that you weed your better judgments of all opinion that grows rank in them that i am wise. i must have liberty withal, as large a charter as the wind, and they that are most gallèd with my folly, they most must laugh. and why, sir, must they so? the "why" is plain as way to parish church: he that a fool doth very wisely hit not to seem senseless of the bob. if not, the wise man's folly is anatomized even by the squand'ring glances of the fool. invest me in my motley. give me leave cleanse the foul body of th' infected world, if they will patiently receive my medicine.
circumstance: that which you hear you'll swear you see, there is such unity in the proofs. the mantle of queen hermione's, her jewel about the neck of it, the letters of antigonus found with it which they creature in resemblance of the mother, the affection of nobleness which nature shows above her breeding, and many other evidences proclaim her with all certainty to be the king's daughter. did you see
you have good judgment in horsemanship.
fie on thee! i can tell what thou wouldst do.
no.
be warned by me, then: they that ride so, and ride not warily, fall into foul bogs. i had rather have my horse to my mistress.
what, for a counter, would i do but good?
then have you lost a sight, which was to be seen, cannot be spoken of. there might you have beheld one joy crown another, so and in such manner that it joy waded in tears. there was casting up of eyes, holding up of hands, with countenances of such distraction that they were to be known by garment, not by favour. our king, being ready to leap out of joy were now become a loss, cries 'o, thy mother, thy mother!' then asks bohemia forgiveness; then embraces his son-in-law; then again worries he his daughter with clipping her; now he thanks the old conduit of many kings' reigns. i never heard of such another encounter, which lames report to follow it and undoes description to do it.
i had as lief have my mistress a jade.
for thou thyself hast been a libertine, as sensual as the brutish sting itself, and all th' embossèd sores and headed evils that thou with license of free foot hast caught
what, pray you, became of antigonus, that carried
i tell thee, constable, my mistress wears his own hair.
why, who cries out on pride that can therein tax any private party? doth it not flow as hugely as the sea till that the weary very means do ebb?
like an old tale still, which will have matter to rehearse, though credit be asleep and not an ear open. he was torn to pieces with a bear: this avouches the shepherd's son; who has not only his handkerchief and rings of his that paulina knows.
i could make as true a boast as that if i had a sow to my mistress.
when that i say the city-woman bears the cost of princes on unworthy shoulders? who can come in and say that i mean her, when such a one as she such is her neighbor? that says his bravery is not of my cost, thinking that i mean him, but therein suits his folly to the mettle of my speech? there then. how then, what then? let me see wherein then he hath wronged himself. if he be free, why then my taxing like a wild goose flies unclaimed of any man. but who comes here?
what became of his bark and his followers?
"le chien est retourné à son propre vomissement, et la truie lavée au bourbier." thou mak'st use of anything.
forbear, and eat no more.
wrecked the same instant of their master's death and in the view of the shepherd: so that all the even then lost when it was found. but o, the noble combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow was fought in paulina! she had one eye declined for the loss of her husband, another elevated that the oracle was and so locks her in embracing, as if she would pin her to her heart that she might no more be in danger of losing.
yet do i not use my horse for my mistress, or any such proverb so little kin to the purpose.
why, i have eat none yet.
the dignity of this act was worth the audience of
my lord constable, the armor that i saw in your tent tonight, are those stars or suns upon it?
nor shalt not till necessity be served.
one of the prettiest touches of all and that which angled for mine eyes, caught the water though not the fish, was when, at the relation of the queen's death, with the manner how she came to't bravely attentiveness wounded his daughter; till, from one sign of dolour to another, she did, with an 'alas,' i would fain say, bleed tears, for i am sure my heart wept blood. who was most marble there changed could have seen 't, the woe had been universal.
stars, my lord.
of what kind should this cock come of?
are they returned to the court?
some of them will fall tomorrow, i hope.
art thou thus boldened, man, by thy distress or else a rude despiser of good manners,
no: the princess hearing of her mother's statue, which is in the keeping of paulina,, a piece many italian master, julio romano, who, had he himself eternity and could put breath into his work, would beguile nature of her custom, so perfectly he is her ape: he so near to hermione hath done hermione that answer: thither with all greediness of affection are they gone, and there they intend to sup.
and yet my sky shall not want.
you touched my vein at first. the thorny point of bare distress hath ta'en from me the show of smooth civility, yet am i inland bred and know some nurture. but forbear, i say. till i and my affairs are answerèd.
i thought she had some great matter there in hand; for she hath privately twice or thrice a day, ever house. shall we thither and with our company piece the rejoicing?
that may be, for you bear a many superfluously, and 'twere more honor some were away.
an you will not be answered with reason, i must die.
who would be thence that has the benefit of access? every wink of an eye some new grace will be born: let's along.
ev'n as your horse bears your praises, who would trot as well were some of your brags dismounted.
what would you have? your gentleness shall force more than your force move us to gentleness.
now, had i not the dash of my former life in me, would preferment drop on my head. i brought the old man and his son aboard the prince: told him i heard at that time, overfond of the shepherd's daughter, so he then took her to be, who began to be much sea-sick, and himself little better, extremity of weather continuing, this mystery remained been the finder out of this secret, it would not have relished among my other discredits.
would i were able to load him with his desert! will it never be day? i will trot tomorrow a mile, and my way shall be paved with english faces.
i almost die for food, and let me have it.
here come those i have done good to against my will, and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.
i will not say so, for fear i should be faced out of my way. but i would it were morning, for i would fain be about the ears of the english.
sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.
daughters will be all gentlemen born.
who will go to hazard with me for twenty prisoners?
speak you so gently? pardon me, i pray you. i thought that all things had been savage here, and therefore put i on the countenance that in this desert inaccessible, under the shade of melancholy boughs, lose and neglect the creeping hours of time, if ever you have looked on better days, if ever sat at any good man's feast, if ever from your eyelids wiped a tear and know what 'tis to pity and be pitied, let gentleness my strong enforcement be,
you are well met, sir. you denied to fight with me this other day, because i was no gentleman born. see you these clothes? say you see them not and these robes are not gentlemen born: give me the lie, do, and try whether i am not now a gentleman born.
you must first go yourself to hazard ere you have them.
true is it that we have seen better days and have with holy bell been knolled to church, and sat at good men's feasts and wiped our eyes of drops that sacred pity hath engendered. and take upon command what help we have that to your wanting may be ministered.
i know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.
'tis midnight. i'll go arm myself.
then but forbear your food a little while whiles, like a doe, i go to find my fawn who after me hath many a weary step limped in pure love. till he be first sufficed, oppressed with two weak evils, age and hunger, i will not touch a bit.
ay, and have been so any time these four hours.
the dauphin longs for morning.
and we will nothing waste till you return.
and so have i, boy.
he longs to eat the english.
i thank you; and be blessed for your good comfort.
so you have: but i was a gentleman born before my father; for the king's son took me by the hand, and called me brother; and then the two kings called my father brother; and then the prince my brother and so we wept, and there was the first gentleman-like tears that ever we shed.
i think he will eat all he kills.
thou seest we are not all alone unhappy. this wide and universal theater wherein we play in.
we may live, son, to shed many more.
by the white hand of my lady, he's a gallant prince.
all the world's a stage, and all the men and women merely players. they have their exits and their entrances, his acts being seven ages. at first the infant, mewling and puking in the nurse's arms. then the whining schoolboy with his satchel and shining morning face, creeping like snail sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad made to his mistress' eyebrow. then a soldier, full of strange oaths and bearded like the pard, jealous in honor, sudden and quick in quarrel,
ay; or else 'twere hard luck, being in so
swear by her foot, that she may tread out the oath.
even in the cannon's mouth. and then the justice, in fair round belly with good capon lined, with eyes severe and beard of formal cut, full of wise saws and modern instances; into the lean and slippered pantaloon with spectacles on nose and pouch on side, his youthful hose, well saved, a world too wide for his shrunk shank, and his big manly voice, and whistles in his sound. last scene of all, that ends this strange eventful history, is second childishness and mere oblivion, sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything.
i humbly beseech you, sir, to pardon me all the faults i have committed to your worship and to give me your good report to the prince my master.
he is simply the most active gentleman of france.
and let him feed.
prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle, now we are
doing is activity, and he will still be doing.
i thank you most for him.
thou wilt amend thy life?
he never did harm that i heard of.
so had you need., i scarce can speak to thank you for myself.
ay, an it like your good worship.
nor will do none tomorrow. he will keep that good name still.
as yet to question you about your fortunes., give us some music, and, good cousin, sing.
give me thy hand: i will swear to the prince thou art as honest a true fellow as any is in bohemia.
i know him to be valiant.
(sings) blow, blow, thou winter wind. as man's ingratitude. thy tooth is not so keen, because thou art not seen, although thy breath be rude. most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly. then heigh-ho, the holly. this life is most jolly. freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky, as benefits forgot. though thou the waters warp, thy sting is not so sharp as friend remembered not. most friendship is feigning, most loving mere folly. then heigh-ho, the holly. this life is most jolly.
you may say it, but not swear it.
i was told that by one that knows him better than you.
if that you were the good sir rowland's son, and as mine eye doth his effigies witness most truly limned and living in your face, be truly welcome hither. i am the duke that loved your father. the residue of your fortune thou art right welcome as thy master is. support him by the arm. give me your hand, and let me all your fortunes understand.
not swear it, now i am a gentleman? let boors and franklins say it, i'll swear it.
what's he?
not see him since? sir, sir, that cannot be. but were i not the better part made mercy, i should not seek an absent argument of my revenge, thou present. but look to it: seek him with candle. bring him, dead or living, within this twelvemonth or turn thou no more to seek a living in our territory. thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine till thou canst quit thee by thy brother's mouth of what we think against thee.
how if it be false, son?
marry, he told me so himself; and he said he cared not who knew it.
oh, that your highness knew my heart in this: i never loved my brother in my life.
if it be ne'er so false, a true gentleman may swear the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt not be drunk; but i know thou art no tall fellow of thy hands and that thou wilt be drunk: but i'll swear it, and i would thou wouldst
he needs not. it is no hidden virtue in him.
and let my officers of such a nature make an extent upon his house and lands. do this expediently, and turn him going.
i will prove so, sir, to my power.
by my faith, sir, but it is; never anybody saw it but his lackey. 'tis a hooded valor, and when it appears, it will bate.
hang there, my verse, in witness of my love. and thou, thrice-crownéd queen of night, survey with thy chaste eye, from thy pale sphere above, thy huntress' name that my full life doth sway. and in their barks my thoughts i'll character, that every eye which in this forest looks shall see thy virtue witnessed everywhere. run, run, orlando, carve on every tree
ay, by any means prove a tall fellow: if i do not wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk, not being a tall fellow, trust me not. hark! the kings queen's picture. come, follow us: we'll be thy good masters.
ill will never said well.
and how like you this shepherd's life, master touchstone?
o grave and good paulina, the great comfort that i have had of thee!
i will cap that proverb with "there is flattery in friendship."
truly, shepherd, in respect of itself, it is a good life; but in respect that it is a shepherd's life, it is naught. in respect that it is solitary, i like it very well; but in respect that it is private, it is a very vile life. now in respect it is in the fields, it pleaseth me well; but in respect it is not in the court, it is tedious. as it is a spare life, look you, it fits my humor well; but as there is no more plenty in it, it goes much against my stomach. hast any philosophy in thee, shepherd?
what, sovereign sir, i did not well i meant well. all my services with your crown'd brother and these your contracted heirs of your kingdoms, my poor house to visit, it is a surplus of your grace, which never my life may last to answer.
and i will take up that with "give the devil his due."
no more but that i know the more one sickens, the worse at ease he is, and that he that wants money, means, and content is without three good friends; that the property of rain is to wet, and fire to burn; that good pasture makes fat sheep; and that a great cause of the night is lack of the sun; that he that hath learned no wit by nature nor art may complain of good breeding or comes of a very dull kindred.
we honour you with trouble: but we came to see the statue of our queen: your gallery have we pass'd through, not without much content in many singularities; but we saw not the statue of her mother.
well placed; there stands your friend for the devil. have at the very eye of that proverb with "a pox of the devil."
such a one is a natural philosopher. wast ever in court, shepherd?
as she lived peerless, so her dead likeness, i do well believe, excels whatever yet you look'd upon lonely, apart. but here it is: prepare to see the life as lively mock'd as ever still sleep mock'd death: behold, and say 'tis well.
you are the better at proverbs, by how much "a fool's bolt is soon shot."
no, truly.
i like your silence, it the more shows off comes it not something near?
you have shot over.
then thou art damned.
her natural posture! chide me, dear stone, that i may say indeed thou art hermione; or rather, thou art she as infancy and grace. but yet, paulina, hermione was not so much wrinkled, nothing so aged as this seems.
'tis not the first time you were overshot.
nay, i hope.
o, not by much.
my lord high constable, the english lie within fifteen hundred paces of your tents.
truly, thou art damned, like an ill-roasted egg, all on one side.
which lets go by some sixteen years and makes her as she lived now.
who hath measured the ground?
for not being at court? your reason.
as now she might have done, so much to my good comfort, as it is even with such life of majesty, warm life, as now it coldly stands, when first i woo'd her! i am ashamed: does not the stone rebuke me for being more stone than it? o royal piece, my evils conjured to remembrance and from thy admiring daughter took the spirits, standing like stone with thee.
the lord grandpré.
why, if thou never wast at court, thou never saw'st good manners; if thou never saw'st good manners, then thy manners must be wicked, and wickedness is sin, and sin is damnation. thou art in a parlous state, shepherd.
and give me leave, i kneel and then implore her blessing. lady, dear queen, that ended when i but began, give me that hand of yours to kiss.
a valiant and most expert gentleman., would it were day! alas, poor harry of england! he longs not for the dawning as we do.
not a whit, touchstone. those that are good manners at the court are as ridiculous in the country as the behavior of the country is most mockable at the court. you told me you salute not at the court but you kiss your hands. that courtesy would be uncleanly if courtiers were shepherds.
o, patience! not dry.
what a wretched and peevish fellow is this king of england to mope with his fat-brained followers so far out of his knowledge.
instance, briefly. come, instance.
my lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on, which sixteen winters cannot blow away, so many summers dry; scarce any joy but kill'd itself much sooner.
if the english had any apprehension, they would run away.
why, we are still handling our ewes, and their fells, you know, are greasy.
dear my brother, let him that was the cause of this have power to take off so much grief from you as he
that they lack, for if their heads had any intellectual armor, they could never wear such heavy head-pieces.
why, do not your courtier's hands sweat? and is not the grease of a mutton as wholesome as the sweat of a man? shallow, shallow. a better instance, i say. come.
indeed, my lord, if i had thought the sight of my poor image would thus have wrought you,, for the stone is mine, i'ld not have show'd it.
that island of england breeds very valiant creatures. their mastiffs are of unmatchable courage.
besides, our hands are hard.
do not draw the curtain.
foolish curs, that run winking into the mouth of a russian bear and have their heads crushed like rotten apples. you may as well say, that's a valiant flea that dare eat his breakfast on the lip of a lion.
your lips will feel them the sooner. shallow again. a more sounder instance. come.
no longer shall you gaze on't, lest your fancy may think anon it moves.
just, just; and the men do sympathize with the mastiffs in robustious and rough coming on, leaving their wits with their wives. and then give them great meals of beef and iron and steel, they will eat like wolves and fight like devils.
and they are often tarred over with the surgery of our sheep; and would you have us kiss tar? the courtier's hands are perfumed with civet.
let be, let be. would i were dead, but that, methinks, already, would you not deem it breathed? and that those veins did verily bear blood?
ay, but these english are shrewdly out of beef.
most shallow man. thou worms' meat in respect of a good piece of flesh, indeed. learn of the wise and perpend: civet is of a baser birth than tar, the very uncleanly flux of a cat. mend the instance, shepherd.
masterly done: the very life seems warm upon her lip.
then shall we find tomorrow they have only stomachs to eat and none to fight. now is it time to arm. come, shall we about it?
you have too courtly a wit for me. i'll rest.
as we are mock'd with art.
it is now two o'clock. but, let me see, by ten we shall have each a hundred englishmen.
wilt thou rest damned? god help thee, shallow man. god make incision in thee; thou art raw.
i'll draw the curtain: my lord's almost so far transported that he'll think anon it lives.
now entertain conjecture of a time when creeping murmur and the poring dark fills the wide vessel of the universe. from camp to camp, through the foul womb of night, that the fixed sentinels almost receive the secret whispers of each other's watch. fire answers fire, and through their paly flames each battle sees the other's umbered face. piercing the night's dull ear; and from the tents the armorers, accomplishing the knights, with busy hammers closing rivets up, give dreadful note of preparation. and, the third hour of drowsy morning named, proud of their numbers and secure in soul, the confident and overlusty french do the low-rated english play at dice who like a foul and ugly witch doth limp so tediously away. the poor condemnèd english, like sacrifices, by their watchful fires sit patiently and inly ruminate investing lank-lean cheeks and war-worn coats, presenteth them unto the gazing moon so many horrid ghosts. oh, now, who will behold the royal captain of this ruined band
sir, i am a true laborer. i earn that i eat, get that i wear, owe no man hate, envy no man's happiness, glad of other men's good, content with my harm, and the greatest of my pride is to see my ewes graze and my lambs suck.
make me to think so twenty years together! no settled senses of the world can match the pleasure of that madness. let 't alone.
let him cry, "praise and glory on his head!" for forth he goes and visits all his host, bids them good morrow with a modest smile, and calls them brothers, friends, and countrymen. how dread an army hath enrounded him, nor doth he dedicate one jot of color unto the weary and all-watchèd night, but freshly looks and overbears attaint that every wretch, pining and pale before, beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks. a largess universal, like the sun, his liberal eye doth give to everyone, behold, as may unworthiness define, a little touch of harry in the night. and so our scene must to the battle fly, where, oh, for pity, we shall much disgrace, right ill-disposed in brawl ridiculous, the name of agincourt. yet sit and see, minding true things by what their mock'ries be.
that is another simple sin in you, to bring the ewes and the rams together and to offer to get your living by the copulation of cattle; to be bawd to a bellwether and to betray a she-lamb of a twelvemonth to a crooked-pated old cuckoldly ram, out of all reasonable match. if thou be'st not damned for this, the devil himself will have no shepherds. i cannot see else how thou shouldst 'scape.
i am sorry, sir, i have thus far stirr'd you: but
gloucester, 'tis true that we are in great danger. the greater therefore should our courage be. , good morrow, brother bedford. god almighty, there is some soul of goodness in things evil, for our bad neighbor makes us early stirrers, which is both healthful and good husbandry. besides, they are our outward consciences and preachers to us all, admonishing thus may we gather honey from the weed and make a moral of the devil himself.
here comes young master ganymede, my new mistress's brother.
do, paulina; for this affliction has a taste as sweet as any cordial comfort. still, methinks, there is an air comes from her: what fine chisel for i will kiss her.
good morrow, old sir thomas erpingham. a good soft pillow for that good white head
(as ganymede, reading) from the east to western ind, no jewel is like rosalind. her worth being mounted on the wind, through all the world bears rosalind. are but black to rosalind. let no fair be kept in mind but the fair of rosalind.
good my lord, forbear: the ruddiness upon her lip is wet; you'll mar it if you kiss it, stain your own
not so, my liege, this lodging likes me better, since i may say, "now lie i like a king."
i'll rhyme you so eight years together, dinners and suppers and sleeping hours excepted. it is the right butter-women's rank to market.
no, not these twenty years.
'tis good for men to love their present pains upon example. so the spirit is eased. the organs, though defunct and dead before, break up their drowsy grave and newly move, with casted slough and fresh legerity. lend me thy cloak, sir thomas. brothers both, do my good morrow to them, and anon desire them all to my pavilion.
out, fool.
so long could i stand by, a looker on.
we shall, my liege.
for a taste: if a hart do lack a hind, if the cat will after kind, so, be sure, will rosalind. winter garments must be lined, so must slender rosalind. then to cart with rosalind. sweetest nut hath sourest rind; such a nut is rosalind. he that sweetest rose will find this is the very false gallop of verses. why do you infect yourself with them?
either forbear, for more amazement. if you can behold it, i'll make the statue move indeed, descend and take you by the hand; but then you'll think, which i protest against, i am assisted
shall i attend your grace?
peace, you dull fool. i found them on a tree.
what you can make her do, i am content to look on: what to speak, i am content to hear; for 'tis as easy to make her speak as move.
go with my brothers to my lords of england. i and my bosom must debate awhile, and then i would no other company.
truly, the tree yields bad fruit.
you do awake your faith. then all stand still; on: those that think it is unlawful business i am about, let them depart.
the lord in heaven bless thee, noble harry!
i'll graft it with you, and then i shall graft it with a medlar. then it will be the earliest fruit i' th' country, for you'll be rotten ere you be half ripe, and that's the right virtue of the medlar.
proceed:
god-a-mercy, old heart, thou speak'st cheerfully.
you have said, but whether wisely or no, let the forest judge.
music, awake her; strike!
qui vous là?
peace. here comes my sister reading. stand aside.
'tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach; strike all that look upon with marvel. come, i'll fill your grave up: stir, nay, come away, dear life redeems you. you perceive she stirs:
a friend.
(as aliena, reads) why should this a desert be? for it is unpeopled? no. tongues i'll hang on every tree some how brief the life of man runs his erring pilgrimage, that the stretching of a span buckles in his sum of age; 'twixt the souls of friend and friend. but upon the fairest boughs, or at every sentence end, will i "rosalinda" write, the quintessence of every sprite heaven would in little show. therefore heaven nature charged that one body should be filled nature presently distilled helen's cheek, but not her heart, cleopatra's majesty, atalanta's better part,
start not; her actions shall be holy as you hear my spell is lawful: do not shun her until you see her die again; for then when she was young you woo'd her; now in age is she become the suitor?
discuss unto me: art thou officer or art thou base, common, and popular?
thus rosalind of many parts by heavenly synod was devised, of many faces, eyes, and hearts to have the touches dearest prized. and i to live and die her slave.
o, she's warm! if this be magic, let it be an art
i am a gentleman of a company.
o most gentle jupiter, what tedious homily of love have you wearied your parishioners withal, and never cried, "have patience, good people."
she embraces him.
trail'st thou the puissant pike?
(as aliena) how now?, back, friends., shepherd, go off a little., go with him, sirrah.
she hangs about his neck: if she pertain to life let her speak too.
even so. what are you?
come, shepherd, let us make an honorable retreat, though not with bag and baggage, yet with scrip and scrippage.
ay, and make't manifest where she has lived,
as good a gentleman as the emperor.
didst thou hear these verses?
that she is living, were it but told you, should be hooted at like an old tale: but it appears she lives, though yet she speak not. mark a little while. and pray your mother's blessing. turn, good lady; our perdita is found.
then you are a better than the king.
oh, yes, i heard them all, and more too, for some of them had in them more feet than the verses would bear.
you gods, look down and from your sacred vials pour your graces where hast thou been preserved? where lived? how found thy father's court? for thou shalt hear that i, knowing by paulina that the oracle gave hope thou wast in being, have preserved
a lad of life, an imp of fame, of parents good, of fist most valiant. i kiss his dirty shoe, and from heartstring i love the lovely bully. what is thy name?
that's no matter. the feet might bear the verses.
there's time enough for that; lest they desire upon this push to trouble your joys with like relation. go together, you precious winners all; your exultation will wing me to some wither'd bough and there my mate, that's never to be found again, lament till i am lost.
harry le roy.
ay, but the feet were lame and could not bear themselves without the verse, and therefore stood lamely in the verse.
o, peace, paulina! as i by thine a wife: this is a match, and made between's by vows. thou hast found mine; but how, is to be question'd; for i saw her, as i thought, dead, and have in vain said many for him, i partly know his mind, to find thee an honourable husband. come, camillo, and take her by the hand, whose worth and honesty is richly noted and here justified what! look upon my brother: both your pardons, that e'er i put between your holy looks my ill suspicion. this is your son-in-law, and son unto the king, who, heavens directing, lead us from hence, where we may leisurely each one demand an answer to his part perform'd in this wide gap of time since first we were dissever'd: hastily lead away.
le roy? a cornish name. art thou of cornish crew?
but didst thou hear without wondering how thy name should be hanged and carved upon these trees?
no, i am a welshman.
i was seven of the nine days out of the wonder before you came, for look here what i found on a palm tree. i was never so berhymed since pythagoras' time, that i was an irish rat, which i can hardly remember.
two households, both alike in dignity (in fair verona, where we lay our scene), from ancient grudge break to new mutiny, where civil blood makes civil hands unclean. a pair of star-crossed lovers take their life, whose misadventured piteous overthrows doth with their death bury their parents' strife. the fearful passage of their death-marked love which, but their children's end, naught could remove, is now the two hours' traffic of our stage, the which, if you with patient ears attend, what here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
know'st thou fluellen?
trow you who hath done this?
gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.
yes.
is it a man?
no, for then we should be colliers.
upon saint davy's day.
and a chain, that you once wore, about his neck. change you color?
i mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
do not you wear your dagger in your cap that day, lest he knock that about yours.
i prithee, who?
ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
art thou his friend?
o lord, lord, it is a hard matter for friends to meet, but mountains may be removed with earthquakes and so encounter.
i strike quickly, being moved.
and his kinsman too.
nay, but who is it?
but thou art not quickly moved to strike.
the figo for thee then!
is it possible?
a dog of the house of montague moves me.
i thank you. god be with you.
nay, i prithee now, with most petitionary vehemence, tell me who it is.
to move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand. therefore if thou art moved thou runn'st away.
my name is pistol called.
o wonderful, wonderful, and most wonderful wonderful, and yet again wonderful, and after that, out of all whooping!
a dog of that house shall move me to stand. i will take the wall of any man or maid of montague's.
it sorts well with your fierceness.
good my complexion, dost thou think though i am caparisoned like a man, i have a doublet and hose in my disposition? one inch of delay more is a south sea of discovery. i prithee, tell me who is it quickly, and speak apace. i would thou couldst stammer, that thou might'st pour this concealed man out of thy mouth as wine comes out of a narrow-mouthed bottle, either too much at once, or none at all. i prithee take the cork out of thy mouth, that i may drink thy tidings.
that shows thee a weak slave, for the weakest goes to the wall.
captain fluellen.
so you may put a man in your belly.
'tis true, and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are ever thrust to the wall. therefore i will push montague's men from the wall, and thrust his maids to the wall.
so. in the name of jesu christ, speak fewer. it is the greatest admiration in the universal world when the true and aunchient prerogatifes and laws of the wars is not kept. if you would take the pains but to examine the wars of pompey the great, you shall find, i warrant you, that there is no tiddle toddle nor pibble babble in pompey's camp. i warrant you, you shall find the ceremonies of the wars and the cares of it and the forms of it and the sobriety of it and the modesty of it to be otherwise.
is he of god's making? what manner of man? is his head worth a hat or his chin worth a beard?
the quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
why, the enemy is loud. you hear him all night.
nay, he hath but a little beard.
'tis all one. i will show myself a tyrant. when i have fought with the men, i will be civil with the maids. i will cut off their heads.
if the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating coxcomb, is it meet, think you, that we should also, look you, be an ass and a fool and a prating coxcomb, in your own conscience, now?
why, god will send more, if the man will be thankful. let me stay the growth of his beard, if thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin.
the heads of the maids?
i will speak lower.
it is young orlando, that tripped up the wrestler's heels and your heart both in an instant.
ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads. take it in what sense thou wilt.
i pray you and beseech you that you will.
nay, but the devil take mocking. speak sad brow and true maid.
they must take it in sense that feel it.
though it appear a little out of fashion, there is much care and valor in this welshman.
i' faith, coz, 'tis he.
me they shall feel while i am able to stand, and 'tis known i am a pretty piece of flesh.
brother john bates, is not that the morning which breaks yonder?
orlando?
'tis well thou art not fish. if thou hadst, thou hadst been poor-john.
i think it be, but we have no great cause to desire the approach of day.
orlando.
draw thy tool! here comes of the house of montagues.
we see yonder the beginning of the day, but i think we shall never see the end of it., who goes there?
alas the day, what shall i do with my doublet and hose? what did he when thou saw'st him? what said he? how looked he? wherein went he? what makes him here? did he ask for me? where remains he? how parted he with thee? and when shalt thou see him again? answer me in one word.
my naked weapon is out. quarrel! i will back thee.
a friend.
you must borrow me gargantua's mouth first. 'tis a word too great for any mouth of this age's size. to say ay and no to these particulars is more than to answer in a catechism.
how? turn thy back and run?
under what captain serve you?
but doth he know that i am in this forest and in man's apparel? looks he as freshly as he did the day he wrestled?
fear me not.
under sir thomas erpingham.
it is as easy to count atomies as to resolve the propositions of a lover. but take a taste of my finding him, and relish it with good observance. i found him under a tree like a dropped acorn.
no, marry. i fear thee.
a good old commander and a most kind gentleman. i pray you, what thinks he of our estate?
it may well be called jove's tree when it drops forth such fruit.
let us take the law of our sides. let them begin.
even as men wracked upon a sand, that look to be washed off the next tide.
give me audience, good madam.
i will frown as i pass by, and let them take it as they list.
he hath not told his thought to the king?
proceed.
nay, as they dare. i will bite my thumb at them, which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it. (bites his thumb)
no. nor it is not meet he should, for, though i speak it to you, i think the king is but a man as i am. the violet smells to him as it doth to me. the element shows to him as it doth to me. all his senses have but human conditions. his ceremonies laid by, in his nakedness he appears but a man, and though his affections are higher mounted than ours, yet when they stoop, they stoop with the like wing. therefore, when he sees reason of fears as we do, his fears, out of doubt, be of the same relish as ours are. yet, in reason, no man should possess him with any appearance of fear, lest he, by showing it, should dishearten his army.
there lay he, stretched along like a wounded knight.
do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
he may show what outward courage he will, but i believe, as cold a night as 'tis, he could wish himself in thames up to the neck; and so i would he were, and i by him, at all adventures, so we were quit here.
though it be pity to see such a sight, it well becomes the ground.
i do bite my thumb, sir.
by my troth, i will speak my conscience of the king. i think he would not wish himself anywhere but where he is.
cry "holla" to thy tongue, i prithee. it curvets unseasonably. he was furnished like a hunter.
do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
then i would he were here alone; so should he be sure to be ransomed, and a many poor men's lives saved.
oh, ominous! he comes to kill my heart.
is the law of our side if i say "ay"?
i dare say you love him not so ill to wish him here alone, howsoever you speak this to feel other men's minds. methinks i could not die anywhere so contented as in the king's company, his cause being just and his quarrel honorable.
i would sing my song without a burden. thou bring'st me out of tune.
(aside to sampson) no.
that's more than we know.
do you not know i am a woman? when i think, i must speak. sweet, say on.
no, sir. i do not bite my thumb at you, sir, but i bite my thumb, sir.
ay, or more than we should seek after, for we know enough if we know we are the king's subjects. if his cause be wrong, our obedience to the king wipes the crime of it out of us.
you bring me out. soft, comes he not here?
do you quarrel, sir?
but if the cause be not good, the king himself hath a heavy reckoning to make, when all those legs and arms and heads, chopped off in a battle, shall join together at the latter day, and cry all, "we died at such a place," some swearing, some crying for a surgeon, some upon their wives left poor behind them, some upon the debts they owe, some upon their children rawly left. i am afeard there are few die well that die in a battle, for how can they charitably dispose of anything, when blood is their argument? now, if these men do not die well, it will be a black matter for the king that led them to it, who to disobey were against all proportion of subjection.
'tis he. slink by, and note him.
quarrel, sir? no, sir.
so, if a son that is by his father sent about merchandise do sinfully miscarry upon the sea, the imputation of his wickedness, by your rule, should be imposed upon his father that sent him. or if a servant, under his master's command transporting a sum of money, be assailed by robbers and die in many irreconciled iniquities, you may call the business of the master the author of the servant's damnation. but this is not so. the king is not bound to answer the particular endings of his soldiers, the father of his son, nor the master of his servant, for they purpose not their death, when they purpose their services. besides, there is no king, be his cause never so spotless, if it come to the arbitrament of swords, can try it out with all unspotted soldiers. some, peradventure, have on them the guilt of premeditated and contrived murder; some, of beguiling virgins with the broken seals of perjury; some, making the wars their bulwark, that have before gored the gentle bosom of peace with pillage and robbery. now, if these men have defeated the law and outrun native punishment, though they can outstrip men, they have no wings to fly from god. war is his beadle, war is his vengeance, so that here men are punished for before-breach of the king's laws in now the king's quarrel. where they feared the death, they have borne life away; and where they would be safe, they perish. then, if they die unprovided, no more is the king guilty of their damnation than he was before guilty of those impieties for the which they are now visited. every subject's duty is the king's, but every subject's soul is his own. therefore should every soldier in the wars do as every sick man in his bed: wash every mote out of his conscience. and, dying so, death is to him advantage; or not dying, the time was blessedly lost wherein such preparation was gained. and in him that escapes, it were not sin to think that, making god so free an offer, he let him outlive that day to see his greatness and to teach others how they should prepare.
i thank you for your company, but, good faith, i had as lief have been myself alone.
but if you do, sir, i am for you. i serve as good a man as you.
'tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon his own head. the king is not to answer it.
and so had i, but yet, for fashion sake, i thank you too for your society.
no better.
i do not desire he should answer for me, and yet i determine to fight lustily for him.
god be wi' you. let's meet as little as we can.
well, sir.
i myself heard the king say he would not be ransomed.
i do desire we may be better strangers.
(aside to sampson) say "better." here comes one of my master's kinsmen.
ay, he said so, to make us fight cheerfully, but when our throats are cut, he may be ransomed, and we ne'er the wiser.
i pray you mar no more trees with writing love songs in their barks.
(to abram) yes, better, sir.
if i live to see it, i will never trust his word after.
i pray you mar no more of my verses with reading them ill- favoredly.
you lie.
you pay him then. that's a perilous shot out of an elder gun, that a poor and private displeasure can do against a monarch. you may as well go about to turn the sun to ice with fanning in his face with a peacock's feather. you'll "never trust his word after." come, 'tis a foolish saying.
rosalind is your love's name?
draw, if you be men., gregory, remember thy washing blow.
your reproof is something too round. i should be angry with you if the time were convenient.
yes, just.
(draws his sword) part, fools!
let it be a quarrel between us, if you live.
i do not like her name.
what, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds? turn thee, benvolio. look upon thy death.
i embrace it.
there was no thought of pleasing you when she was christened.
i do but keep the peace. put up thy sword, or manage it to part these men with me.
how shall i know thee again?
what stature is she of?
as i hate hell, all montagues, and thee. have at thee, coward!
give me any gage of thine, and i will wear it in my bonnet. then, if ever thou dar'st acknowledge it, i will make it my quarrel.
just as high as my heart.
clubs, bills, and partisans! strike! beat them down! down with the capulets! down with the montagues!
here's my glove. give me another of thine.
you are full of pretty answers. have you not been acquainted with goldsmiths' wives and conned them out of rings?
what noise is this? give me my long sword, ho!
there.
not so. but i answer you right painted cloth, from whence you have studied your questions.
a crutch, a crutch! why call you for a sword?
this will i also wear in my cap. if ever thou come to me and say, after tomorrow, "this is my glove," by this hand i will take thee a box on the ear.
you have a nimble wit. i think 'twas made of atalanta's heels. will you sit down with me? and we two will rail against our mistress the world and all our misery.
my sword, i say! old montague is come, and flourishes his blade in spite of me.
if ever i live to see it, i will challenge it.
i will chide no breather in the world but myself, against whom i know most faults.
thou villain capulet! hold me not. let me go.
thou dar'st as well be hanged.
the worst fault you have is to be in love.
thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
well, i will do it, though i take thee in the king's company.
'tis a fault i will not change for your best virtue. i am weary of you.
rebellious subjects, enemies to peace, profaners of this neighbor-stainèd steel!, will they not hear?, what, ho! you men, you beasts, that quench the fire of your pernicious rage on pain of torture, from those bloody hands throw your mistempered weapons to the ground, and hear the sentence of your movèd prince. three civil brawls, bred of an airy word, have thrice disturbed the quiet of our streets and made verona's ancient citizens cast by their grave-beseeming ornaments, to wield old partisans in hands as old, if ever you disturb our streets again, your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace. for this time, all the rest depart away. you, capulet, shall go along with me, to know our farther pleasure in this case, to old free-town, our common judgment-place. once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
keep thy word. fare thee well.
by my troth, i was seeking for a fool when i found you.
who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
be friends, you english fools, be friends. we have french quarrels enough, if you could tell how to reckon.
he is drowned in the brook. look but in, and you shall see him.
here were the servants of your adversary, and yours, close fighting ere i did approach. i drew to part them. in the instant came the fiery tybalt, with his sword prepared, he swung about his head and cut the winds, who, nothing hurt withal, hissed him in scorn. while we were interchanging thrusts and blows, came more and more and fought on part and part,
indeed, the french may lay twenty french crowns to one they will beat us, for they bear them on their shoulders. but it is no english treason to cut french crowns, and tomorrow the king himself will be a clipper.
there i shall see mine own figure.
oh, where is romeo? saw you him today? right glad i am he was not at this fray.
we must bear all. o hard condition, twin-born with greatness, subject to the breath of every fool, whose sense no more can feel must kings neglect that private men enjoy? and what have kings that privates have not too, save ceremony, save general ceremony? and what art thou, thou idol ceremony? of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers? what are thy rents? what are thy comings in? o ceremony, show me but thy worth! what is thy soul of adoration? creating awe and fear in other men, wherein thou art less happy, being feared, than they in fearing? what drink'st thou oft, instead of homage sweet, and bid thy ceremony give thee cure! think'st thou the fiery fever will go out with titles blown from adulation? will it give place to flexure and low bending? command the health of it? no, thou proud dream, that play'st so subtly with a king's repose. i am a king that find thee, and i know 'tis not the balm, the scepter, and the ball, the intertissued robe of gold and pearl, the farcèd title running 'fore the king, the throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp
which i take to be either a fool or a cipher.
madam, an hour before the worshipped sun peered forth the golden window of the east, where, underneath the grove of sycamore that westward rooteth from this city side, so early walking did i see your son. towards him i made, but he was 'ware of me i, measuring his affections by my own, which then most sought where most might not be found, being one too many by my weary self, pursued my humor not pursuing his,
that beats upon the high shore of this world. not all these, laid in bed majestical, can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave, who, with a body filled and vacant mind, gets him to rest, crammed with distressful bread; but, like a lackey, from the rise to set sweats in the eye of phoebus, and all night sleeps in elysium; next day after dawn, doth rise and help hyperion to his horse, with profitable labor to his grave. and, but for ceremony, such a wretch, winding up days with toil and nights with sleep, had the forehand and vantage of a king. enjoys it, but in gross brain little wots what watch the king keeps to maintain the peace, whose hours the peasant best advantages.
i'll tarry no longer with you. farewell, good signior love.
many a morning hath he there been seen, with tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew, adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs. but all so soon as the all-cheering sun the shady curtains from aurora's bed, away from light steals home my heavy son,
my lord, your nobles, jealous of your absence,
i am glad of your departure. adieu, good monsieur melancholy.
and private in his chamber pens himself, shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight out, black and portentous must this humor prove unless good counsel may the cause remove.
good old knight, collect them all together at my tent. i'll be before thee.
(aside to celia) i will speak to him like a saucy lackey, and under that habit play the knave with him., do you hear, forester?
my noble uncle, do you know the cause?
i shall do't, my lord.
very well. what would you?
i neither know it nor can learn of him.
possess them not with fear. take from them now the sense of reck'ning ere th' opposèd numbers pluck their hearts from them. not today, o lord, oh, not today, think not upon the fault i richard's body have interrèd anew, and on it have bestowed more contrite tears than from it issued forcèd drops of blood. five hundred poor i have in yearly pay, toward heaven to pardon blood. and i have built two chantries where the sad and solemn priests sing still for richard's soul. more will i do, though all that i can do is nothing worth, imploring pardon.
(as ganymede) i pray you, what is 't o'clock?
have you importuned him by any means?
my liege.
you should ask me what time o' day. there's no clock in the forest.
both by myself and many other friends. but he, his own affections' counselor, is to himself, i will not say how true, but to himself so secret and so close, as is the bud bit with an envious worm, ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air, or dedicate his beauty to the same. could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow.
my brother gloucester's voice., ay, i know thy errand. i will go with thee.
then there is no true lover in the forest, else sighing every minute and groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot of time as well as a clock.
see, where he comes. so please you, step aside. i'll know his grievance or be much denied.
the sun doth gild our armor. up, my lords.
and why not the swift foot of time? had not that been as proper?
i would thou wert so happy by thy stay to hear true shrift., come, madam, let's away.
montez à cheval! my horse, varlet! lackey! ha!
by no means, sir. time travels in diverse paces with diverse persons. i'll tell you who time ambles withal, who time trots withal, who time gallops withal, and who he stands still withal.
good morrow, cousin.
o brave spirit!
i prithee, who doth he trot withal?
is the day so young?
via les eaux et la terre.
marry, he trots hard with a young maid between the contract of her marriage and the day it is solemnized. if the interim be but a se'nnight, time's pace is so hard that it seems the length of seven year.
but new struck nine.
rien puis? l'air et feu?
who ambles time withal?
ay me! sad hours seem long. was that my father that went hence so fast?
cieux, cousin orléans.
with a priest that lacks latin and a rich man that hath not the gout, for the one sleeps easily because he cannot study and the other lives merrily because he feels no pain, the one lacking the burden of lean and wasteful learning, the other knowing no burden of heavy tedious penury. these time ambles withal.
it was. what sadness lengthens romeo's hours?
now, my lord constable?
who doth he gallop withal?
not having that which, having, makes them short.
hark how our steeds for present service neigh.
with a thief to the gallows, for though he go as softly as foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there.
in love?
mount them and make incision in their hides, and dout them with superfluous courage. ha!
who stays it still withal?
out.
what, will you have them weep our horses' blood? how shall we then behold their natural tears?
with lawyers in the vacation, for they sleep between term and term, and then they perceive not how time moves.
of love?
the english are embattled, you french peers.
where dwell you, pretty youth?
out of her favor, where i am in love.
do but behold yond poor and starvèd band, and your fair show shall suck away their souls, leaving them but the shales and husks of men. there is not work enough for all our hands, to give each naked curtal axe a stain, that our french gallants shall today draw out and sheathe for lack of sport. let us but blow on them, the vapor of our valor will o'erturn them. that our superfluous lackeys and our peasants, who in unnecessary action swarm about our squares of battle, were enough to purge this field of such a hilding foe, took stand for idle speculation, but that our honors must not. what's to say? a very little little let us do, and all is done. then let the trumpets sound for our approach shall so much dare the field that england shall couch down in fear and yield.
with this shepherdess, my sister, here in the skirts of the forest like fringe upon a petticoat.
alas, that love, so gentle in his view,
why do you stay so long, my lords of france? yond island carrions, desperate of their bones, their ragged curtains poorly are let loose, and our air shakes them passing scornfully. big mars seems bankrupt in their beggared host and faintly through a rusty beaver peeps.
are you native of this place?
alas, that love, whose view is muffled still, should, without eyes, see pathways to his will! where shall we dine?, o me! what fray was here? yet tell me not, for i have heard it all. why then, o brawling love, o loving hate, o anything of nothing first created! o heavy lightness, serious vanity, misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms! still-waking sleep, that is not what it is! this love feel i, that feel no love in this. dost thou not laugh?
with torch staves in their hand, and their poor jades lob down their heads, dropping the hides and hips, the gum down-roping from their pale-dead eyes, and in their pale dull mouths the gemeled bit and their executors, the knavish crows, fly o'er them all, impatient for their hour. description cannot suit itself in words to demonstrate the life of such a battle
as the cony that you see dwell where she is kindled.
no, coz, i rather weep.
they have said their prayers, and they stay for death.
your accent is something finer than you could purchase in so removed a dwelling.
good heart, at what?
shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits, and give their fasting horses provender, and after fight with them?
i have been told so of many. but indeed an old religious uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was in his youth an inland man, one that knew courtship too well, for there he fell in love. i have heard him read many lectures against it, and i thank god i am not a woman, to be touched with so many giddy offenses as he hath generally taxed their whole sex withal.
at thy good heart's oppression.
i will the banner from a trumpet take and use it for my haste. come, come away. the sun is high, and we outwear the day.
can you remember any of the principal evils that he laid to the charge of women?
why, such is love's transgression. griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast, which thou wilt propagate, to have it pressed with more of thine. this love that thou hast shown love is a smoke raised with the fume of sighs; being purged, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes; being vexed, a sea nourished with loving tears. what is it else? a madness most discreet, farewell, my coz.
where is the king?
there were none principal. they were all like one another as half-pence are, every one fault seeming monstrous till his fellow fault came to match it.
soft! i will go along. and if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
the king himself is rode to view their battle.
i prithee, recount some of them.
tut, i have lost myself. i am not here. this is not romeo. he's some other where.
of fighting men they have full threescore thousand.
no, i will not cast away my physic but on those that are sick. there is a man haunts the forest that abuses our young plants with carving "rosalind" on their barks, hangs odes upon hawthorns and elegies on brambles, all, forsooth, deifying the name of rosalind. if i could meet that fancy- monger i would give him some good counsel, for he seems to have the quotidian of love upon him.
tell me in sadness, who is that you love.
there's five to one. besides, they all are fresh.
i am he that is so love-shaked. i pray you tell me your remedy.
what, shall i groan and tell thee?
god be wi' you, princes all. i'll to my charge. if we no more meet till we meet in heaven, then joyfully, my noble lord of bedford, my dear lord gloucester, and my good lord exeter,
there is none of my uncle's marks upon you. he taught me how to know a man in love, in which cage of rushes i am sure you are not prisoner.
groan! why, no. but sadly, tell me who.
farewell, good salisbury, and good luck go with thee.
what were his marks?
a sick man in sadness makes his will, a word ill urged to one that is so ill.
farewell, kind lord. fight valiantly today. and yet i do thee wrong to mind thee of it, for thou art framed of the firm truth of valor.
a lean cheek, which you have not; a blue eye and sunken, which you have not; an unquestionable spirit, which you have not; a beard neglected, which you have not, but i pardon you for that, for simply your having in beard is a younger brother's revenue. then your hose should be ungartered, your bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbuttoned, your shoe untied, and everything about you demonstrating a careless desolation. but you are no such man. you are rather point-device in your accouterments, as loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other.
i aimed so near when i supposed you loved.
princely in both.
fair youth, i would i could make thee believe i love.
a right good markman! and she's fair i love.
oh, that we now had here but one ten thousand of those men in england that do no work today.
me believe it? you may as soon make her that you love believe it, which i warrant she is apter to do than to confess she does. that is one of the points in the which women still give the lie to their consciences. but, in good sooth, are you he that hangs the verses on the trees wherein rosalind is so admired?
a right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
my cousin westmoreland? no, my fair cousin. if we are marked to die, we are enough to do our country loss; and if to live, the fewer men, the greater share of honor. by jove, i am not covetous for gold nor care i who doth feed upon my cost; it yearns me not if men my garments wear; such outward things dwell not in my desires. i am the most offending soul alive. no, faith, my coz, wish not a man from england. god's peace, i would not lose so great an honor as one man more, methinks, would share from me, rather proclaim it, westmoreland, through my host, that he which hath no stomach to this fight, let him depart. his passport shall be made, and crowns for convoy put into his purse. that fears his fellowship to die with us. this day is called the feast of crispian. he that outlives this day and comes safe home, will stand o' tiptoe when the day is named he that shall see this day, and live old age, will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbors and say, "tomorrow is saint crispian." then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars,
i swear to thee, youth, by the white hand of rosalind, i am that he, that unfortunate he.
well, in that hit you miss. she'll not be hit and, in strong proof of chastity well armed from love's weak childish bow, she lives uncharmed. she will not stay the siege of loving terms, nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes, oh, she is rich in beauty, only poor that when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
old men forget; yet all shall be forgot but he'll remember with advantages what feats he did that day. then shall our names, familiar in his mouth as household words, warwick and talbot, salisbury and gloucester, be in their flowing cups freshly remembered. this story shall the good man teach his son, and crispin crispian shall ne'er go by, but we in it shall be rememberèd, we few, we happy few, we band of brothers; for he today that sheds his blood with me shall be my brother; be he ne'er so vile, and gentlemen in england now abed shall think themselves accursed they were not here, and hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks that fought with us upon saint crispin's day.
but are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?
then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
the french are bravely in their battles set, and will with all expedience charge on us.
neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.
she hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste, cuts beauty off from all posterity. she is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair, to merit bliss by making me despair. she hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
all things are ready if our minds be so.
love is merely a madness and, i tell you, deserves as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do, and the reason why they are not so punished and cured is that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers are in love, too. yet i profess curing it by counsel.
be ruled by me. forget to think of her.
perish the man whose mind is backward now!
did you ever cure any so?
o, teach me how i should forget to think!
thou dost not wish more help from england, coz?
yes, one, and in this manner. he was to imagine me his love, his mistress, and i set him every day to woo me; at which time would i, being but a moonish youth, grieve, be effeminate, changeable, longing and liking, proud, fantastical, apish, shallow, inconstant, full of tears, full of smiles; for every passion something, and for no passion truly anything, as boys and women are, for the most part, cattle of this color; would now like him, now loathe him; then entertain him, then forswear him; now weep for him, then spit at him, that i drave my suitor from his mad humor of love to a living humor of madness, which was to forswear the full stream of the world and to live in a nook merely monastic. and thus i cured him, and this way will i take upon me to wash your liver as clean as a sound sheep's heart, that there shall not be one spot of love in 't.
by giving liberty unto thine eyes. examine other beauties.
god's will, my liege, would you and i alone, without more help, could fight this royal battle!
i would not be cured, youth.
'tis the way these happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows, being black, puts us in mind they hide the fair. he that is strucken blind cannot forget the precious treasure of his eyesight lost. what doth her beauty serve but as a note where i may read who passed that passing fair? farewell. thou canst not teach me to forget.
why, now thou hast unwished five thousand men, which likes me better than to wish us one. tucket
i would cure you if you would but call me rosalind and come every day to my cote and woo me.
i'll pay that doctrine or else die in debt.
once more i come to know of thee, king harry, if for thy ransom thou wilt now compound, before thy most assurèd overthrow. thou needs must be englutted. besides, in mercy, the constable desires thee thou wilt mind thy followers of repentance, that their souls may make a peaceful and a sweet retire must lie and fester.
now, by the faith of my love, i will. tell me where it is.
but montague is bound as well as i, in penalty alike. and 'tis not hard, i think, for men so old as we to keep the peace.
who hath sent thee now?
go with me to it, and i'll show it you; and by the way you shall tell me where in the forest you live. will you go?
of honorable reckoning are you both. but now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
the constable of france.
with all my heart, good youth.
but saying o'er what i have said before. my child is yet a stranger in the world. she hath not seen the change of fourteen years. ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
i pray thee, bear my former answer back. good god, why should they mock poor fellows thus? the man that once did sell the lion's skin while the beast lived was killed with hunting him. a many of our bodies shall no doubt shall witness live in brass of this day's work. and those that leave their valiant bones in france, dying like men though buried in your dunghills, they shall be famed; for there the sun shall greet them leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime,
nay, you must call me rosalind., come, sister, will you go?
younger than she are happy mothers made.
the smell whereof shall breed a plague in france. mark, then, abounding valor in our english, that being dead, like to the bullet's crazing, killing in relapse of mortality. let me speak proudly: tell the constable we are but warriors for the working day; our gayness and our gilt are all besmirched there's not a piece of feather in our host, good argument, i hope, we will not fly, and time hath worn us into slovenry. but, by the mass, our hearts are in the trim, they'll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck the gay new coats o'er the french soldiers' heads and turn them out of service. if they do this, as, if god please, they shall, my ransom then come thou no more for ransom, gentle herald. they shall have none, i swear, but these my joints, which, if they have, as i will leave 'em them, shall yield them little. tell the constable.
come apace, good audrey. i will fetch up your goats, audrey. and how, audrey? am i the man yet? doth my simple feature content you?
and too soon marred are those so early made. earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she. but woo her, gentle paris, get her heart. my will to her consent is but a part. an she agreed within her scope of choice, lies my consent and fair according voice. whereto i have invited many a guest such as i love. and you among the store, one more, most welcome, makes my number more. at my poor house look to behold this night
thou never shalt hear herald anymore.
your features, lord warrant us! what features?
such comfort as do lusty young men feel when well-appareled april on the heel of limping winter treads. even such delight among fresh fennel buds shall you this night and like her most whose merit most shall be, which on more view of many, mine, being one, may stand in number, though in reckoning none, come, go with me.
i fear thou wilt once more come again for a ransom.
i am here with thee and thy goats, as the most capricious poet, honest ovid, was among the goths.
go, sirrah, trudge about through fair verona. find those persons out whose names are written there, and to them say my house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
my lord, most humbly on my knee i beg the leading of the vaward.
(aside) o knowledge ill-inhabited, worse than jove in a thatched house.
find them out whose names are written here? it is written, that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter with his nets. but i am sent to find those persons whose names are here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath here writ. i must to the learned in good time!
and how thou pleasest, god, dispose the day.
when a man's verses cannot be understood nor a man's good wit seconded with the forward child, understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room. truly, i would the gods had made thee poetical.
one pain is lessened by another's anguish. turn giddy, and be helped by backward turning. one desperate grief cures with another's languish. take thou some new infection to thy eye,
yield, cur.
i do not know what "poetical" is. is it honest in deed and word? is it a true thing?
your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
je pense que vous êtes gentilhomme de bonne qualité.
no, truly, for the truest poetry is the most feigning, and lovers are given to poetry, and what they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign.
for what, i pray thee?
qualtitie calmie custure me. art thou a gentleman? what is thy name? discuss.
do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical?
for your broken shin.
ô seigneur dieu!
i do, truly, for thou swear'st to me thou art honest. now, if thou wert a poet, i might have some hope thou didst feign.
why romeo, art thou mad?
o seigneur dew should be a gentleman. perpend my words, o seigneur dew, and mark: o seigneur dew, thou diest on point of fox, except, o seigneur, thou do give to me egregious ransom.
would you not have me honest?
shut up in prison, kept without my food, whipped and tormented and, good e'en, good fellow.
ô, prenez miséricorde! ayez pitié de moi!
no, truly, unless thou wert hard-favored, for honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar.
god 'i' good e'en. i pray, sir, can you read?
moy shall not serve. i will have forty moys, or i will fetch thy rim out at thy throat in drops of crimson blood.
(aside) a material fool.
ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
est-il impossible d'échapper la force de ton bras?
well, i am not fair, and therefore i pray the gods make me honest.
perhaps you have learned it without book. but i pray, can you read anything you see?
brass, cur? thou damned and luxurious mountain goat, offer'st me brass?
truly, and to cast away honesty upon a foul slut were to put good meat into an unclean dish.
ay, if i know the letters and the language.
ô, pardonnez-moi!
i am not a slut, though i thank the gods i am foul.
ye say honestly. rest you merry.
say'st thou me so? is that a ton of moys?, come hither, boy. ask me this slave in french what is his name.
well, praised be the gods for thy foulness; sluttishness may come hereafter. but be it as it may be, i will marry thee; and to that end i have been with sir oliver martext, the vicar of the next village, who hath promised to meet me in this place of the forest and to couple us.
stay, fellow. i can read. (he reads the letter) county anselme and his beauteous sisters; the lady widow of vitruvio; seigneur placentio and his lovely nieces; mercutio and his brother valentine; my fair niece rosaline and livia;
écoutez. comment êtes-vous appelé?
(aside) i would fain see this meeting.
seigneur valentio and his cousin tybalt; lucio and the lively helena." a fair assembly. whither should they come?
monsieur le fer.
well, the gods give us joy.
up.
he says his name is master fer.
amen. a man may, if he were of a fearful heart, stagger in this attempt, for here we have no temple but the wood, no assembly but horn-beasts. but what though? courage. as horns are odious, they are necessary. it is said, "many a man knows no end of his goods." right: many a man has good horns and knows no end of them.
whither? to supper?
master fer. i'll fer him, and firk him, and ferret him. discuss the same in french unto him.
well, that is the dowry of his wife; 'tis none of his own getting. horns? even so. poor men alone? no, no. the noblest deer hath them as huge as the rascal. is the single man therefore blessed? no. as a walled town is more worthier than a village, so is the forehead of a married man more honorable than the bare brow of a bachelor. and by how much defense is better than no skill, by so much is a horn more precious than to want.
to our house.
i do not know the french for "fer," and "ferret," and "firk."
here comes sir oliver., sir oliver martext, you are well met. will you dispatch us here under this tree, or shall we go with you to your chapel?
whose house?
bid him prepare, for i will cut his throat.
is there none here to give the woman?
my master's.
(to the boy) que dit-il, monsieur?
i will not take her on gift of any man.
indeed, i should have asked thee that before.
il me commande à vous dire que vous faites vous prêt, car ce soldat ici est disposé tout à cette heure de couper votre gorge.
truly, she must be given, or the marriage is not lawful.
now i'll tell you without asking. my master is the great rich capulet, and if you be not of the house of montagues, i pray come and crush a cup of wine. rest you merry!
owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy, peasant, unless thou give me crowns, brave crowns, or mangled shalt thou be by this my sword.
(advancing) proceed, proceed. i'll give her.
at this same ancient feast of capulet's with all the admired beauties of verona. go thither, and with unattainted eye compare her face with some that i shall show, and i will make thee think thy swan a crow.
ô, je vous supplie, pour l'amour de dieu, me pardoner. je suis gentilhomme de bonne maison. gardez ma vie, et je vous donnerai deux cents écus
good even, good monsieur what-ye-call't. how do you, sir? you are very well met. god 'ild you for your last company. i am very glad to see you. even a toy in hand here, sir. nay, pray be covered.
maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires, and these, who, often drowned, could never die, transparent heretics, be burnt for liars! one fairer than my love? the all-seeing sun
what are his words?
will you be married, motley?
tut, you saw her fair, none else being by, herself poised with herself in either eye. but in that crystal scales let there be weighed your lady's love against some other maid and she shall scant show well that now shows best.
he prays you to save his life. he is a gentleman of a good house, and for his ransom he will give you two hundred crowns.
as the ox hath his bow, sir, the horse his curb, and the falcon her bells, so man hath his desires; and as pigeons bill, so wedlock would be nibbling.
i'll go along, no such sight to be shown, but to rejoice in splendor of mine own.
tell him my fury shall abate, and i the crowns will take.
and will you, being a man of your breeding, be married under a bush like a beggar? get you to church, and have a good priest that can tell you what marriage is. this fellow will but join you together as they join wainscot. then one of you will prove a shrunk panel and, like green timber, warp, warp.
nurse, where's my daughter? call her forth to me.
petit monsieur, que dit-il?
(aside) i am not in the mind but i were better to be married of him than of another, for he is not like to marry me well, and not being well married, it will be a good excuse for me hereafter to leave my wife.
now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old i bade her come. what, lamb! what, ladybird! god forbid! where's this girl? what, juliet!
encore qu'il est contre son jurement de pardoner aucun prisonnier; néanmoins, pour les écus que vous lui avez promis, il est content à vous donner la liberté, le franchisement.
go thou with me, and let me counsel thee.
how now, who calls?
sur mes genoux je vous donne mille remercîments, et je m'estime heureux que j'ai tombé entre les mains d'un chevalier, je pense, le plus brave, vaillant, et très distingué seigneur d'angleterre.
come, sweet audrey. we must be married, or we must live in bawdry., farewell, good master oliver, not o sweet oliver, leave me not behind thee but wind away, begone, i say,
your mother.
expound unto me, boy.
'tis no matter. ne'er a fantastical knave of them all shall flout me out of my calling.
madam, i am here. what is your will?
he gives you upon his knees a thousand thanks, and he esteems himself happy that he hath fall'n into the hands of one, as he thinks, the most brave, valorous, and thrice- worthy seigneur of england.
never talk to me. i will weep.
this is the matter., nurse, give leave awhile, we must talk in secret., nurse, come back again. thou know'st my daughter's of a pretty age.
as i suck blood, i will some mercy show. follow me.
do, i prithee, but yet have the grace to consider that tears do not become a man.
faith, i can tell her age unto an hour.
suivez-vous le grand capitaine.
but have i not cause to weep?
she's not fourteen.
i did never know so full a voice issue from so empty a heart. but the saying is true: "the empty vessel makes the greatest sound." bardolph and nym had ten times more valor than this roaring devil i' th' old play, that everyone may pare his nails with a wooden dagger, and they are both hanged, and so would this be if he durst steal any thing adventurously. i must stay with the lackeys with the luggage of our camp. the french might have a good prey of us if he knew of it, for there is none to guard it but boys.
as good cause as one would desire. therefore weep.
i'll lay fourteen of my teeth, and yet, to my teen be it spoken, i have but four, she is not fourteen. how long is it now to lammastide?
ô diable!
his very hair is of the dissembling color.
a fortnight and odd days.
ô seigneur! le jour est perdu, tout est erdu!
something browner than judas's. marry, his kisses are judas's own children.
even or odd, of all days in the year, come lammas eve at night shall she be fourteen. were of an age. well, susan is with god. she was too good for me. but, as i said, on lammas eve at night shall she be fourteen. that shall she. marry, i remember it well. and she was weaned, i never shall forget it, of all the days of the year, upon that day. for i had then laid wormwood to my dug, sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall. nay, i do bear a brain., but, as i said, when it did taste the wormwood on the nipple of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool, to see it tetchy and fall out with the dug! to bid me trudge. and since that time it is eleven years, for then she could stand alone. nay, by the rood, she could have run and waddled all about, and then my husband, god be with his soul! he was a merry man, took up the child. "yea," quoth he, "dost thou fall upon thy face? thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit, the pretty wretch left crying and said "ay." to see now, how a jest shall come about! i warrant, an i should live a thousand years, i never should forget it. "wilt thou not, jule?" quoth he.
mort de ma vie, all is confounded, all! reproach and everlasting shame
i' faith, his hair is of a good color.
enough of this. i pray thee, hold thy peace.
ô méchante fortune! do not run away.
an excellent color. your chestnut was ever the only color.
yes, madam. yet i cannot choose but laugh to think it should leave crying and say "ay." and yet, i warrant, it had upon its brow a perilous knock, and it cried bitterly. "yea," quoth my husband, "fall'st upon thy face? thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age. wilt thou not, jule?" it stinted and said "ay."
why, all our ranks are broke.
and his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch of holy bread.
and stint thou too, i pray thee, nurse, say i.
o perdurable shame! let's stab ourselves.
he hath bought a pair of cast lips of diana. a nun of winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously. the very ice of chastity is in them.
peace, i have done. god mark thee to his grace! thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er i nursed. an i might live to see thee married once, i have my wish.
is this the king we sent to for his ransom?
but why did he swear he would come this morning, and comes not?
i came to talk of. tell me, daughter juliet, how stands your disposition to be married?
shame, and eternal shame, nothing but shame! let us die. in once more! back again! and he that will not follow bourbon now, like a base pander hold the chamber door, whilst by a slave, no gentler than my dog, his fairest daughter is contaminate.
nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.
it is an honor that i dream not of.
disorder, that hath spoiled us, friend us now.
do you think so?
an honor! were not i thine only nurse,
we are enough yet living in the field to smother up the english in our throngs, if any order might be thought upon.
yes, i think he is not a pick-purse nor a horse-stealer, but for his verity in love, i do think him as concave as a covered goblet or a worm-eaten nut.
well, think of marriage now. younger than you here in verona, ladies of esteem are made already mothers. by my count, i was your mother much upon these years the valiant paris seeks you for his love.
the devil take order now! i'll to the throng.
not true in love?
a man, young lady! lady, such a man as all the world. why, he's a man of wax.
well have we done, thrice-valiant countrymen, but all's not done. yet keep the french the field.
yes, when he is in, but i think he is not in.
verona's summer hath not such a flower.
the duke of york commends him to your majesty.
you have heard him swear downright he was.
nay, he's a flower. in faith, a very flower.
lives he, good uncle? thrice within this hour from helmet to the spur, all blood he was.
"was" is not "is." besides, the oath of a lover is no stronger than the word of a tapster. they are both the confirmer of false reckonings. he attends here in the forest on the duke your father.
what say you? can you love the gentleman? this night you shall behold him at our feast. read o'er the volume of young paris' face and find delight writ there with beauty's pen. and see how one another lends content, and what obscured in this fair volume lies find written in the margin of his eyes. this precious book of love, this unbound lover, the fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride for fair without the fair within to hide. that book in many's eyes doth share the glory that in gold clasps locks in the golden story. by having him, making yourself no less.
in which array, brave soldier, doth he lie, larding the plain, and by his bloody side, yoke-fellow to his honor-owing wounds, suffolk first died, and york, all haggled over, comes to him where in gore he lay insteeped and takes him by the beard, kisses the gashes that bloodily did yawn upon his face. my soul shall thine keep company to heaven. tarry, sweet soul, for mine; then fly abreast, as in this glorious and well-foughten field we kept together in our chivalry." he smiled me in the face, raught me his hand, and with a feeble grip, says "dear my lord, commend my service to my sovereign." so did he turn, and over suffolk's neck
i met the duke yesterday and had much question with him. he asked me of what parentage i was. i told him, of as good as he. so he laughed and let me go. but what talk we of fathers when there is such a man as orlando?
no less? nay, bigger. women grow by men.
and so, espoused to death, with blood he sealed a testament of noble-ending love. the pretty and sweet manner of it forced those waters from me which i would have stopped, and all my mother came into mine eyes and gave me up to tears.
oh, that's a brave man. he writes brave verses, speaks brave words, swears brave oaths, and breaks them bravely, quite traverse, athwart the heart of his lover, as a puny tilter that spurs his horse but on one side breaks his staff like a noble goose; but all's brave that youth mounts and folly guides.
speak briefly. can you like of paris, love?
i blame you not, for, hearing this, i must perforce compound
who comes here?
i'll look to like if looking liking move. than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
but hark, what new alarum is this same? the french have reinforced their scattered men. then every soldier kill his prisoners. give the word through.
mistress and master, you have oft inquired after the shepherd that complained of love, who you saw sitting by me on the turf, praising the proud disdainful shepherdess
madam, the guests are come, supper served up, you called, my young lady asked for, the nurse cursed in the pantry, and every thing in extremity. i must hence to wait. i beseech you, follow straight.
kill the poys and the luggage! 'tis expressly against the law of arms. 'tis as arrant a piece of knavery, mark you now, as can be offert, in your conscience now, is it not?
(as aliena) well, and what of him?
we follow thee., juliet, the county stays.
'tis certain there's not a boy left alive, and the cowardly rascals that ran from the battle ha' done this slaughter. besides, they have burned and carried away all that was in the king's tent, wherefore the king, most worthily, hath caused every soldier to cut his prisoner's throat. oh, 'tis a gallant king!
if you will see a pageant truly played between the pale complexion of true love and the red glow of scorn and proud disdain, if you will mark it.
go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
ay, he was porn at monmouth, captain gower. what call you the town's name where alexander the pig was born?
(aside to celia) o, come, let us remove. the sight of lovers feedeth those in love. , (as ganymede) bring us to this sight, and you shall say
what, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse? or shall we on without apology?
alexander the great.
sweet phoebe, do not scorn me. do not, phoebe. say that you love me not, but say not so in bitterness. the common executioner, whose heart th' accustomed sight of death makes hard, but first begs pardon. will you sterner be than he that dies and lives by bloody drops?
the date is out of such prolixity. we'll have no cupid hoodwinked with a scarf, scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper, nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke after the prompter for our entrance. but let them measure us by what they will.
why, i pray you, is not "pig" great? the pig, or the great, or the mighty, or the huge, or the magnanimous are all one reckonings, save the phrase is a little variations.
i would not be thy executioner. i fly thee, for i would not injure thee. 'tis pretty, sure, and very probable that eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things, who shut their coward gates on atomies, should be called tyrants, butchers, murderers. and if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill thee. now counterfeit to swoon, why, now fall down; or if thou canst not, oh, for shame, for shame, lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers. scratch thee but with a pin, and there remains some scar of it. lean upon a rush, the cicatrice and capable impressure thy palm some moment keeps. but now mine eyes, nor, i am sure, there is no force in eyes that can do hurt.
give me a torch. i am not for this ambling. being but heavy, i will bear the light.
i think alexander the great was born in macedon. his father was called philip of macedon, as i take it.
o dear phoebe, if ever, as that ever may be near, then shall you know the wounds invisible that love's keen arrows make.
nay, gentle romeo, we must have you dance.
i think it is in macedon where alexander is porn. i tell you, captain, if you look in the maps of the 'orld, i warrant you shall find, in the comparisons between macedon and monmouth, that the situations, look you, is both alike.
but till that time come not thou near me. and when that time comes, as till that time i shall not pity thee.
not i, believe me. you have dancing shoes so stakes me to the ground i cannot move.
there is a river in macedon, and there is also, moreover, a river at monmouth. it is called wye at monmouth, but it is out of my prains what is the name of the other river. but 'tis all one; 'tis alike as my fingers is to my fingers, and there is salmons in both. if you mark alexander's life well, harry of monmouth's life is come after it indifferent well, for there is figures in all things. alexander, god knows and you know, in his rages and his furies and his wraths and his cholers and his moods and his displeasures and his indignations, and also being a little intoxicates in his prains, did, in his ales and his angers, look you, kill his best friend, cleitus.
(advancing, as ganymede) and why, i pray you? who might be your mother, that you insult, exult, and all at once, as, by my faith, i see no more in you than without candle may go dark to bed, must you be therefore proud and pitiless? why, what means this? why do you look on me? of nature's sale-work., 'od's my little life, i think she means to tangle my eyes, too. , no, faith, proud mistress, hope not after it. 'tis not your inky brows, your black silk hair, that can entame my spirits to your worship. , you foolish shepherd, wherefore do you follow her, like foggy south puffing with wind and rain? you are a thousand times a properer man that makes the world full of ill-favored children. 'tis not her glass but you that flatters her, and out of you she sees herself more proper than any of her lineaments can show her. and thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love, for i must tell you friendly in your ear, sell when you can; you are not for all markets. cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer. , so take her to thee, shepherd. fare you well.
you are a lover. borrow cupid's wings and soar with them above a common bound.
our king is not like him in that. he never killed any of his friends.
, but, mistress, know yourself. down on your knees and thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love, for i must tell you friendly in your ear, cry the man mercy, love him, take his offer. foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer. , so take her to thee, shepherd. fare you well.
i am too sore enpiercèd with his shaft i cannot bound a pitch above dull woe. under love's heavy burden do i sink.
it is not well done, mark you now, to take the tales out of my mouth ere it is made and finished. i speak but in the figures and comparisons of it. as alexander killed his friend cleitus, being in his ales and his cups, so also harry monmouth, being in his right wits and his good judgments, turned away the fat knight with the great-belly doublet; he was full of jests, and gipes and knaveries, and mocks, i have forgot his name.
sweet youth, i pray you chide a year together.
and to sink in it, should you burthen love, too great oppression for a tender thing.
sir john falstaff.
he's fall'n in love with your foulness. (to silvius ) and she'll fall in love with my anger. if it be so, as fast as she answers thee with frowning looks, i'll sauce her with bitter words. (to phoebe ) why look you so upon me?
too rude, too boisterous, and it pricks like thorn.
monmouth.
for no ill will i bear you.
if love be rough with you, be rough with love. prick love for pricking, and you beat love down., give me a case to put my visage in! what curious eye doth cote deformities? here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
here comes his majesty.
i pray you, do not fall in love with me, for i am falser than vows made in wine. besides, i like you not. if you will know my house, 'tis at the tuft of olives, here hard by. , come, sister., shepherdess, look on him better, and be not proud. though all the world could see, none could be so abused in sight as he. , come, to our flock.
come, knock and enter. and no sooner in but every man betake him to his legs.
i was not angry since i came to france until this instant. take a trumpet, herald. if they will fight with us, bid them come down, or void the field. they do offend our sight. if they'll do neither, we will come to them and make them skirr away as swift as stones besides, we'll cut the throats of those we have, and not a man of them that we shall take shall taste our mercy. go and tell them so.
"who ever loved that loved not at first sight?"
tickle the senseless rushes with their heels. for i am proverbed with a grandsire phrase, i'll be a candle holder, and look on. the game was ne'er so fair, and i am done.
here comes the herald of the french, my liege.
sweet phoebe, 
if thou art dun, we'll draw thee from the mire, or, save your reverence, love, wherein thou stick'st up to the ears. come, we burn daylight, ho!
his eyes are humbler than they used to be.
ha, what sayst thou, silvius?
nay, that's not so.
how now, what means this, herald? know'st thou not that i have fined these bones of mine for ransom? com'st thou again for ransom?
sweet phoebe, pity me.
i mean, sir, in delay. take our good meaning, for our judgment sits five times in that ere once in our fine wits.
no, great king. that we may wander o'er this bloody field to book our dead and then to bury them; to sort our nobles from our common men, for many of our princes, woe the while!, so do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs in blood of princes, and the wounded steeds fret fetlock deep in gore, and with wild rage yerk out their armèd heels at their dead masters, to view the field in safety and dispose of their dead bodies.
why, i am sorry for thee, gentle silvius.
and we mean well in going to this mask, but 'tis no wit to go.
i tell thee truly, herald, i know not if the day be ours or no, and gallop o'er the field.
wherever sorrow is, relief would be. if you do sorrow at my grief in love, by giving love your sorrow and my grief were both extermined.
why, may one ask?
the day is yours.
thou hast my love. is not that neighborly?
i dreamt a dream tonight.
praised be god, and not our strength, for it! what is this castle called that stands hard by?
i would have you.
and so did i.
they call it agincourt.
why, that were covetousness. silvius, the time was that i hated thee, and yet it is not that i bear thee love, thy company, which erst was irksome to me, i will endure, and i'll employ thee too. but do not look for further recompense than thine own gladness that thou art employed.
well, what was yours?
then call we this the field of agincourt, fought on the day of crispin crispianus.
and i in such a poverty of grace, that i shall think it a most plenteous crop to glean the broken ears after the man that the main harvest reaps. loose now and then
that dreamers often lie.
your grandfather of famous memory, an't please your majesty, and your great-uncle edward the plack prince of wales, as i have read in the chronicles, fought a most prave pattle here in france.
know'st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhile?
in bed asleep while they do dream things true.
they did, fluellen.
not very well, but i have met him oft, and he hath bought the cottage and the bounds that the old carlot once was master of.
oh, then, i see queen mab hath been with you.
your majesty says very true. if your majesties is remembered of it, the welshmen did good service in a garden where leeks did grow, wearing leeks in their monmouth caps, which, your majesty know, to this hour is an honorable badge of the service. and i do believe your majesty takes no scorn to wear the leek upon saint tavy's day.
'tis but a peevish boy, yet he talks well, but what care i for words? yet words do well when he that speaks them pleases those that hear. it is a pretty youth, not very pretty, he'll make a proper man. the best thing in him is his complexion; and faster than his tongue did make offense, his eye did heal it up. he is not very tall, yet for his years he's tall. there was a pretty redness in his lip, a little riper and more lusty red than that mixed in his cheek: 'twas just the difference betwixt the constant red and mingled damask. in parcels as i did, would have gone near to fall in love with him; but for my part i love him not nor hate him not; and yet i have more cause to hate him than to love him. he said mine eyes were black and my hair black and, now i am remembered, scorned at me. i marvel why i answered not again. but that's all one: omittance is no quittance. and thou shalt bear it. wilt thou, silvius?
queen mab, what's she
for i am welsh, you know, good countryman.
phoebe, with all my heart.
in shape no bigger than an agate stone on the forefinger of an alderman, drawn with a team of little atomi over men's noses as they lie asleep. the cover of the wings of grasshoppers, her traces of the smallest spider's web, her collars of the moonshine's watery beams, her whip of cricket's bone, the lash of film, not half so big as a round little worm pricked from the lazy finger of a maid.
all the water in wye cannot wash your majesty's welsh plood out of your pody, i can tell you that: god pless it and preserve it as long as it pleases his grace and his majesty too.
i'll write it straight. the matter's in my head and in my heart. go with me, silvius.
her chariot is an empty hazelnut made by the joiner squirrel or old grub, and in this state she gallops night by night through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love; on courtiers' knees, that dream on curtsies straight; o'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees; which oft the angry mab with blisters plagues, because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are. sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose, and then dreams he of smelling out a suit. tickling a parson's nose as he lies asleep, then he dreams of another benefice. sometime she driveth o'er a soldier's neck, and then dreams he of cutting foreign throats, of healths five fathom deep, and then anon drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes, and being thus frighted swears a prayer or two and sleeps again. this is that very mab and bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish hairs, which once untangled, much misfortune bodes. this is the hag, when maids lie on their backs, that presses them and learns them first to bear, this is she, 
thanks, good my countryman.
i prithee, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted with thee.
peace, peace, mercutio, peace! thou talk'st of nothing.
by jeshu, i am your majesty's countryman, i care not who know it. i will confess it to all the 'orld. i need not to be ashamed of your majesty, praised be god, so long as your majesty is an honest man.
they say you are a melancholy fellow.
true, i talk of dreams, which are the children of an idle brain, begot of nothing but vain fantasy, and more inconstant than the wind, who woos even now the frozen bosom of the north, and, being angered, puffs away from thence, turning his face to the dew-dropping south.
god keep me so., our heralds go with him. bring me just notice of the numbers dead on both our parts. (points to williams) call yonder fellow hither.
i am so. i do love it better than laughing.
supper is done, and we shall come too late.
soldier, you must come to the king.
those that are in extremity of either are abominable fellows and betray themselves to every modern censure worse than drunkards.
i fear too early, for my mind misgives some consequence yet hanging in the stars shall bitterly begin his fearful date of a despisèd life closed in my breast by some vile forfeit of untimely death. but he that hath the steerage of my course, direct my sail. on, lusty gentlemen.
soldier, why wear'st thou that glove in thy cap?
why, 'tis good to be sad and say nothing.
strike, drum.
an't please your majesty, 'tis the gage of one that i should fight withal, if he be alive.
why then, 'tis good to be a post.
where's potpan, that he helps not to take away? he shift a trencher? he scrape a trencher!
an englishman?
i have neither the scholar's melancholy, which is emulation; nor the musician's, which is fantastical; nor the courtier's, which is proud; nor the soldier's, which is ambitious; nor the lawyer's, which is politic; nor the lady's, which is nice; nor the lover's, which is all these, but it is a melancholy of mine own, compounded of many simples, extracted from many objects, and indeed the sundry contemplation of my travels, in which my often rumination wraps me in a most humorous sadness.
when good manners shall lie all in one or two men's hands, and they unwashed too, 'tis a foul thing.
an 't please your majesty, a rascal that swaggered with me last night, who, if alive and ever dare to challenge this glove, i have sworn to take him a box o' th' ear, or if i can see my glove in his cap, which he swore, as he was a soldier, he would wear if alive, i will strike it out soundly.
a traveler. by my faith, you have great reason to be sad. i fear you have sold your own lands to see other men's. then to have seen much and to have nothing is to have rich eyes and poor hands.
away with the joint-stools, remove the court-cupboard, look to the plate. good thou, save me a piece of marchpane, and, as thou loves me, let the porter let in susan grindstone and nell., antony and potpan!
what think you, captain fluellen, is it fit this soldier keep his oath?
yes, i have gained my experience.
ay, boy, ready.
he is a craven and a villain else, an 't please your majesty, in my conscience.
and your experience makes you sad. i had rather have a fool to make me merry than experience to make me sad, and to travel for it, too.
you are looked for and called for, asked for and sought for, in the great chamber.
it may be his enemy is a gentleman of great sort, quite from the answer of his degree.
good day and happiness, dear rosalind.
we cannot be here and there too. cheerly, boys. be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.
though he be as good a gentleman as the devil is, as lucifer and beelzebub himself, it is necessary, look your grace, that he keep his vow and his oath. if he be perjured, see you now, his reputation is as arrant a villain and a jack sauce as ever his black shoe trod upon god's ground and his earth, in my conscience, la.
nay then, god be wi' you, an you talk in blank verse.
welcome, gentlemen! ladies that have their toes unplagued with corns will walk a bout with you., will now deny to dance? she that makes dainty, she, i'll swear, hath corns. am i come near ye now?, welcome, gentlemen! i have seen the day a whispering tale in a fair lady's ear such as would please. 'tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone., you are welcome, gentlemen., come, musicians, play. (music plays and they dance) more light, you knaves! and turn the tables up, and quench the fire. the room is grown too hot., ah, sirrah, this unlooked-for sport comes well., nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin capulet, how long is 't now since last yourself and i were in a mask?
then keep thy vow, sirrah, when thou meet'st the fellow.
farewell, monsieur traveler. look you lisp and wear strange suits, disable all the benefits of your own country, be out of love with your nativity, and almost chide god for making you that countenance you are, or i will scarce think you have swam in a gondola.
by'r lady, thirty years.
so i will, my liege, as i live.
(as ganymede pretending to be rosalind ) why, how now, orlando, where have you been all this while? you a lover? an you serve me such another trick, never come in my sight more.
what, man, 'tis not so much, 'tis not so much. 'tis since the nuptials of lucentio, some five and twenty years, and then we masked.
who serv'st thou under?
my fair rosalind, i come within an hour of my promise.
'tis more, 'tis more. his son is elder, sir. his son is thirty.
under captain gower, my liege.
break an hour's promise in love? he that will divide a minute into a thousand parts and break but a part of the thousand part of a minute in the affairs of love, it may be said of him that cupid hath clapped him o' th' shoulder, but i'll warrant him heart-whole.
will you tell me that? his son was but a ward two years ago.
gower is a good captain, and is good knowledge and literatured in the wars.
pardon me, dear rosalind.
of yonder knight?
call him hither to me, soldier.
nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight. i had as lief be wooed of a snail.
i know not, sir.
i will, my liege.
of a snail?
oh, she doth teach the torches to burn bright! it seems she hangs upon the cheek of night like a rich jewel in an ethiope's ear, so shows a snowy dove trooping with crows as yonder lady o'er her fellows shows. the measure done, i'll watch her place of stand, and, touching hers, make blessèd my rude hand. for i ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
here, fluellen, wear thou this favor for me and stick it in thy cap. (gives williams's glove to fluellen) when alençon and myself were down together, i plucked this glove from his helm. if any man challenge this, he is a friend to alençon and an enemy to our person. if thou encounter any such, apprehend him, an thou dost me love.
ay, of a snail, for though he comes slowly, he carries his house on his head, a better jointure, i think, than you make a woman. besides, he brings his destiny with him.
this, by his voice, should be a montague., (to his page) fetch me my rapier, boy., what, dares the slave to fleer and scorn at our solemnity? now, by the stock and honor of my kin, to strike him dead i hold it not a sin.
your grace does me as great honors as can be desired in the hearts of his subjects. i would fain see the man that has but two legs that shall find himself aggrieved at this glove, that is all; but i would fain see it once, an please god of his grace that i might see.
what's that?
why, how now, kinsman? wherefore storm you so?
know'st thou gower?
why, horns, which such as you are fain to be beholding to your wives for. but he comes armed in his fortune and prevents the slander of his wife.
a villain that is hither come in spite to scorn at our solemnity this night.
he is my dear friend, an please you.
virtue is no hornmaker, and my rosalind is virtuous.
young romeo is it?
pray thee, go seek him, and bring him to my tent.
and i am your rosalind.
'tis he, that villain romeo.
i will fetch him.
(as aliena) it pleases him to call you so, but he hath a rosalind of a better leer than you.
content thee, gentle coz. let him alone. and, to say truth, verona brags of him to be a virtuous and well-governed youth. i would not for the wealth of all the town here in my house do him disparagement. it is my will, the which if thou respect, show a fair presence and put off these frowns, an ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
follow fluellen closely at the heels. the glove which i have given him for a favor may haply purchase him a box o' th' ear. it is the soldier's. i by bargain should
come, woo me, woo me, for now i am in a holiday humor, and like enough to consent. what would you say to me now, an i were your very, very rosalind?
it fits when such a villain is a guest.
if that the soldier strike him, as i judge by his blunt bearing he will keep his word, some sudden mischief may arise of it, for i do know fluellen valiant and quickly will return an injury. follow, and see there be no harm between them. , go you with me, uncle of exeter.
i would kiss before i spoke.
he shall be endured. what, goodman boy! i say, he shall. go to. am i the master here, or you? go to. you'll not endure him! god shall mend my soul, you'll make a mutiny among my guests.
i warrant it is to knight you, captain.
nay, you were better speak first, and when you were graveled for lack of matter, you might take occasion to kiss. very good orators, when they are out, they will spit; and for lovers lacking, god warn us, matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.
why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
god's will and his pleasure, captain, i beseech you now, come apace to the king. there is more good toward you peradventure than is in your knowledge to dream of.
how if the kiss be denied?
go to, go to. you are a saucy boy. is 't so, indeed? this trick may chance to scathe you, i know what. you must contrary me. marry, 'tis time., be quiet, or, more light, more light!, for shame! i'll make you quiet., what, cheerly, my hearts!
sir, know you this glove?
then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.
patience perforce with willful choler meeting makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting. now seeming sweet, convert to bitterest gall.
know the glove! i know the glove is a glove.
who could be out, being before his beloved mistress?
(taking juliet's hand) if i profane with my unworthiest hand this holy shrine, the gentle sin is this: my lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
i know this, and thus i challenge it. (strikes him)
marry, that should you if i were your mistress, or i should think my honesty ranker than my wit.
good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much, which mannerly devotion shows in this, for saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch, and palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
'sblood, an arrant traitor as any 's in the universal world, or in france, or in england!
what, of my suit?
have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
how now, sir? you villain!
not out of your apparel, and yet out of your suit. am not i your rosalind?
ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in prayer.
do you think i'll be forsworn?
i take some joy to say you are because i would be talking of her.
o, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do. they pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
stand away, captain gower. i will give treason his payment into plows, i warrant you.
well, in her person i say i will not have you.
saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
i am no traitor.
then, in mine own person i die.
then move not, while my prayer's effect i take.
that's a lie in thy throat., i charge you in his majesty's name, apprehend him. he's a friend of the duke alençon's.
no, faith, die by attorney. the poor world is almost six thousand years old, and in all this time there was not any man died in his own person, videlicet, in a love cause. troilus had his brains dashed out with a grecian club, yet he did what he could to die before, and he is one of the patterns of love. leander, he would have lived many a fair year though hero had turned nun if it had not been for a hot midsummer night, for, good youth, he went but forth to wash him in the hellespont and, being taken with the cramp, was drowned; and the foolish chroniclers of that age found it was hero of sestos. but these are all lies. men have died from time to time, and worms have eaten them, but not for love.
kisses her
how now, how now, what's the matter?
i would not have my right rosalind of this mind, for i protest her frown might kill me.
thus from my lips, by thine, my sin is purged.
my lord of warwick, here is, praised be god for it, a most contagious treason come to light, look you, as you shall desire in a summer's day.
by this hand, it will not kill a fly. but come; now i will be your rosalind in a more coming-on disposition, and ask me what you will, i will grant it.
then have my lips the sin that they have took.
here is his majesty.
then love me, rosalind.
sin from thy lips? o trespass sweetly urged!
how now, what's the matter?
yes, faith, will i, fridays and saturdays and all.
you kiss by th' book.
my liege, here is a villain and a traitor, that, look your grace, has struck the glove which your majesty is take out of the helmet of alençon.
and wilt thou have me?
madam, your mother craves a word with you.
my liege, this was my glove; here is the fellow of it. and he that i gave it to in change promised to wear it in his cap. i promised to strike him if he did. i met this man with my glove in his cap, and i have been as good as my word.
ay, and twenty such.
what is her mother?
your majesty, hear now, saving your majesty's manhood, what an arrant, rascally, beggarly, lousy knave it is. i hope your majesty is pear me testimony and witness, and will avouchment that this is the glove of alençon that your majesty is give me, in your conscience now.
what sayest thou?
marry, bachelor, her mother is the lady of the house, and a good lady, and a wise and virtuous. i tell you, he that can lay hold of her shall have the chinks.
'twas i indeed thou promised'st to strike, and thou hast given me most bitter terms.
are you not good?
(aside) is she a capulet? o dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
an please your majesty, let his neck answer for it, if there is any martial law in the world.
i hope so.
(to romeo) away, begone. the sport is at the best.
how canst thou make me satisfaction?
why then, can one desire too much of a good thing?, come, sister, you shall be the priest and marry us., give me your hand, orlando., what do you say, sister?
ay, so i fear. the more is my unrest.
all offenses, my lord, come from the heart. never came any from mine that might offend your majesty.
pray thee, marry us.
nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone. we have a trifling foolish banquet towards., is it e'en so? why, then, i thank you all. i thank you, honest gentlemen. good night., ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late. i'll to my rest.
it was ourself thou didst abuse.
i cannot say the words.
come hither, nurse. what is yond gentleman?
your majesty came not like yourself. you appeared to me but as a common man. witness the night, your garments, your lowliness. and what your highness suffered under that shape, i beseech you take it for your own fault and not mine, for, had you been as i took you for, i made no offense. therefore, i beseech your highness pardon me.
you must begin "will you, orlando, "
the son and heir of old tiberio.
and give it to this fellow., keep it, fellow, and wear it for an honor in thy cap till i do challenge it., give him the crowns. , and, captain, you must needs be friends with him.
go to., will you, orlando, have to wife this rosalind?
what's he that now is going out of door?
by this day and this light, the fellow has mettle enough in his belly., hold, there is twelve pence for you, and i pray you to serve god and keep you out of prawls and prabbles and quarrels and dissensions, and i warrant you it is the better for you.
i will.
marry, that, i think, be young petruchio.
i will none of your money.
ay, but when?
what's he that follows here, that would not dance?
it is with a good will. i can tell you it will serve you to mend your shoes. come, wherefore should you be so pashful? your shoes is not so good. 'tis a good silling, i warrant you, or i will change it.
why, now, as fast as she can marry us.
i know not.
now, herald, are the dead numbered?
then you must say "i take thee, rosalind, for wife."
go ask his name., if he be married.
here is the number of the slaughtered french.
i take thee, rosalind, for wife.
his name is romeo, and a montague, the only son of your great enemy.
what prisoners of good sort are taken, uncle?
i might ask you for your commission, but i do take thee, orlando, for my husband. there's a girl goes before the priest, and certainly a woman's thought runs before her actions.
(aside) my only love sprung from my only hate! too early seen unknown, and known too late! that i must love a loathèd enemy.
charles, duke of orléans, nephew to the king; john, duke of bourbon, and lord bouciqualt. full fifteen hundred, besides common men.
so do all thoughts. they are winged.
what's this? what's this?
this note doth tell me of ten thousand french that in the field lie slain. of princes in this number and nobles bearing banners, there lie dead of knights, esquires, and gallant gentlemen, eight thousand and four hundred, of the which, five hundred were but yesterday dubbed knights. so that in these ten thousand they have lost, the rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires, and gentlemen of blood and quality. the names of those their nobles that lie dead: charles delabreth, high constable of france; the master of the crossbows, lord rambures;
now tell me how long you would have her after you have possessed her.
a rhyme i learned even now of one i danced withal.
great master of france, the brave sir guichard dauphin; john, duke of alençon; anthony, duke of brabant, the brother of the duke of burgundy, grandpré and roussi, faulconbridge and foix, beaumont and marle, vaudemont and lestrale. here was a royal fellowship of death. where is the number of our english dead?
forever and a day.
anon, anon! come, let's away. the strangers all are gone.
sir richard ketly, davy gam, esquire; none else of name, and of all other men but five and twenty. o god, thy arm was here, and not to us but to thy arm alone but in plain shock and even play of battle, was ever known so great and little loss on one part and on th' other? take it, god, for it is none but thine.
say "a day" without the "ever." no, no, orlando, men are april when they woo, december when they wed. maids are may when they are maids, but the sky changes when they are wives. i will be more jealous of thee than a barbary cock- pigeon over his hen, more clamorous than a parrot against rain, more newfangled than an ape, more giddy in my desires than a monkey. i will weep for nothing, like diana in the fountain, and i will do that when you are disposed to be merry. i will laugh like a hyena, and that when thou art inclined to sleep.
now old desire doth in his deathbed lie, and young affection gapes to be his heir. that fair for which love groaned for and would die with tender juliet matched, is now not fair. alike bewitchèd by the charm of looks, but to his foe supposed he must complain, and she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks. being held a foe, he may not have access and she as much in love, her means much less to meet her new beloved anywhere. but passion lends them power, time means, to meet, tempering extremities with extreme sweet.
'tis wonderful.
but will my rosalind do so?
can i go forward when my heart is here? turn back, dull earth, and find thy center out.
come, go we in procession to the village, and be it death proclaimèd through our host to boast of this or take that praise from god which is his only.
by my life, she will do as i do.
romeo, my cousin romeo! romeo!
is it not lawful, an please your majesty, to tell how many is killed?
oh, but she is wise.
he is wise, and, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
yes, captain, but with this acknowledgement: that god fought for us.
or else she could not have the wit to do this. the wiser, the waywarder. make the doors upon a woman's wit, and it will out at the casement. shut that, and 'twill out at the keyhole. stop that, 'twill fly with the smoke out at the chimney.
call, good mercutio.
yes, my conscience, he did us great good.
a man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say "wit, whither wilt?"
nay, i'll conjure too! romeo! humours, madman, passion, lover! appear thou in the likeness of a sigh! speak but one rhyme, and i am satisfied. speak to my gossip venus one fair word, one nickname for her purblind son and heir, young abraham cupid, he that shot so true when king cophetua loved the beggar maid., the ape is dead, and i must conjure him., i conjure thee by rosaline's bright eyes, by her high forehead and her scarlet lip, by her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh, that in thy likeness thou appear to us.
let there be sung non nobis and te deum, the dead with charity enclosed in clay, and then to calais, and to england then, where ne'er from france arrived more happy men.
nay, you might keep that check for it, till you met your wife's wit going to your neighbor's bed.
an if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
vouchsafe to those that have not read the story that i may prompt them; and of such as have, i humbly pray them to admit th' excuse of time, of numbers, and due course of things, be here presented. now we bear the king toward calais. grant him there. there seen, heave him away upon your wingèd thoughts athwart the sea. behold, the english beach whose shouts and claps outvoice the deep-mouthed sea, which like a mighty whiffler 'fore the king seems to prepare his way. so let him land, and solemnly see him set on to london. you may imagine him upon blackheath, where that his lords desire him to have borne his bruisèd helmet and his bended sword before him through the city. he forbids it, giving full trophy, signal, and ostent quite from himself, to god. but now behold, in the quick forge and workinghouse of thought, how london doth pour out her citizens. like to the senators of th' antique rome, with the plebeians swarming at their heels, go forth and fetch their conquering caesar in, as, by a lower but loving likelihood,
and what wit could wit have to excuse that?
this cannot anger him. 'twould anger him to raise a spirit in his mistress' circle till she had laid it and conjured it down. that were some spite. my invocation is fair and honest. in his mistress' name i conjure only but to raise up him.
as in good time he may, from ireland coming, bringing rebellion broached on his sword, how many would the peaceful city quit to welcome him! much more, and much more cause, (as yet the lamentation of the french invites the king of england's stay at home; the emperor's coming in behalf of france to order peace between them) and omit till harry's back return again to france. there must we bring him, and myself have played the interim, by remembering you 'tis past. then brook abridgment, and your eyes advance
marry, to say she came to seek you there. you shall never take her without her answer unless you take her without her tongue. oh, that woman that cannot make her fault her husband's occasion, let her never nurse her child herself, for she will breed it like a fool.
to be consorted with the humorous night. blind is his love and best befits the dark.
nay, that's right. but why wear you your leek today? saint davy's day is past.
for these two hours, rosalind, i will leave thee.
if love be blind, love cannot hit the mark. now will he sit under a medlar tree as maids call medlars when they laugh alone., o romeo, that she were! oh, that she were an open arse, and thou a poperin pear. romeo, good night. i'll to my truckle bed. come, shall we go?
there is occasions and causes why and wherefore in all things. i will tell you as my friend, captain gower. the rascally, scald, beggarly, lousy, pragging knave, pistol, which you and yourself and all the world know to be no petter than a fellow, look you now, of no merits, he is come to me and prings me pread and salt yesterday, look you, and bid me eat my leek. it was in place where i could not breed no contention with him, but i will be so bold as to wear it in my cap till i see him once again, and then i will tell him a little piece of my desires.
alas, dear love, i cannot lack thee two hours.
go, then, for 'tis in vain to seek him here that means not to be found.
why, here he comes, swelling like a turkey-cock.
i must attend the duke at dinner. by two o'clock i will be with thee again.
he jests at scars that never felt a wound.
'tis no matter for his swellings, nor his turkey-cocks., god pless you.
ay, go your ways, go your ways. i knew what you would prove. my friends told me as much, and i thought no less. that flattering tongue of yours won me. 'tis but one cast away, and so, come, death. two o'clock is your hour?
but soft! what light through yonder window breaks? it is the east, and juliet is the sun. arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon, that thou, her maid, art far more fair than she. be not her maid since she is envious. her vestal livery is but sick and green, and none but fools do wear it. cast it off! oh, that she knew she were! she speaks, yet she says nothing. what of that? her eye discourses. i will answer it., i am too bold. 'tis not to me she speaks. having some business, do entreat her eyes to twinkle in their spheres till they return. what if her eyes were there, they in her head? the brightness of her cheek would shame those stars would through the airy region stream so bright that birds would sing and think it were not night. see how she leans her cheek upon her hand. oh, that i were a glove upon that hand
ha, art thou bedlam? dost thou thirst, base trojan, to have me fold up parca's fatal web? hence. i am qualmish at the smell of leek.
ay, sweet rosalind.
ay me!
i peseech you heartily, scurvy, lousy knave, at my desires, and my requests, and my petitions, to eat, look you, this leek. because, look you, you do not love it, nor your affections and your appetites and your digestions does not agree with it, i would desire you to eat it.
by my troth, and in good earnest, and so god mend me, and by all pretty oaths that are not dangerous, if you break one jot of your promise or come one minute behind your hour, i will think you the most pathetical break-promise and the most hollow lover and the most unworthy of her you call rosalind that may be chosen out of the gross band of the unfaithful. therefore beware my censure, and keep your promise.
(aside) she speaks. o, speak again, bright angel! for thou art as glorious to this night, being o'er my head, as is a wingèd messenger of heaven unto the white, upturnèd, wondering eyes when he bestrides the lazy-puffing clouds and sails upon the bosom of the air.
not for cadwallader and all his goats.
with no less religion than if thou wert indeed my rosalind.
o romeo, romeo! wherefore art thou romeo? deny thy father and refuse thy name. and i'll no longer be a capulet.
there is one goat for you. (strikes him) will you be so good, scald knave, as eat it?
well, time is the old justice that examines all such offenders, and let time try. adieu.
(aside) shall i hear more, or shall i speak at this?
base trojan, thou shalt die.
you have simply misused our sex in your love-prate. we must have your doublet and hose plucked over your head and show the world what the bird hath done to her own nest.
'tis but thy name that is my enemy. thou art thyself, though not a montague. nor arm, nor face, nor any other part belonging to a man. o, be some other name! what's in a name? that which we call a rose by any other word would smell as sweet. retain that dear perfection which he owes without that title. romeo, doff thy name, and for that name, which is no part of thee take all myself.
you say very true, scald knave, when god's will is. i will desire you to live in the meantime and eat your victuals. come, there is sauce for it. (strikes him) you called me yesterday "mountain squire," but i will make you today a squire of low degree. i pray you, fall to. if you can mock a leek, you can eat a leek.
o coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that thou didst know how many fathom deep i am in love. but it cannot be sounded; my affection hath an unknown bottom, like the bay of portugal.
i take thee at thy word. henceforth i never will be romeo.
enough, captain. you have astonished him.
or rather bottomless, that as fast as you pour affection in, it runs out.
what man art thou that, thus bescreened in night, so stumblest on my counsel?
i say i will make him eat some part of my leek, or i will peat his pate four days., bite, i pray you. it is good for your green wound and your ploody coxcomb.
no, that same wicked bastard of venus that was begot of thought, conceived of spleen, and born of madness, that blind rascally boy that abuses everyone's eyes because his own are out, let him be judge how deep i am in love. i'll tell thee, aliena, i cannot be out of the sight of orlando. i'll go find a shadow and sigh till he come.
by a name i know not how to tell thee who i am. because it is an enemy to thee. had i it written, i would tear the word.
must i bite?
and i'll sleep.
my ears have not yet drunk a hundred words of that tongue's uttering, yet i know the sound.
yes, certainly, and out of doubt and out of question, too, and ambiguities.
which is he that killed the deer?
neither, fair maid, if either thee dislike.
by this leek, i will most horribly revenge. i eat and eat, i swear, 
sir, it was i.
how camest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore? the orchard walls are high and hard to climb, and the place death, considering who thou art,
eat, i pray you. will you have some more sauce to your leek? there is not enough leek to swear by.
let's present him to the duke like a roman conqueror. and it would do well to set the deer's horns upon his head for a branch of victory., have you no song, forester, for this purpose?
with love's light wings did i o'erperch these walls, for stony limits cannot hold love out, and what love can do, that dares love attempt. therefore thy kinsmen are no stop to me.
quiet thy cudgel. thou dost see i eat.
yes, sir.
if they do see thee they will murder thee.
much good do you, scald knave, heartily. nay, pray you throw none away. the skin is good for your broken coxcomb. when you take occasions to see leeks hereafter, i pray you, mock at 'em, that is all.
sing it. 'tis no matter how it be in tune, so it make noise enough.
alack, there lies more peril in thine eye than twenty of their swords. look thou but sweet, and i am proof against their enmity.
good.
what shall he have that killed the deer? his leather skin and horns to wear. then sing him home. (the rest shall bear this burden.) it was a crest ere thou wast born. thy father's father wore it, and thy father bore it. the horn, the horn, the lusty horn
i would not for the world they saw thee here.
ay, leeks is good. hold you, there is a groat to heal your pate.
how say you now? is it not past two o'clock? and here much orlando.
and but thou love me, let them find me here. my life were better ended by their hate than death proroguèd, wanting of thy love.
me, a groat?
i warrant you, with pure love and troubled brain he hath ta'en his bow and arrows and is gone forth to sleep.
by whose direction found'st thou out this place?
yes, verily, and in truth you shall take it, or i have another leek in my pocket, which you shall eat.
look who comes here.
he lent me counsel and i lent him eyes. i am no pilot. yet, wert thou as far as that vast shore washed with the farthest sea, i would adventure for such merchandise.
i take thy groat in earnest of revenge.
(to rosalind) my errand is to you, fair youth. my gentle phoebe did bid me give you this. i know not the contents, but as i guess by the stern brow and waspish action it bears an angry tenor. pardon me. i am but as a guiltless messenger. (gives the letter)
else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek for that which thou hast heard me speak tonight. fain would i dwell on form. fain, fain deny what i have spoke. but farewell compliment! and i will take thy word. yet if thou swear'st thou mayst prove false. at lovers' perjuries, they say, jove laughs. o gentle romeo, if thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully. i'll frown and be perverse and say thee nay, so thou wilt woo. but else, not for the world. in truth, fair montague, i am too fond, and therefore thou mayst think my 'havior light. than those that have more coying to be strange. i should have been more strange, i must confess, but that thou overheard'st, ere i was 'ware, my true love's passion. therefore pardon me, which the dark night hath so discovered.
if i owe you anything, i will pay you in cudgels. you shall be a woodmonger and buy nothing of me but cudgels. god be wi' you and keep you and heal your pate.
(examines the letter) (as ganymede) patience herself would startle at this letter she says i am not fair, that i lack manners. she calls me proud, and that she could not love me were man as rare as phoenix. 'od's my will, her love is not the hare that i do hunt. this is a letter of your own device.
lady, by yonder blessèd moon i vow, that tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops, 
all hell shall stir for this.
no, i protest, i know not the contents. phoebe did write it.
o, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon, lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
go, go. you are a counterfeit cowardly knave. will you mock at an ancient tradition begun upon an honorable respect and worn as a memorable trophy of predeceased valor, and dare not avouch in your deeds any of your words? i have seen you gleeking and galling at this gentleman twice or thrice. you thought because he could not speak english in the native garb, he could not therefore handle an english cudgel. you find it otherwise, and henceforth let a welsh correction teach you a good english condition. fare you well.
come, come, you are a fool, i saw her hand. she has a leathern hand, a freestone-colored hand. i verily did think that her old gloves were on, but 'twas her hands. she has a huswife's hand, but that's no matter. this is a man's invention, and his hand.
what shall i swear by?
doth fortune play the huswife with me now? news have i that my nell is dead i' th' spital of a malady of france, old i do wax, and from my weary limbs honor is cudgeled. well, bawd i'll turn, and something lean to cutpurse of quick hand. to england will i steal, and there i'll steal. and swear i got them in the gallia wars.
sure it is hers.
do not swear at all. or, if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self, which is the god of my idolatry,
unto our brother france and to our sister, health and fair time of day., joy and good wishes to our most fair and princely cousin katherine., and, as a branch and member of this royalty, we do salute you, duke of burgundy., and princes french, and peers, health to you all. peace to this meeting wherefore we are met.
why, 'tis a boisterous and a cruel style, a style for challengers. why, she defies me could not drop forth such giant-rude invention, such ethiop words, blacker in their effect than in their countenance. will you hear the letter?
if my heart's dear love, 
most worthy brother england. fairly met. , so are you, princes english, every one.
so please you, for i never heard it yet,
well, do not swear. although i joy in thee, i have no joy of this contract tonight. it is too rash, too unadvised, too sudden, too like the lightning, which doth cease to be this bud of love, by summer's ripening breath, may prove a beauteous flower when next we meet. good night, good night! as sweet repose and rest come to thy heart as that within my breast.
so happy be the issue, brother england, of this good day and of this gracious meeting, your eyes which hitherto have borne in them against the french that met them in their bent the fatal balls of murdering basilisks. the venom of such looks, we fairly hope, shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.
she phoebes me. mark how the tyrant writes. (reads) art thou god to shepherd turned, that a maiden's heart hath burned? can a woman rail thus?
o, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
to cry "amen" to that, thus we appear.
call you this railing?
what satisfaction canst thou have tonight?
you english princes all, i do salute you.
(reads) why, thy godhead laid apart, warr'st thou with a woman's heart? did you ever hear such railing? that could do no vengeance to me. meaning me a beast.
th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
my duty to you both, on equal love, with all my wits, my pains, and strong endeavors, to bring your most imperial majesties unto this bar and royal interview, your mightiness on both parts best can witness. that face to face and royal eye to eye you have congreeted. let it not disgrace me if i demand before this royal view what rub or what impediment there is dear nurse of arts, plenties, and joyful births, should not in this best garden of the world, our fertile france, put up her lovely visage? alas, she hath from france too long been chased, corrupting in its own fertility. her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart, unprunèd, dies. her hedges, even-pleached, like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair, the darnel, hemlock, and rank fumitory doth root upon, while that the coulter rusts that should deracinate such savagery. the even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth wanting the scythe, withal uncorrected, rank, conceives by idleness, and nothing teems but hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burrs, losing both beauty and utility. defective in their natures, grow to wildness, even so our houses and ourselves and children have lost, or do not learn for want of time, the sciences that should become our country,
if the scorn of your bright eyne have power to raise such love in mine, would they work in mild aspect? whiles you chid me, i did love. how then might your prayers move? he that brings this love to thee and by him seal up thy mind whether that thy youth and kind will the faithful offer take of me, and all that i can make, and then i'll study how to die.
i gave thee mine before thou didst request it, and yet i would it were to give again.
that nothing do but meditate on blood, to swearing and stern looks, diffused attire, and everything that seems unnatural. which to reduce into our former favor that i may know the let why gentle peace should not expel these inconveniences and bless us with her former qualities.
call you this chiding?
wouldst thou withdraw it? for what purpose, love?
if, duke of burgundy, you would the peace, which you have cited, you must buy that peace with full accord to all our just demands, whose tenors and particular effects you have, enscheduled briefly, in your hands.
(as aliena) alas, poor shepherd.
but to be frank, and give it thee again. and yet i wish but for the thing i have. my bounty is as boundless as the sea, my love as deep. the more i give to thee,
there is no answer made.
do you pity him? no, he deserves no pity., wilt thou love such a woman? what, to make thee an instrument and play false strains upon thee? not to be endured. well, go your way to her, for i see love hath made thee a tame snake, and say this to her: that if she love me, i charge her to love thee; if she will not, i will never have her unless thou entreat for her. if you be a true lover, hence and not a word, for here comes more company.
i hear some noise within. dear love, adieu., anon, good nurse!, sweet montague, be true. stay but a little. i will come again.
well then, the peace which you before so urged lies in his answer.
good morrow, fair ones. pray you, if you know, where in the purlieus of this forest stands a sheepcote fenced about with olive trees?
o blessèd, blessèd night! i am afeard, too flattering sweet to be substantial.
i have but with a cursitory eye to appoint some of your council presently to sit with us once more with better heed to resurvey them, we will suddenly pass our accept and peremptory answer.
west of this place, down in the neighbor bottom, the rank of osiers by the murmuring stream left on your right hand brings you to the place. but at this hour the house doth keep itself.
three words, dear romeo, and good night indeed. if that thy bent of love be honorable, thy purpose marriage, send me word tomorrow where and what time thou wilt perform the rite, and all my fortunes at thy foot i'll lay and follow thee my lord throughout the world.
and brother clarence, and you, brother gloucester, warwick and huntingdon, go with the king and take with you free power to ratify, augment, or alter, as your wisdoms best anything in or out of our demands,
if that an eye may profit by a tongue, then should i know you by description. such garments, and such years. "the boy is fair, of female favor, and bestows himself and browner than her brother." are not you the owner of the house i did inquire for?
(from within) madam!
and we'll consign thereto., will you, fair sister, go with the princes or stay here with us?
it is no boast, being asked, to say we are.
i do beseech thee, 
our gracious brother, i will go with them. when articles too nicely urged be stood on.
orlando doth commend him to you both, he sends this bloody napkin. are you he?
(from within) madam!
yet leave our cousin katherine here with us. she is our capital demand, comprised within the forerank of our articles.
(as ganymede) i am. what must we understand by this?
by and by, i come., to cease thy strife and leave me to my grief.
she hath good leave.
some of my shame, if you will know of me what man i am, and how, and why, and where
so thrive my soul, 
fair katherine, and most fair, will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms such as will enter at a lady's ear and plead his love suit to her gentle heart?
i pray you, tell it.
a thousand times good night!
england.
when last the young orlando parted from you, he left a promise to return again within an hour, and pacing through the forest, lo, what befell. he threw his eye aside, and mark what object did present itself: under an old oak, whose boughs were mossed with age and high top bald with dry antiquity, lay sleeping on his back. about his neck a green and gilded snake had wreathed itself, who with her head, nimble in threats, approached the opening of his mouth. but suddenly, and, with indented glides, did slip away into a bush, under which bush's shade a lioness, with udders all drawn dry, lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch the royal disposition of that beast to prey on nothing that doth seem as dead. this seen, orlando did approach the man and found it was his brother, his elder brother.
a thousand times the worse to want thy light. love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books,
o fair katherine, if you will love me soundly with your french heart, i will be glad to hear you confess it brokenly with your english tongue. do you like me, kate?
and he did render him the most unnatural that lived amongst men.
hist! romeo, hist!, oh, for a falconer's voice, to lure this tassel-gentle back again! bondage is hoarse, and may not speak aloud, else would i tear the cave where echo lies, with repetition of "my romeo!"
pardonnez-moi, i cannot tell what is "like me."
and well he might so do, for well i know he was unnatural.
it is my soul that calls upon my name. how silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night, like softest music to attending ears!
an angel is like you, kate, and you are like an angel.
food to the sucked and hungry lioness?
romeo!
(to alice) que dit-il? que je suis semblable à les anges?
twice did he turn his back and purposed so, but kindness, nobler ever than revenge, and nature, stronger than his just occasion, who quickly fell before him; in which hurtling, from miserable slumber i awaked.
my nyas?
oui, vraiment, sauf votre grâce, ainsi dit-il.
are you his brother?
what o'clock tomorrow shall i send to thee?
i said so, dear katherine; and i must not blush to affirm it.
was 't you he rescued?
by the hour of nine.
ô bon dieu! les langues des hommes sont pleines de tromperies.
was 't you that did so oft contrive to kill him?
i will not fail. 'tis twenty year till then. i have forgot why i did call thee back.
what says she, fair one? that the tongues of men are full of deceits?
'twas i, but 'tis not i. i do not shame to tell you what i was, since my conversion so sweetly tastes, being the thing i am.
let me stand here till thou remember it.
oui, dat de tongues of de mans is be full of deceits; dat is de princess.
but for the bloody napkin?
remembering how i love thy company.
the princess is the better englishwoman., i' faith, kate, my wooing is fit for thy understanding. i am glad thou canst speak no better english, for if thou couldst, thou wouldst find me such a plain king that thou wouldst think i had sold my farm to buy my crown. i know no ways to mince it in love, but directly to say, "i love you." then if you urge me farther than to say, "do you, in faith?" i wear out my suit. give me your answer, i' faith, do; and so clap hands and a bargain. how say you, lady?
when from the first to last betwixt us two tears our recountments had most kindly bathed, as how i came into that desert place, in brief, he led me to the gentle duke, committing me unto my brother's love, who led me instantly unto his cave, there stripped himself, and here upon his arm the lioness had torn some flesh away, and cried in fainting upon rosalind. brief, i recovered him, bound up his wound, and after some small space, being strong at heart,
and i'll still stay, to have thee still forget, forgetting any other home but this.
sauf votre honneur, me understand vell.
he sent me hither, stranger as i am, his broken promise, and to give this napkin dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth that he in sport doth call his rosalind.
'tis almost morning. i would have thee gone. that lets it hop a little from his hand like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves, and with a silken thread plucks it back again, so loving-jealous of his liberty.
marry, if you would put me to verses or to dance for your sake, kate, why you undid me. for the one, i have neither words nor measure; and for the other, i have no strength in measure, yet a reasonable measure in strength. if i could win a lady at leapfrog or by vaulting into my saddle with my armor on my back, under the correction of bragging be it spoken, i should quickly leap into a wife. or if i might buffet for my love or bound my horse for her favors, i could lay on like a butcher and sit like a jackanapes, never off. but, before god, kate, i cannot look greenly nor gasp out my eloquence, nor i have no cunning in protestation, only
why, how now, ganymede, sweet ganymede?
i would i were thy bird.
downright oaths, which i never use till urged, nor never break for urging. if thou canst love a fellow of this temper, kate, whose face is not worth sunburning, that never looks in his glass for love of anything he sees there, let thine eye be thy cook. i speak to thee plain soldier. if thou canst love me for this, take me. if not, to say to thee that i shall die is true, but for thy love, by the lord, no. yet i love thee too. and while thou liv'st, dear kate, take a fellow of plain and uncoined constancy, for he perforce must do thee right because he hath not the gift to woo in other places. for these fellows of infinite tongue, that can rhyme themselves into ladies' favors, they do always reason themselves out again. what? a speaker is but a prater, a rhyme is but a ballad, a good leg will fall, a straight back will stoop, a black beard will turn white, a curled pate will grow bald, a fair face will wither, a full eye will wax hollow, but a good heart, kate, is the sun and the moon, or rather the sun and not the moon, for it shines bright and never changes but keeps his course truly. if thou would have such a one, take me. and take me, take a soldier. take a soldier, take a king. and what say'st thou then to my love? speak, my fair, and fairly, i pray thee.
many will swoon when they do look on blood.
sweet, so would i. yet i should kill thee with much cherishing. good night, good night! parting is such sweet sorrow that i shall say good night till it be morrow.
is it possible dat i sould love de enemy of france?
there is more in it., cousin ganymede.
sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast. hence will i to my ghostly friar's close cell, his help to crave and my dear hap to tell.
no, it is not possible you should love the enemy of france, kate. but, in loving me, you should love the friend of france, for i love france so well that i will not part with a village of it. i will have it all mine. and, kate, when france is mine and i am yours, then yours is france and you are mine.
look, he recovers.
the gray-eyed morn smiles on the frowning night, checkering the eastern clouds with streaks of light, and fleckled darkness like a drunkard reels from forth day's path and titan's fiery wheels. the day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry, i must upfill this osier cage of ours with baleful weeds and precious-juicèd flowers. the earth, that's nature's mother, is her tomb. and from her womb children of divers kind we sucking on her natural bosom find, many for many virtues excellent, none but for some and yet all different. in herbs, plants, stones, and their true qualities. for naught so vile that on the earth doth live but to the earth some special good doth give. nor aught so good but, strained from that fair use virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied, and vice sometime by action dignified.
i cannot tell wat is dat.
i would i were at home.
within the infant rind of this small flower poison hath residence and medicine power. being tasted, stays all senses with the heart. two such opposèd kings encamp them still, in man as well as herbs, grace and rude will.
no, kate? i will tell thee in french, which i am sure will hang upon my tongue like a new-married wife about her husband's neck, hardly to be shook off. je quand sur le possession de france, et quand vous avez le possession de moi, let me see, what then? saint denis be my speed!, donc vôtre est france et vous êtes mienne. it is as easy for me, kate, to conquer the kingdom as to speak so much more french. i shall never move thee in french, unless it be to laugh at me.
we'll lead you thither.
and where the worser is predominant,
sauf votre honneur, le français que vous parlez, il est meilleur que l'anglais lequel je parle.
be of good cheer, youth. you a man? you lack a man's heart.
good morrow, father.
no, faith, is 't not, kate, but thy speaking of my tongue, and i thine, most truly-falsely must needs be granted to be much at one. but, kate, dost thou understand thus much english? canst thou love me?
i do so, i confess it. ah, sirrah, a body would think this was well-counterfeited. i pray you tell your brother how well i counterfeited. heigh-ho.
benedicite. what early tongue so sweet saluteth me? young son, it argues a distempered head so soon to bid good morrow to thy bed. and where care lodges, sleep will never lie. but where unbruisèd youth with unstuffed brain doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign. therefore thy earliness doth me assure or if not so, then here i hit it right: our romeo hath not been in bed tonight.
i cannot tell.
this was not counterfeit. there is too great testimony in your complexion that it was a passion of earnest.
that last is true. the sweeter rest was mine.
can any of your neighbors tell, kate? i'll ask them. come, i know thou lovest me; and at night, when you come into your closet, you'll question this gentlewoman about me, and, i know, kate, you will to her dispraise those parts in me that you love with your heart. but, good kate, mock me mercifully, the rather, gentle princess, because i love thee cruelly. if ever thou beest mine, kate, as i have a saving faith within me tells me thou shalt, i get thee with scambling, and thou must therefore needs prove a good soldier-breeder. shall not thou and i, between saint denis
counterfeit, i assure you.
god pardon sin! wast thou with rosaline?
and saint george, compound a boy, half french, half english, that shall go to constantinople and take the turk by the beard? shall we not? what say'st thou, my fair flower de luce?
well then, take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man.
i have forgot that name and that name's woe.
i do not know dat.
so i do. but i' faith, i should have been a woman by right.
that's my good son. but where hast thou been, then?
no, 'tis hereafter to know, but now to promise. do but now promise, kate, you will endeavor for your french part of such a boy; and for my english moiety take the word of a king and a bachelor. how answer you, la plus belle katherine du monde, mon très cher et divin déesse?
come, you look paler and paler. pray you, draw homewards., good sir, go with us.
i'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again. i have been feasting with mine enemy, that's by me wounded. both our remedies within thy help and holy physic lies. i bear no hatred, blessèd man, for, lo, my intercession likewise steads my foe.
your majestée ave fausse french enough to deceive de most sage demoiselle dat is en france.
that will i, for i must bear answer back how you excuse my brother, rosalind.
riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
now fie upon my false french. by mine honor, in true english, i love thee, kate. by which honor i dare not swear thou lovest me, yet my blood begins to flatter me that thou dost, notwithstanding the poor and untempering effect of my visage. now, beshrew my father's ambition! he was thinking of civil wars when he got me; therefore was i created with a stubborn outside, with an aspect of iron, that when i come to woo ladies, i fright them. but, in faith, kate, the elder i wax, the better i shall appear. my comfort is that old age, that ill layer-up of beauty, can do no more spoil upon my face. thou hast me, if thou hast me, at the worst, and thou shalt wear me, if thou wear me, better and better. and therefore tell me, most fair katherine, will you have me? put off your maiden blushes, avouch the thoughts of your heart with the looks of an empress, take me by the hand, and say "harry of england, i am thine," which word thou shalt no sooner bless mine ear withal, but i will tell
i shall devise something. but i pray you commend my counterfeiting to him. will you go?
then plainly know my heart's dear love is set on the fair daughter of rich capulet. as mine on hers, so hers is set on mine, by holy marriage. when and where and how we met, we wooed and made exchange of vow, i'll tell thee as we pass, but this i pray: that thou consent to marry us today.
thee aloud "england is thine, ireland is thine, france is thine, and harry plantagenet is thine," who, though i speak it before his face, if he be not fellow with the best king, thou shalt find the best king of good fellows. come, your answer in broken music, for thy voice is music and thy english broken. therefore, queen of all, katherine, break thy mind to me in broken english. wilt thou have me?
we shall find a time, audrey. patience, gentle audrey.
is rosaline, whom thou didst love so dear, so soon forsaken? young men's love then lies not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes. jesu maria, what a deal of brine how much salt water thrown away in waste to season love that of it doth not taste! the sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears, thy old groans ring yet in my ancient ears. of an old tear that is not washed off yet. if e'er thou wast thyself and these woes thine, thou and these woes were all for rosaline. and art thou changed? pronounce this sentence then:
dat is as it sall please de roi mon père.
faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old gentleman's saying.
thou chid'st me oft for loving rosaline.
nay, it will please him well, kate; it shall please him, kate.
a most wicked sir oliver, audrey, a most vile martext. but, audrey, there is a youth here in the forest lays claim to you.
for doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
den it sall also content me.
ay, i know who 'tis. he hath no interest in me in the world.
and badest me bury love.
upon that i kiss your hand, and i call you my queen.
here comes the man you mean.
not in a grave, to lay one in, another out to have.
laissez, mon seigneur, laissez, laissez! ma foi, je ne veux point que vous abaissiez votre grandeur en baisant la main d'une, notre seigneur!, indigne serviteur. excusez-moi, je vous supplie, mon très puissant eigneur.
it is meat and drink to me to see a clown. by my troth, we that have good wits have much to answer for. we shall be flouting. we cannot hold.
doth grace for grace and love for love allow. the other did not so.
then i will kiss your lips, kate.
good ev'n, audrey.
oh, she knew well thy love did read by rote, that could not spell. but come, young waverer, come, go with me, for this alliance may so happy prove to turn your households' rancor to pure love.
les dames et demoiselles pour être baisées devant leur noces, il n'est pas la coutume de france.
god gi' good ev'n, william.
oh, let us hence. i stand on sudden haste.
madam my interpreter, what says she?
and good ev'n to you, sir.
wisely and slow. they stumble that run fast.
dat it is not be de fashion pour les ladies of france, i cannot tell wat is baiser en anglish.
nay, prithee, be covered. how old are you, friend?
where the devil should this romeo be? came he not home tonight?
to kiss.
five-and-twenty, sir.
not to his father's. i spoke with his man.
your majesté entendre bettre que moi.
a ripe age. is thy name william?
why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that rosaline,
it is not a fashion for the maids in france to kiss before they are married, would she say?
william, sir.
tybalt, the kinsman to old capulet, hath sent a letter to his father's house.
oui, vraiment.
a fair name. wast born i' th' forest here?
a challenge, on my life.
o kate, nice customs curtsy to great kings. dear kate, you and i cannot be confined within the weak list of a country's fashion. we are the makers of manners, kate, and the liberty that follows our places stops the mouth of all find- faults, as i will do yours for upholding the nice fashion of your country in denying me a kiss. therefore, patiently and yielding. (kissing her) you have witchcraft in your lips, kate. there is more eloquence in a sugar touch of them than in the tongues of the french council, and they should sooner persuade harry of england than a general petition of monarchs. here comes your father.
ay, sir, i thank god.
romeo will answer it.
god save your majesty. my royal cousin, teach you our princess english?
"thank god." a good answer. art rich?
any man that can write may answer a letter.
i would have her learn, my fair cousin, how perfectly i love her, and that is good english.
'faith, sir, so-so.
nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being dared.
is she not apt?
"so-so" is good, very good, very excellent good. and yet it is not: it is but so-so. art thou wise?
alas, poor romeo! he is already dead, stabbed with a white wench's black eye, shot through the ear with a love song, the very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt shaft. and is he a man to encounter tybalt?
our tongue is rough, coz, and my condition is not smooth, so that, having neither the voice nor the heart of flattery about me, i cannot so conjure up the spirit of love in her that he will appear in his true likeness.
ay, sir, i have a pretty wit.
why, what is tybalt?
pardon the frankness of my mirth if i answer you for that. if you would conjure in her, you must make a circle; if conjure up love in her in his true likeness, he must appear naked and blind. can you blame her then, being a maid yet rosed over with the virgin crimson of modesty, if she deny the appearance of a naked blind boy in her naked seeing self? it were, my lord, a hard condition for a maid to consign to.
why, thou sayst well. i do now remember a saying: "the fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be a fool." the heathen philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape, would open his lips when he put it into his mouth, meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and lips to open. you do love this maid?
more than prince of cats. oh, he's the courageous captain of compliments. he fights as you sing prick-song, keeps time, distance, and proportion. he rests his minim rests, one, two, and the third in your bosom. the very butcher of a silk button, a duelist, a duelist, a gentleman of the very first house of the first and second cause. ah, the immortal passado, the punto reverso, the hai!
yet they do wink and yield, as love is blind and enforces.
i do, sir.
the what?
they are then excused, my lord, when they see not what they do.
give me your hand. art thou learned?
the pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasmines, these new tuners of accents! "by jesu, a very good blade! a very tall man! a very good whore!" why, is not this a lamentable thing, grandsire, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange flies, these fashion-mongers, these "pardon me's," who stand so much on the new form, that they cannot sit at ease on the old bench? oh, their bones, their bones!
then, good my lord, teach your cousin to consent winking.
no, sir.
here comes romeo, here comes romeo.
i will wink on her to consent, my lord, if you will teach her to know my meaning, for maids, well summered and warm kept, are like flies at bartholomew-tide: blind, though they have their eyes; and then they will endure handling, which before would not abide looking on.
then learn this of me: to have is to have. for it is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured out of a cup into a glass, by filling the one doth empty the other. for all your writers do consent that ipse is "he." now, you are not ipse, for i am he.
without his roe, like a dried herring. o flesh, flesh, how art thou fishified! now is he for the numbers that petrarch flowed in. laura to his lady was but a kitchen-wench, marry, she had a better love to berhyme her, dido a dowdy, cleopatra a gypsy, helen and hero hildings and harlots, thisbe a grey eye or so, but not to the purpose., signior romeo, bonjour! there's a french salutation to your french slop. you gave us the counterfeit fairly last night.
this moral ties me over to time and a hot summer. and so i shall catch the fly, your cousin, in the latter end and she must be blind too.
which he, sir?
good morrow to you both. what counterfeit did i give you?
as love is, my lord, before it loves.
he, sir, that must marry this woman. therefore, you clown, abandon, which is, in the vulgar, "leave", the society, which in the boorish is "company", of this female, which in the common is "woman"; which together is, abandon the society of this female, or, clown, thou perishest; or, to thy better understanding, diest; or, to wit, i kill thee, make thee away, translate thy life into death, thy liberty into bondage. i will deal in poison with thee, or in bastinado, or in steel. i will bandy with thee in faction. i will o'errun thee with policy. i will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways. therefore tremble and depart.
the slip, sir, the slip. can you not conceive?
it is so. and you may, some of you, thank love for my blindness, who cannot see many a fair french city for one fair french maid that stands in my way.
do, good william.
pardon, good mercutio, my business was great, and in such a case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
yes, my lord, you see them perspectively, the cities turned into a maid, for they are all girdled with maiden walls that war hath never entered.
god rest you merry, sir.
that's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a man to bow in the hams.
shall kate be my wife?
our master and mistress seeks you. come away, away.
meaning "to curtsy"?
so please you.
trip, audrey, trip, audrey., i attend, i attend.
thou hast most kindly hit it.
i am content, so the maiden cities you talk of may wait on her. so the maid that stood in the way for my wish shall show me the way to my will.
is 't possible that on so little acquaintance you should like her? that, but seeing, you should love her? and loving, woo? and wooing, she should grant? and will you persever to enjoy her?
a most courteous exposition.
we have consented to all terms of reason.
neither call the giddiness of it in question, the poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden wooing, nor her sudden consenting, but say with me "i love aliena"; say with her that she loves me; consent with both that we may enjoy each other. it shall be to your good, for my father's house and all the revenue that was old sir rowland's will i estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.
nay, i am the very pink of courtesy.
is 't so, my lords of england?
you have my consent. let your wedding be tomorrow. thither will i invite the duke and all's contented followers. go you and prepare aliena, for look you, here comes my
pink for flower.
his daughter first, and, in sequel, all, according to their firm proposed natures.
(as ganymede) god save you, brother.
right.
only he hath not yet subscribèd this: where your majesty demands that the king of france, having any occasion to write for matter of grant, shall name your highness in this form and with this addition, in french: notre très cher fils henri, roi d'angleterre, héritier de france; and thus in latin: praeclarissimus filius noster henricus, rex angliae, et haeres franciae.
and you, fair sister.
why, then is my pump well flowered.
but your request shall make me let it pass.
o my dear orlando, how it grieves me to see thee wear thy heart in a scarf.
sure wit, follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy pump, that when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may remain, after the wearing solely singular.
i pray you, then, in love and dear alliance, let that one article rank with the rest, and thereupon give me your daughter.
it is my arm.
o single-soled jest, solely singular for the singleness.
issue to me, that the contending kingdoms of france and england, whose very shores look pale with envy of each other's happiness,
i thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a lion.
come between us, good benvolio. my wits faints.
may cease their hatred, and this dear conjunction in their sweet bosoms, that never war advance his bleeding sword 'twixt england and fair france.
wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.
switch and spurs, switch and spurs, or i'll cry a match.
amen.
did your brother tell you how i counterfeited to swoon when he showed me your handkercher?
nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, i am done, for thou hast more of the wild-goose in one of thy wits than, i am sure, i have in my whole five. was i with you there for the goose?
now welcome, kate, and bear me witness all
ay, and greater wonders than that.
thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there for the goose.
god, the best maker of all marriages, combine your hearts in one, your realms in one. as man and wife, being two, are one in love, so be there 'twixt your kingdoms such a spousal which troubles oft the bed of blessèd marriage, thrust in between the paction of these kingdoms to make divorce of their incorporate league, that english may as french, french englishmen,
oh, i know where you are. nay, 'tis true. there was never anything so sudden but the fight of two rams and caesar's thrasonical brag of "i came, saw, and overcame." for your brother and my sister no sooner met but they looked, no sooner looked but they loved, no sooner loved but they sighed, no sooner sighed but they asked one another the reason, no sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy; and in these degrees have they made a pair of stairs to marriage, which they will climb incontinent, or else be incontinent before marriage. they are in the very wrath of love, and they will together. clubs cannot part them.
i will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
amen.
they shall be married tomorrow, and i will bid the duke to the nuptial. but oh, how bitter a thing it is to look into happiness through another man's eyes. by so much the more shall i tomorrow be at the height of heart-heaviness, by how much i shall think my brother happy in having what he wishes for.
nay, good goose, bite not.
prepare we for our marriage; on which day, my lord of burgundy, we'll take your oath, and all the peers', for surety of our leagues. and may our oaths well kept and prosp'rous be.
why, then, tomorrow i cannot serve your turn for rosalind?
thy wit is a very bitter sweeting. it is a most sharp sauce.
thus far with rough and all-unable pen our bending author hath pursued the story, in little room confining mighty men, small time, but in that small most greatly lived this star of england. fortune made his sword, by which the world's best garden be achieved and of it left his son imperial lord. of france and england, did this king succeed, whose state so many had the managing that they lost france and made his england bleed, which oft our stage hath shown. and for their sake,
i can live no longer by thinking.
and is it not well served into a sweet goose?
i will weary you then no longer with idle talking. know of me then, for now i speak to some purpose, that i know you are a gentleman of good conceit. i speak not this that you should bear a good opinion of my knowledge, insomuch i say i know you are. neither do i labor for a greater esteem than may in some little measure draw a belief from you to do yourself good, and not to grace me. believe then, if you please, that i can do strange things. i have, since i was three year old, conversed with a magician, most profound in his art and yet not damnable. if you do love rosalind so near the heart as your gesture cries it out, when your brother marries aliena shall you marry her. i know into what straits of fortune she is driven, and it is not impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient to you, to set her before your eyes tomorrow, human as she is, and without any danger.
oh, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch narrow to an ell broad!
i learn in this letter that don pedro of aragon comes this night to messina.
speak'st thou in sober meanings?
i stretch it out for that word "broad," which, added to the goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
he is very near by this. he was not three leagues off when i left him.
by my life i do, which i tender dearly, though i say i am a magician. therefore put you in your best array, bid your friends; for if you will be married tomorrow, you shall, and to rosalind, if you will.
why, is not this better now than groaning for love? now art thou sociable. now art thou romeo. now art thou what thou art, by art as well as by nature, for this driveling love is like a great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in a hole.
how many gentlemen have you lost in this action?
look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.
stop there, stop there.
but few of any sort, and none of name.
youth, you have done me much ungentleness to show the letter that i writ to you.
thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
a victory is twice itself when the achiever brings home full numbers. i find here that don pedro hath bestowed much honor on a young florentine called claudio.
to seem despiteful and ungentle to you. you are there followed by a faithful shepherd. look upon him, love him; he worships you.
thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
don pedro. he hath borne himself beyond the promise of his age, doing in the figure of a lamb the feats of a lion. he hath indeed better bettered expectation than you must expect of me to tell you how.
good shepherd, tell this youth what 'tis to love.
oh, thou art deceived. i would have made it short, for i was come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant, indeed, to occupy the argument no longer.
it.
and so am i for phoebe.
here's goodly gear.
i have already delivered him letters, and there appears much joy in him, even so much that joy could not show itself modest enough without a badge of bitterness.
and i for ganymede.
a sail, a sail!
did he break out into tears?
and i for rosalind.
two, two, a shirt and a smock.
in great measure.
and i for no woman.
peter!
a kind overflow of kindness. there are no faces truer than those that are so washed. how much better is it to weep at joy than to joy at weeping!
and so am i for phoebe.
anon!
no?
and i for ganymede.
my fan, peter.
i know none of that name, lady. there was none such in the army of any sort.
and i for rosalind.
good, peter, to hide her face, for her fan's the fairer face.
what is he that you ask for, niece?
and i for no woman.
god ye good morrow, gentlemen.
my cousin means signor benedick of padua.
all made of passion and all made of wishes, all adoration, duty, and observance, all humbleness, all patience and impatience, all purity, all trial, all observance,
god ye good e'en, fair gentlewoman.
oh, he's returned, and as pleasant as ever he was.
and so am i for ganymede.
is it good e'en?
he set up his bills here in messina and challenged cupid at the flight, and my uncle's fool, reading the challenge, subscribed for cupid and challenged him at the bird-bolt. wars? but how many hath he killed? for indeed i promised to eat all of his killing.
and so am i for rosalind.
'tis no less, i tell you, for the bawdy hand of the dial is now upon the prick of noon.
faith, niece, you tax signor benedick too much, but he'll be meet with you, i doubt it not.
and so am i for no woman.
out upon you! what a man are you?
he hath done good service, lady, in these wars.
if this be so, why blame you me to love you?
one, gentlewoman, that god hath made, himself to mar.
you had musty victual, and he hath holp to eat it. he is a very valiant trencherman. he hath an excellent stomach.
if this be so, why blame you me to love you?
by my troth, it is well said. "for himself to mar," quoth he? gentlemen, can any of you tell me where i may find the young romeo?
and a good soldier too, lady.
if this be so, why blame you me to love you?
i can tell you, but young romeo will be older when you have found him than he was when you sought him. i am the youngest of that name, for fault of a worse.
and a good soldier to a lady, but what is he to a lord?
why do you speak, too, "why blame you me to love you?"?
you say well.
virtues.
to her that is not here, nor doth not hear.
yea, is the worst well? very well took, i' faith, wisely, wisely.
it is so indeed. he is no less than a stuffed man. but for the stuffing, well, we are all mortal.
pray you, no more of this. 'tis like the howling of irish wolves against the moon. (to silvius) i will help you, if i can. (to phoebe) i would love you if i could., tomorrow meet me all together. (to phoebe) i will marry you if ever i marry woman, and i'll be married tomorrow. (to orlando) i will satisfy you if ever i satisfy man, and you shall be married tomorrow. (to silvius) i will content you, if what pleases you contents you, and you shall be married tomorrow. (to orlando) as you love rosalind, meet. (to silvius) as you love phoebe, meet., and as i love no woman, i'll meet. so fare you well. i have left you commands.
if you be he, sir, i desire some confidence with you.
you must not, sir, mistake my niece. there is a kind of meet but there's a skirmish of wit between them.
i'll not fail, if i live.
she will indite him to some supper.
alas, he gets nothing by that. in our last conflict four of his five wits went halting off, and now is the whole man governed with one, so that if he have wit enough to keep himself and his horse, for it is all the wealth that he hath left to be known a reasonable creature. who is his companion now? he hath every month a new sworn brother.
nor i.
a bawd, a bawd, a bawd! so ho!
is 't possible?
nor i.
what hast thou found?
his hat; it ever changes with the next block.
tomorrow is the joyful day, audrey. tomorrow will we be married.
no hare, sir, unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is, something stale and hoar ere it be spent.
i see, lady, the gentleman is not in your books.
i do desire it with all my heart, and i hope it is no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the world.
(sings) an old hare hoar, and an old hare hoar, is very good meat in lent. but a hare that is hoar is too much for a score when it hoars ere it be spent.
no. an he were, i would burn my study. but i pray you, who is his companion? is there no young squarer now that
here comes two of the banished duke's pages.
romeo, will you come to your father's? we'll to dinner, thither.
he is most in the company of the right noble claudio.
well met, honest gentleman.
i will follow you.
o lord, he will hang upon him like a disease! he is sooner caught than the pestilence, and the taker runs presently mad. god help the noble claudio! if he have caught the
by my troth, well met. come, sit, sit, and a song.
farewell, ancient lady. farewell, lady, lady, lady.
i will hold friends with you, lady.
we are for you. sit i' th' middle.
i pray you, sir, what saucy merchant was this that was so full of his ropery?
do, good friend.
shall we clap into 't roundly, without hawking or spitting or saying we are hoarse, which are the only prologues to a bad voice?
a gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk, and will speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
you will never run mad, niece.
i' faith, i' faith, and both in a tune like two gypsies on a horse.
an he speak any thing against me, i'll take him down, an he were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks. and if i cannot, i'll find those that shall. scurvy knave! i am none of his flirt-gills. i am none of his skains-mates. (to peter) and thou must stand by, too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure?
no, not till a hot january.
(sing) with a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no, that o'er the green cornfield did pass in springtime, the only pretty ring time, when birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding. between the acres of the rye,
i saw no man use you at his pleasure. if i had, my weapon should quickly have been out, i warrant you. i dare draw as soon as another man if i see occasion in a good quarrel and the law on my side.
don pedro is approached.
with a hey, and a ho, and a hey-nonny-no, these pretty country folks would lie in springtime, the only pretty ring time, sweet lovers love the spring. this carol they began that hour, with a hey, and a ho, and a hey hey-nonny-no, how that a life was but a flower when birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding. sweet lovers love the spring. and therefore take the present time, with a hey, and a ho, and a hey hey-nonny-no, in springtime, the only pretty ring time, when birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding. sweet lovers love the spring.
now, afore god, i am so vexed that every part about me quivers. scurvy knave! (to romeo) pray you, sir, a word. and as i told you, my young lady bid me inquire you out. what she bade me say, i will keep to myself. but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of behavior, as they say. for the gentlewoman is young, and therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an ill thing to be offered to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
good signor leonato, are you come to meet your trouble? the fashion of the world is to avoid cost, and you encounter it.
truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great matter in the ditty, yet the note was very untunable.
nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. i protest unto thee, 
never came trouble to my house in the likeness of your when you depart from me, sorrow abides and happiness takes his leave.
you are deceived, sir. we kept time. we lost not our time.
good heart, and i' faith, i will tell her as much. lord, lord, she will be a joyful woman.
you embrace your charge too willingly. i think this is your daughter.
by my troth, yes. i count it but time lost to hear such a foolish song. god be wi' you, and god mend your voices., come, audrey.
what wilt thou tell her, nurse? thou dost not mark me.
her mother hath many times told me so.
dost thou believe, orlando, that the boy can do all this that he hath promisèd?
i will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as i take it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
were you in doubt, sir, that you asked her?
i sometimes do believe and sometimes do not, as those that fear they hope, and know they fear.
bid her devise and there she shall at friar lawrence' cell be shrived and married. (gives her coins) here is for thy pains.
signor benedick, no, for then were you a child.
(to duke senior ) you say, if i bring in your rosalind, you will bestow her on orlando here?
no, truly, sir. not a penny.
you have it full, benedick. we may guess by this what you are, being a man. truly, the lady fathers herself., be
that would i, had i kingdoms to give with her.
go to. i say you shall.
if signor leonato be her father, she would not have his head on her shoulders for all messina, as like him as she is.
(to orlando ) and you say you will have her when i bring her?
(takes the money) this afternoon, sir? well, she shall be there.
i wonder that you will still be talking, signor benedick. nobody marks you.
that would i, were i of all kingdoms king.
and stay, good nurse. behind the abbey wall within this hour my man shall be with thee and bring thee cords made like a tackled stair, which to the high top-gallant of my joy farewell. be trusty, and i'll quit thy pains. farewell. commend me to thy mistress.
what, my dear lady disdain! are you yet living?
(to phoebe ) you say you'll marry me if i be willing?
now god in heaven bless thee! hark you, sir.
is it possible disdain should die while she hath such meet food to feed it as signor benedick? courtesy itself must convert to disdain if you come in her presence.
that will i, should i die the hour after.
what sayst thou, my dear nurse?
then is courtesy a turncoat. but it is certain i am loved of my heart that i had not a hard heart, for truly i love none.
but if you do refuse to marry me,
"two may keep counsel, putting one away"?
a dear happiness to women. they would else have been troubled with a pernicious suitor. i thank god and my cold blood i am of your humor for that. i had rather hear my dog
so is the bargain.
warrant thee, my man's as true as steel.
god keep your ladyship still in that mind, so some gentle- man or other shall 'scape a predestinate scratched face.
(to silvius ) you say that you'll have phoebe if she will?
well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady., lord, lord! when 'twas a little prating thing., oh, there is a nobleman in town, one paris, that would fain lay knife aboard, but she, good soul, had as lief see a toad, a very toad, as see him. i anger her sometimes and tell her that paris is the properer man. but, i'll warrant you, when i say so, she looks as pale as any clout in the versal world. doth not rosemary and romeo begin both with a letter?
scratching could not make it worse an 'twere such a face as yours were.
though to have her and death were both one thing.
ay, nurse, what of that? both with an r.
well, you are a rare parrot-teacher.
i have promised to make all this matter even. , you yours, orlando, to receive his daughter. , keep your word, phoebe, that you'll marry me or else, refusing me, to wed this shepherd. , keep your word, silvius, that you'll marry her to make these doubts all even.
ah, mocker, that's the dog's name. r is for the, no, i know it begins with some other letter, and she hath the prettiest sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good to hear it.
a bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours.
i do remember in this shepherd boy some lively touches of my daughter's favor.
commend me to thy lady.
i would my horse had the speed of your tongue and so good a continuer. but keep your way, i' god's name. i have done.
my lord, the first time that i ever saw him but, my good lord, this boy is forest-born and hath been tutored in the rudiments of many desperate studies by his uncle, whom he reports to be a great magician
ay, a thousand times., peter!
you always end with a jade's trick. i know you of old.
there is sure another flood toward, and these couples are coming to the ark. here comes a pair of very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools.
anon!
signior benedick, my dear friend leonato hath invited you all. i tell him we shall stay here at the least a month, and he heartily prays some occasion may detain us longer. i dare swear he is no hypocrite but prays from his heart.
salutation and greeting to you all.
before and apace.
john) let me bid you welcome, my lord. being reconciled to the prince your brother, i owe you all duty.
good my lord, bid him welcome. this is the motley-minded gentleman that i have so often met in the forest. he hath been a courtier, he swears.
the clock struck nine when i did send the nurse. in half an hour she promised to return. perchance she cannot meet him. that's not so. oh, she is lame! love's heralds should be thoughts, driving back shadows over louring hills. therefore do nimble-pinioned doves draw love and therefore hath the wind-swift cupid wings. now is the sun upon the highmost hill is three long hours, yet she is not come. had she affections and warm youthful blood, she would be as swift in motion as a ball. my words would bandy her to my sweet love, but old folks, many feign as they were dead, unwieldy, slow, heavy, and pale as lead.
i thank you. i am not of many words, but i thank you.
if any man doubt that, let him put me to my purgation. i have trod a measure. i have flattered a lady. i have been politic with my friend, smooth with mine enemy. i have undone three tailors. i have had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.
o god, she comes., o honey nurse, what news? hast thou met with him? send thy man away.
please it your grace lead on?
and how was that ta'en up?
peter, stay at the gate.
your hand, leonato. we will go together.
faith, we met and found the quarrel was upon the seventh cause.
now, good sweet nurse, o lord, why look'st thou sad? though news be sad, yet tell them merrily. if good, thou shamest the music of sweet news by playing it to me with so sour a face.
benedick, didst thou note the daughter of signior leonato?
how "seventh cause"?, good my lord, like this fellow.
fie, how my bones ache! what a jaunt have i!
i noted her not, but i looked on her.
i like him very well.
i would thou hadst my bones and i thy news. nay, come, i pray thee, speak. good, good nurse, speak.
is she not a modest young lady?
god 'ild you, sir. i desire you of the like. i press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country copulatives, to swear and to forswear, according as marriage binds and blood breaks. a poor virgin, sir, an ill-favored thing, sir, but mine own. a poor humor of mine, sir, to take that that no man else will. rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a poor house, as your pearl in your foul oyster.
jesu, what haste! can you not stay awhile?
do you question me as an honest man should do, for my my custom, as being a professed tyrant to their sex?
by my faith, he is very swift and sententious.
how art thou out of breath when thou hast breath to say to me that thou art out of breath? the excuse that thou dost make in this delay is longer than the tale thou dost excuse. say either, and i'll stay the circumstance. let me be satisfied. is 't good or bad?
no, i pray thee speak in sober judgment.
according to the fool's bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.
well, you have made a simple choice. you know not how to choose a man. romeo! no, not he, though his face be better than any man's, yet his leg excels all men's, and for a hand and a foot and a body, though they be not to be talked on, yet they are past compare. he is not the flower of courtesy, but, i'll warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. go thy ways, wench. serve god. what, have you dined at home?
why, i' faith, methinks she's too low for a high praise, too brown for a fair praise, and too little for a great praise. only than she is, she were unhandsome, and being no other but as she is, i do not like her.
but for the seventh cause. how did you find the quarrel on the seventh cause?
no, no. but all this did i know before.
thou thinkest i am in sport. i pray thee tell me truly how thou lik'st her.
upon a lie seven times removed., bear your body more seeming, audrey., as thus, sir: i did dislike the cut of a certain courtier's beard. he sent me word if i said his beard was not cut well, he was in the mind it was. this is called "the retort courteous." if i sent him word again it was not well cut, he would send me word he cut it to please himself. this is called "the quip modest." if again it was not well cut, he disabled my judgment. this is called "the reply churlish." if again it was not well cut, he would answer i spake not true. this is called "the reproof valiant." if again it was not well cut, he would say i lie. this is called "the countercheck quarrelsome," and so to "the lie circumstantial" and "the lie direct."
lord, how my head aches! what a head have i! it beats as it would fall in twenty pieces. my back a' t' other side. ah, my back, my back! beshrew your heart for sending me about,
would you buy her, that you enquire after her?
and how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?
i' faith, i am sorry that thou art not well. sweet, sweet, sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
can the world buy such a jewel?
i durst go no further than the lie circumstantial, nor he durst not give me the lie direct, and so we measured swords and parted.
your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous, and a kind, and a handsome, and, i warrant, a virtuous, where is your mother?
yea, and a case to put it into. but speak you this with a sad brow? or do you play the flouting jack, to tell us cupid is a good hare-finder and vulcan a rare carpenter? come, in
can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?
where is my mother? why, she is within. where should she be? how oddly thou repliest! "your love says, like an honest gentleman, 'where is your mother?'"
in mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever i looked on.
o sir, we quarrel in print, by the book, as you have books for good manners. i will name you the degrees: the first, "the retort courteous"; the second, "the quip modest"; the third, "the reply churlish"; the fourth, "the reproof valiant"; the fifth, "the countercheque quarrelsome"; the sixth, "the lie with circumstance"; the seventh, "the lie direct." all these you may avoid but the lie direct, and you may avoid that, too, with an "if." i knew when seven justices could not take up a quarrel, but when the parties were met themselves, one of them thought but of an "if," as: "if you said so, then i said so." and they shook hands and swore brothers. your "if" is the only peacemaker: much virtue in "if."
o god's lady dear, is this the poultice for my aching bones? henceforward do your messages yourself.
i can see yet without spectacles, and i see no such matter. there's her cousin, an she were not possessed with a fury, exceeds her as much in beauty as the first of may doth the husband, have you?
is not this a rare fellow, my lord? he's as good at anything and yet a fool.
here's such a coil. come, what says romeo?
i would scarce trust myself, though i had sworn the contrary, if hero would be my wife.
he uses his folly like a stalking-horse, and under the presentation of that he shoots his wit.
have you got leave to go to shrift today?
is 't come to this? in faith, hath not the world one man but bachelor of three-score again? go to, i' faith, an thou wilt needs thrust thy neck into a yoke, wear the print of it, and sigh away sundays. look, don pedro is returned to seek you.
then is there mirth in heaven atone together.
i have.
leonato's?
good duke, receive thy daughter. hymen from heaven brought her, yea, brought her hither, whose heart within his bosom is.
then hie you hence to friar lawrence's cell. there stays a husband to make you a wife. now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks. they'll be in scarlet straight at any news. to fetch a ladder, by the which your love must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark. i am the drudge and toil in your delight, but you shall bear the burden soon at night.
i would your grace would constrain me to tell.
(to duke senior ) to you i give myself, for i am yours. (to orlando ) to you i give myself, for i am yours.
hie to high fortune! honest nurse, farewell.
i charge thee on thy allegiance.
if there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.
so smile the heavens upon this holy act that after-hours with sorrow chide us not.
you hear, count claudio? i can be secret as a dumb man, i this, on my allegiance, (to don pedro) he is in love. with who? now, that is your grace's part. mark how short his answer is: with hero, leonato's short daughter.
if there be truth in sight, you are my rosalind.
amen, amen. but come what sorrow can, it cannot countervail the exchange of joy do thou but close our hands with holy words, then love-devouring death do what he dare; it is enough i may but call her mine.
if this were so, so were it uttered.
if sight and shape be true, why then, my love adieu.
these violent delights have violent ends which, as they kiss, consume. the sweetest honey is loathsome in his own deliciousness and in the taste confounds the appetite. therefore love moderately. long love doth so.
indeed, god forbid it should be so."
(to duke senior ) i'll have no father, if you be not he. (to orlando ) i'll have no husband, if you be not he,
here comes the lady. oh, so light a foot will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint. a lover may bestride the gossamers that idles in the wanton summer air,
if my passion change not shortly, god forbid it should be otherwise.
peace, ho! i bar confusion. 'tis i must make conclusion of these most strange events. here's eight that must take hands if truth holds true contents. (to orlando and rosalind) you and you no cross shall part. (to oliver and celia ) you and you are heart in heart. (to phoebe ) you to his love must accord (to touchstone and audrey ) you and you are sure together as the winter to foul weather. (to all) whiles a wedlock hymn we sing, feed yourselves with questioning, how thus we met, and these things finish.
good even to my ghostly confessor.
amen, if you love her, for the lady is very well worthy.
(sings) wedding is great juno's crown, o blessèd bond of board and bed. high wedlock then be honorèd. honor, high honor, and renown, to hymen, god of every town.
romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
you speak this to fetch me in, my lord.
o my dear niece, welcome thou art to me,
as much to him, else is his thanks too much.
by my troth, i speak my thought.
i will not eat my word. now thou art mine, thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.
ah, juliet, if the measure of thy joy to blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath this neighbor air, and let rich music's tongue unfold the imagined happiness that both receive in either by this dear encounter.
and, in faith, my lord, i spoke mine.
let me have audience for a word or two. i am the second son of old sir rowland, duke frederick, hearing how that every day men of great worth resorted to this forest, addressed a mighty power, which were on foot in his own conduct, purposely to take and to the skirts of this wild wood he came, where, meeting with an old religious man, after some question with him, was converted both from his enterprise and from the world, and all their lands restored to them again that were with him exiled. this to be true i do engage my life.
brags of his substance, not of ornament. they are but beggars that can count their worth. but my true love is grown to such excess i cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
and by my two faiths and troths, my lord, i spoke mine.
welcome, young man. to one his lands withheld, and to the other a land itself at large, a potent dukedom. , first, in this forest let us do those ends that here were well begun and well begot, that have endured shrewd days and nights with us shall share the good of our returnèd fortune according to the measure of their states. meantime, forget this new-fall'n dignity, , play, music., and you brides and bridegrooms all, with measure heaped in joy to th' measures fall.
for, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone till holy church incorporate two in one.
that i love her, i feel.
sir, by your patience: if i heard you rightly, the duke hath put on a religious life
i pray thee, good mercutio, let's retire. the day is hot; the capulets, abroad; and if we meet we shall not 'scape a brawl, for now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
that she is worthy, i know.
he hath.
thou art like one of those fellows that, when he enters the confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says "god send me no need of thee!" and, by the operation of the second cup, draws it on the drawer when indeed there is no need.
that i neither feel how she should be loved nor know how she should be worthy is the opinion that fire cannot melt out of me. i will die in it at the stake.
to him will i. out of these convertites there is much matter to be heard and learned. (to duke senior ) your patience and your virtue well deserves it. (to orlando ) you to a love that your true faith doth merit. (to oliver ) (to silvius ) you to a long and well-deservèd bed.
am i like such a fellow?
thou wast ever an obstinate heretic in the despite of beauty.
(to touchstone ) and you to wrangling, for thy loving voyage i am for other than for dancing measures.
come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in italy, and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.
and never could maintain his part but in the force of his will.
stay, jaques, stay.
and what to?
that a woman conceived me, i thank her. that she brought me up, i likewise give her most humble thanks. but that i will have a recheat winded in my forehead or hang my bugle because i will not do them the wrong to mistrust any, i will do myself the right to trust none. and the fine is, for the which i may go the finer, i will live a bachelor.
to see no pastime i. what you would have i'll stay to know at your abandoned cave.
nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for one would kill the other. thou, why, thou wilt quarrel with a man that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast. thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. what eye but such an eye would spy out such a quarrel? thy head is as full of quarrels as an egg is full of meat, and yet thy head hath been beaten as addle as an egg for quarreling. thou hast quarreled with a man for coughing in the street because he hath wakened thy dog that hath lain asleep in the sun. didst thou not fall out with a tailor for wearing his new doublet before easter? with another, for tying his new shoes with old ribbon? and yet thou wilt tutor me from quarreling!
i shall see thee, ere i die, look pale with love.
as we do trust they'll end, in true delights.
an i were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
with love. prove that ever i lose more blood with love than i will get again with drinking, pick out mine eyes with a ballad-maker's pen and hang me up at the door of a brothel house for the sign of blind cupid.
it is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue, but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord the prologue. if it be true that good wine needs no bush, 'tis true that a good play needs no epilogue. yet to good wine they do use good bushes, and good plays prove the better by the help of good epilogues. what a case am i in, then, that am neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with you in the behalf of a good play. i am not furnished like a beggar; therefore to beg will not become me. my way is to conjure you, and i'll begin with the women. i charge you, o women, for the love you bear to men, to like as much of this play as please you. and i charge you, o men, for the love you bear to women, as i perceive by your simpering, none of you hates them, that between you and the women the play may please. if i were a woman, i would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased me, complexions that liked me, and breaths that i defied not. and i am sure as many as have good beards, or good faces, or sweet breaths will, for my kind offer, when i make curtsy, bid me farewell.
the fee simple? o simple!
a notable argument.
by my head, here comes the capulets.
if i do, hang me in a bottle like a cat and shoot at me, and he that hits me, let him be clapped on the shoulder and called adam.
i'll pheeze you, in faith.
by my heel, i care not.
in time the savage bull doth bear the yoke.
a pair of stocks, you rogue!
follow me close, for i will speak to them.
the savage bull may, but if ever the sensible benedick bear it, pluck off the bull's horns and set them in my forehead, and let me be vilely painted, and in such great letters as they sign "here you may see benedick the married man."
y'are a baggage, the slys are no rogues. look in the chronicles, we came in with richard conqueror. therefore paucas pallabris: let the world slide. sessa!
and but one word with one of us? couple it with something. make it a word and a blow.
if this should ever happen, thou wouldst be horn-mad.
you will not pay for the glasses you have burst?
you shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me occasion.
nay, if cupid have not spent all his quiver in venice, thou wilt quake for this shortly.
no, not a denier. go by, saint jeronimy. go to thy cold bed and warm thee.
could you not take some occasion without giving?
i look for an earthquake too, then.
i know my remedy. i must go fetch the thirdborough.
mercutio, thou consort'st with romeo.
well, you temporize with the hours. in the meantime, good signior benedick, repair to leonato's. commend me to him and tell him i will not fail him at supper, for indeed he hath made great preparation.
third, or fourth, or fifth borough, i'll answer him by law.
consort? what, dost thou make us minstrels? an thou make minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. here's my fiddlestick. here's that shall make you dance. zounds, "consort"!
and so i commit you, 
huntsman, i charge thee, tender well my hounds. breathe merriman, the poor cur is embossed, and couple clowder with the deep-mouthed brach. saw'st thou not, boy, how silver made it good i would not lose the dog for twenty pound.
we talk here in the public haunt of men. either withdraw unto some private place, and reason coldly of your grievances, or else depart. here all eyes gaze on us.
to the tuition of god. from my house, if i had it, 
why, belman is as good as he, my lord. he cried upon it at the merest loss, and twice today picked out the dullest scent.
i will not budge for no man's pleasure, i.
the sixth of july. your loving friend, benedick.
thou art a fool. if echo were as fleet, i would esteem him worth a dozen such. but sup them well and look unto them all. tomorrow i intend to hunt again.
well, peace be with you, sir. here comes my man.
nay, mock not, mock not. the body of your discourse is slightly basted on neither. ere you flout old ends any further, examine your conscience. and so i leave you.
i will, my lord.
but i'll be hanged, sir, if he wear your livery. marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower.
my liege, your highness now may do me good.
what's here? one dead, or drunk? see, doth he breathe?
romeo, the love i bear thee can afford no better term than this: thou art a villain.
my love is thine to teach. teach it but how, any hard lesson that may do thee good.
he breathes, my lord. were he not warmed with ale, this were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly.
tybalt, the reason that i have to love thee doth much excuse the appertaining rage therefore, farewell. i see thou know'st me not.
hath leonato any son, my lord?
o monstrous beast, how like a swine he lies! sirs, i will practice on this drunken man. what think you: if he were conveyed to bed, wrapped in sweet clothes, rings put upon his fingers, a most delicious banquet by his bed, would not the beggar then forget himself?
boy, this shall not excuse the injuries that thou hast done me. therefore turn and draw.
no child but hero; she's his only heir. dost thou affect her, claudio?
believe me, lord, i think he cannot choose.
i do protest i never injured thee, till thou shalt know the reason of my love. and so, good capulet, which name i tender as dearly as my own, be satisfied.
o, my lord, i looked upon her with a soldier's eye, that liked but had a rougher task in hand than to drive liking to the name of love. but now i am returned and that war thoughts come thronging soft and delicate desires, all prompting me how fair young hero is, saying i liked her ere i went to wars.
it would seem strange unto him when he waked.
o calm dishonourable, vile submission! tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
thou wilt be like a lover presently if thou dost love fair hero, cherish it, and i will break with her and with her father, and thou shalt have her. was 't not to this end that thou began'st to twist so fine a story?
even as a flatt'ring dream or worthless fancy. carry him gently to my fairest chamber and hang it round with all my wanton pictures. balm his foul head in warm distilled waters and burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet. to make a dulcet and a heavenly sound. and if he chance to speak, be ready straight and with a low submissive reverence say, "what is it your honor will command?" full of rose-water and bestrewed with flowers, another bear the ewer, the third a diaper, and say, "will 't please your lordship cool your hands?" someone be ready with a costly suit another tell him of his hounds and horse, and that his lady mourns at his disease. persuade him that he hath been lunatic, and when he says he is, say that he dreams, this do, and do it kindly, gentle sirs. it will be pastime passing excellent if it be husbanded with modesty.
what wouldst thou have with me?
that know love's grief by his complexion! but lest my liking might too sudden seem, i would have salved it with a longer treatise.
my lord, i warrant you we will play our part he is no less than what we say he is.
good king of cats, nothing but one of your nine lives, that i mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter, dry-beat the rest of the eight. will you pluck your sword out of his pilcher by the ears? make haste, lest mine be about your ears ere it be out.
what need the bridge much broader than the flood? look what will serve is fit. 'tis once, thou lovest, and i will fit thee with the remedy. i know we shall have reveling tonight. i will assume thy part in some disguise and in her bosom i'll unclasp my heart and take her hearing prisoner with the force and strong encounter of my amorous tale. then after to her father will i break, in practice let us put it presently.
take him up gently, and to bed with him, and each one to his office when he wakes.
i am for you. (draws his sword)
how now, brother, where is my cousin, your son? hath he provided this music?
sirrah, go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds.
gentle mercutio, put thy rapier up.
he is very busy about it. but, brother, i can tell you strange news that you yet dreamt not of.
traveling some journey, to repose him here.
come, sir, your passado.
are they good?
how now! who is it?
(draws his sword) draw, benvolio. beat down their weapons. gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage. tybalt, mercutio! the prince expressly hath hold, tybalt! good mercutio!
as the events stamps them, but they have a good cover; they show well outward. the prince and count claudio, walking in a thick-pleached alley in mine orchard, were thus much overheard by a man of mine: the prince and meant to acknowledge it this night in a dance, and if he found her accordant, he meant to take the present time by the top and instantly break with you of it.
an't please your honor, players that offer service to your lordship.
away, tybalt.
hath the fellow any wit that told you this?
bid them come near.
i am hurt. a plague o' both your houses! i am sped.
yourself.
now, fellows, you are welcome.
what, art thou hurt?
no, no, we will hold it as a dream till it appear itself. but i will acquaint my daughter withal, that she may be the better prepared for an answer if peradventure this be true.
we thank your honor.
ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. marry, 'tis enough. where is my page?, go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
cousins, you know what you have to do., o, i cry you mercy, friend. go you with me and i will use your skill., good cousin, have a care this busy time.
do you intend to stay with me tonight?
courage, man. the hurt cannot be much.
what the goodyear, my lord, why are you thus out of measure sad?
so please your lordship to accept our duty.
no, 'tis not so deep as a well nor so wide as a church-door, but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. ask for me tomorrow, and you shall find me a grave man. i am peppered, i warrant, for this world. a plague o' both your houses! zounds, a dog, a rat, a mouse, a cat to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue, a villain that fights by the book of arithmetic! why the devil came you between us? i was hurt under your arm.
there is no measure in the occasion that breeds. therefore the sadness is without limit.
with all my heart. this fellow i remember 'twas where you wooed the gentlewoman so well. i have forgot your name, but sure that part was aptly fitted and naturally performed.
i thought all for the best.
you should hear reason.
i think 'twas soto that your honor means.
help me into some house, benvolio, or i shall faint. a plague o' both your houses! they have made worms' meat of me. i have it,
and when i have heard it, what blessing brings it?
well, you are come to me in happy time, the rather for i have some sport in hand wherein your cunning can assist me much. there is a lord will hear you play tonight; lest over-eyeing of his odd behavior, for yet his honor never heard a play, you break into some merry passion and so offend him. for i tell you, sirs,
this gentleman, the prince's near ally, my very friend, hath got his mortal hurt in my behalf. my reputation stained with tybalt's slander., tybalt, that an hour thy beauty hath made me effeminate and in my temper softened valor's steel!
if not a present remedy, at least a patient sufferance.
fear not, my lord, we can contain ourselves were he the veriest antic in the world.
o romeo, romeo, brave mercutio is dead! that gallant spirit hath aspired the clouds,
i wonder that thou, being, as thou sayst thou art, born under saturn, goest about to apply a moral medicine to a when i have cause and smile at no man's jests, eat when i have stomach and wait for no man's leisure, sleep when i am drowsy and tend on no man's business, laugh when i am merry and claw no man in his humor.
go, sirrah, take them to the buttery and give them friendly welcome every one.
this day's black fate on more days doth depend. this but begins the woe others must end.
may do it without controlment. you have of late stood out against your brother, and he hath ta'en you newly into his grace, where it is impossible you should take true root but by the fair weather that you make yourself. it is needful that
sirrah, go you to barthol'mew, my page, and see him dressed in all suits like a lady. that done, conduct him to the drunkard's chamber and call him "madam," do him obeisance. he bear himself with honorable action, such as he hath observed in noble ladies unto their lords, by them accomplishèd.
here comes the furious tybalt back again.
i had rather be a canker in a hedge than a rose in his grace, and it better fits my blood to be disdained of all than to fashion a carriage to rob love from any. in this, though i cannot be said to be a flattering honest man, it must not be muzzle and enfranchised with a clog; therefore i have decreed not to sing in my cage. if i had my mouth, i would bite; if i had my liberty, i would do my liking. in the meantime, let me be that i am, and seek not to alter me.
such duty to the drunkard let him do and say, "what is 't your honor will command, wherein your lady and your humble wife may show her duty and make known her love?" and then with kind embracements, tempting kisses, bid him shed tears, as being overjoyed to see her noble lord restored to health, who for this seven years hath esteemed him no better than a poor and loathsome beggar. to rain a shower of commanded tears, an onion will do well for such a shift, which in a napkin being close conveyed shall in despite enforce a watery eye. anon i'll give thee more instructions.
alive in triumph, and mercutio slain! and fire-eyed fury be my conduct now. now, tybalt, take the "villain" back again that late thou gavest me, for mercutio's soul is but a little way above our heads, either thou or i, or both, must go with him.
can you make no use of your discontent?
i know the boy will well usurp the grace, voice, gait, and action of a gentlewoman. i long to hear him call the drunkard "husband," when they do homage to this simple peasant. i'll in to counsel them. haply my presence may well abate the over-merry spleen which otherwise would grow into extremes.
thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here shalt with him hence.
i make all use of it, for i use it only. who comes here?
for god's sake, a pot of small ale.
this shall determine that.
what news, borachio?
will 't please your lordship drink a cup of sack?
romeo, away, be gone! stand not amazed. the prince will doom thee death if thou art taken. hence, be gone, away!
i came yonder from a great supper. the prince your brother intelligence of an intended marriage.
will 't please your honor taste of these conserves?
oh, i am fortune's fool!
will it serve for any model to build mischief on? what is he for a fool that betroths himself to unquietness?
what raiment will your honor wear today?
why dost thou stay?
marry, it is your brother's right hand.
i am christophero sly. call not me "honor" nor "lordship." i ne'er drank sack in my life. an if you give me any conserves, give me conserves of beef. ne'er ask me what raiment i'll wear, for i have no more doublets than backs, no more stockings than legs, nor no more shoes than feet, nay sometime more feet than shoes, or such shoes as my toes look through the over-leather.
which way ran he that killed mercutio?
who? the most exquisite claudio?
heaven cease this idle humor in your honor! oh, that a mighty man of such descent, of such possessions and so high esteem, should be infusèd with so foul a spirit!
there lies that tybalt.
even he.
what, would you make me mad? am not i christopher sly, old sly's son of burton heath, by birth a peddler, by education a cardmaker, by transmutation a bearherd, and now by present profession a tinker? ask marian hacket, the fat alewife of wincot, if she know me not! if she say i am not fourteen pence on the score for sheer ale, score me up for the lying'st knave in christendom. what! i am not bestraught! here's, 
(to tybalt) up, sir, go with me. i charge thee in the prince's name, obey.
a proper squire. and who, and who? which way looks he?
oh, this it is that makes your lady mourn!
where are the vile beginners of this fray?
marry, on hero, the daughter and heir of leonato.
oh, this is it that makes your servants droop!
the unlucky manage of this fatal brawl. there lies the man, slain by young romeo, that slew thy kinsman, brave mercutio.
a very forward march-chick! how came you to this?
hence comes it that your kindred shuns your house, as beaten hence by your strange lunacy. call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment, and banish hence these abject lowly dreams. look how thy servants do attend on thee, each in his office ready at thy beck.
tybalt, my cousin! o my brother's child! of my dear kinsman! prince, as thou art true, for blood of ours shed blood of montague. o cousin, cousin!
room, comes me the prince and claudio, hand in hand, in sad conference. i whipped me behind the arras, and there heard it agreed upon that the prince should woo hero for himself, and having obtained her, give her to count
and twenty cagèd nightingales do sing: or wilt thou sleep? we'll have thee to a couch softer and sweeter than the lustful bed on purpose trimmed up for semiramis. or wilt thou ride? thy horses shall be trapped, their harness studded all with gold and pearl. dost thou love hawking? thou hast hawks will soar above the morning lark. or wilt thou hunt? and fetch shrill echoes from the hollow earth.
benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
come, come, let us thither. this may prove food to my displeasure. that young start-up hath all the glory of my overthrow. if i can cross him any way, i bless myself every way. you are both sure, and will assist me?
say thou wilt course. thy greyhounds are as swift as breathed stags, ay, fleeter than the roe.
tybalt here slain, whom romeo's hand did slay. how nice the quarrel was and urged withal your high displeasure. all this uttered with gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bowed, could not take truce with the unruly spleen with piercing steel at bold mercutio's breast, who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point, and, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats cold death aside and with the other sends retorts it. romeo, he cries aloud, "hold, friends! friends, part!" and, swifter than his tongue, his agile arm beats down their fatal points, and 'twixt them rushes, underneath whose arm of stout mercutio, and then tybalt fled.
to the death, my lord.
dost thou love pictures? we will fetch thee straight and cytherea all in sedges hid, which seem to move and wanton with her breath, even as the waving sedges play with wind.
but by and by comes back to romeo, who had but newly entertained revenge, and to 't they go like lightning, for ere i and, as he fell, did romeo turn and fly. this is the truth, or let benvolio die.
let us to the great supper. their cheer is the greater that i am subdued. would the cook were o' my mind! shall we go prove what's to be done?
we'll show thee io as she was a maid as lively painted as the deed was done.
he is a kinsman to the montague. affection makes him false. he speaks not true. and all those twenty could but kill one life. i beg for justice, which thou, prince, must give. romeo slew tybalt. romeo must not live.
we'll wait upon your lordship.
or daphne roaming through a thorny wood, scratching her legs that one shall swear she bleeds, and at that sight shall sad apollo weep,
romeo slew him; he slew mercutio.
was not count john here at supper?
thou art a lord, and nothing but a lord. thou hast a lady far more beautiful than any woman in this waning age.
not romeo, prince, he was mercutio's friend. his fault concludes but what the law should end, the life of tybalt.
i saw him not.
and till the tears that she hath shed for thee she was the fairest creature in the world, and yet she is inferior to none.
and for that offence immediately we do exile him hence. my blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding. but i'll amerce you with so strong a fine that you shall all repent the loss of mine. i will be deaf to pleading and excuses. therefore use none. let romeo hence in haste, else, when he's found, that hour is his last. bear hence this body and attend our will. mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
how tartly that gentleman looks! i never can see him but i am heartburned an hour after.
am i a lord, and have i such a lady? or do i dream? or have i dreamed till now? i smell sweet savors and i feel soft things. upon my life, i am a lord indeed and not a tinker, nor christopher sly. well, bring our lady hither to our sight,
gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds, toward phoebus' lodging. such a wagoner as phaeton would whip you to the west and bring in cloudy night immediately. that runaways' eyes may wink, and romeo leap to these arms, untalked of and unseen. lovers can see to do their amorous rites by their own beauties, or, if love be blind, thou sober-suited matron, all in black, and learn me how to lose a winning match played for a pair of stainless maidenhoods. hood my unmanned blood bating in my cheeks, think true love acted simple modesty. come, night. come, romeo. come, thou day in night, for thou wilt lie upon the wings of night whiter than new snow upon a raven's back. give me my romeo. and when i shall die, take him and cut him out in little stars, and he will make the face of heaven so fine that all the world will be in love with night oh, i have bought the mansion of a love, but not possessed it, and though i am sold, not yet enjoyed. so tedious is this day as is the night before some festival and may not wear them.
he is of a very melancholy disposition.
will 't please your mightiness to wash your hands? o, how we joy to see your wit restored! o, that once more you knew but what you are! these fifteen years you have been in a dream
oh, here comes my nurse, and she brings news, and every tongue that speaks but romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence., now, nurse, what news? what hast thou there? the cords
he were an excellent man that were made just in the midway between him and benedick. the one is too like an image and says nothing, and the other too like my lady's eldest son, evermore tattling.
these fifteen years! by my fay, a goodly nap. but did i never speak of all that time?
ay, ay, the cords.
mouth, and half count john's melancholy in signor benedick's face, 
o, yes, my lord, but very idle words. for though you lay here in this goodly chamber, and rail upon the hostess of the house, and say you would present her at the leet, because she brought stone jugs and no sealed quarts. sometimes you would call out for cicely hacket.
ay me, what news? why dost thou wring thy hands?
with a good leg and a good foot, uncle, and money enough in his purse, such a man would win any woman in the
ay, the woman's maid of the house.
ah, welladay! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead! we are undone, lady, we are undone!
by my troth, niece, thou wilt never get thee a husband if thou be so shrewd of thy tongue.
why, sir, you know no house nor no such maid, nor no such men as you have reckoned up, as stephen sly and old john naps of greece, and peter turph and henry pimpernell, which never were, nor no man ever saw.
can heaven be so envious?
in faith, she's too curst.
now lord be thanked for my good amends!
romeo can, though heaven cannot. o romeo, romeo! who ever would have thought it? romeo!
too curst is more than curst. i shall lessen god's sending but to a cow too curst, he sends none.
amen.
what devil art thou that dost torment me thus? hath romeo slain himself? say thou but "ay," and that bare vowel i shall poison more than the death-darting eye of cockatrice. i am not i if there be such an i, if he be slain, say "ay," or if not, "no." brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
so, by being too curst, god will send you no horns.
i thank thee. thou shalt not lose by it.
i saw the wound, i saw it with mine eyes, god save the mark!, here on his manly breast. pale, pale as ashes, all bedaubed in blood, all in gore blood. i swoonèd at the sight.
just, if he send me no husband, for the which blessing i am at him upon my knees every morning and evening. lord, i rather lie in the woolen.
how fares my noble lord?
o, break, my hear, poor bankrupt, break at once! to prison, eyes, ne'er look on liberty. and thou and romeo press one heavy bier.
you may light on a husband that hath no beard.
marry, i fare well, for here is cheer enough. where is my wife?
o tybalt, tybalt, the best friend i had! o courteous tybalt! honest gentleman! that ever i should live to see thee dead.
what should i do with him? dress him in my apparel and make him my waiting gentlewoman? he that hath a beard a man; and he that is more than a youth is not for me, and he that is less than a man, i am not for him. therefore i will even take sixpence in earnest of the bearherd, and lead his apes into hell.
here, noble lord. what is thy will with her?
is romeo slaughtered, and is tybalt dead? my dearest cousin and my dearer lord? then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom! for who is living if those two are gone?
well then, go you into hell?
are you my wife and will not call me "husband"? my men should call me "lord." i am your goodman.
romeo that killed him, he is banishèd.
no, but to the gate, and there will the devil meet me like an old cuckold with horns on his head, and say, "get you to heaven, beatrice, get you to heaven; here's no place for you maids." so deliver i up my apes and away to saint peter. for live we as merry as the day is long.
i am your wife in all obedience.
o god, did romeo's hand shed tybalt's blood?
(to hero)well, niece, i trust you will be ruled by your father.
i know it well., what must i call her?
it did, it did. alas the day, it did.
yes, faith, it is my cousin's duty to make curtsy and say, him be a handsome fellow, or else make another curtsy and say, "father, as it please me."
"madam."
o serpent heart hid with a flowering face! beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical! dove-feathered raven, wolvish-ravening lamb! despisèd substance of divinest show, just opposite to what thou justly seem'st. o nature, what hadst thou to do in hell when thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend in moral paradise of such sweet flesh? was ever book containing such vile matter in such a gorgeous palace!
well, niece, i hope to see you one day fitted with a husband.
"alice madam," or "joan madam"?
there's no trust, no faith, no honesty in men. all perjured, all forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers. ah, where's my man?, give me some aqua vitae., shame come to romeo!
not till god make men of some other metal than earth. piece of valiant dust? to make an account of her life to a clod of wayward marl? no, uncle, i'll none. adam's sons are my brethren, and truly i hold it a sin to match in my kindred.
"madam," and nothing else. so lords call ladies.
blistered be thy tongue for such a wish! he was not born to shame. upon his brow shame is ashamed to sit, for 'tis a throne where honor may be crowned. oh, what a beast was i to chide at him!
(to hero) daughter, remember what i told you. if the
and slept above some fifteen year or more.
will you speak well of him that killed your cousin?
the fault will be in the music, cousin, if you be not wooed in good time. if the prince be too important, tell him there is measure in everything, and so dance out the answer. for hear me, hero, wooing, wedding, and repenting is as a and hasty like a scotch jig, and full as fantastical; the wedding, mannerly modest as a measure, full of state and ancientry; and then comes repentance, and with his bad legs falls into the cinquepace faster and faster till he sink
ay, and the time seems thirty unto me, being all this time abandoned from your bed.
shall i speak ill of him that is my husband? ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name, but wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin? that villain cousin would have killed my husband. back, foolish tears, back to your native spring. your tributary drops belong to woe, my husband lives, that tybalt would have slain, and tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband. all this is comfort. wherefore weep i then? some word there was, worser than tybalt's death, but oh, it presses to my memory, like damnèd guilty deeds to sinners' minds. "tybalt is dead, and romeo banishèd."
cousin, you apprehend passing shrewdly.
'tis much., servants, leave me and her alone.
that "banishèd," that one word "banishèd" was woe enough, if it had ended there. or, if sour woe delights in fellowship and needly will be ranked with other griefs, why followed not, when she said "tybalt's dead," which modern lamentations might have moved? but with a rearward following tybalt's death, "romeo is banishèd." to speak that word, is father, mother, tybalt, romeo, juliet, there is no end, no limit, measure, bound, in that word's death. no words can that woe sound. where is my father and my mother, nurse?
i have a good eye, uncle. i can see a church by daylight.
thrice noble lord, let me entreat of you to pardon me yet for a night or two, or if not so, until the sun be set. for your physicians have expressly charged, that i should yet absent me from your bed. i hope this reason stands for my excuse.
weeping and wailing over tybalt's corse.
the revelers are entering, brother. make good room.
ay, it stands so that i may hardly tarry so long. but i would be loath to fall into my dreams again. i will therefore tarry in despite of the flesh and the blood.
wash they his wounds with tears? mine shall be spent when theirs are dry, for romeo's banishment. take up those cords., poor ropes, you are beguiled, both you and i, for romeo is exiled. but i, a maid, die maiden-widowèd. come, cords., come, nurse. i'll to my wedding bed. and death, not romeo, take my maidenhead!
lady, will you walk a bout with your friend?
your honor's players, hearing your amendment, for so your doctors hold it very meet, seeing too much sadness hath congealed your blood, and melancholy is the nurse of frenzy. therefore they thought it good you hear a play which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life.
hie to your chamber. i'll find romeo hark ye, your romeo will be here at night. i'll to him. he is hid at lawrence' cell.
yours for the walk, and especially when i walk away.
marry, i will. let them play it. is not a comonty a christmas gambold or a tumbling-trick?
(gives the nurse a ring)o, find him! give this ring to my true knight, and bid him come to take his last farewell.
with me in your company?
no, my good lord, it is more pleasing stuff.
romeo, come forth. come forth, thou fearful man. affliction is enamoured of thy parts, and thou art wedded to calamity.
i may say so when i please.
what, household stuff?
father, what news? what is the prince's doom? that i yet know not?
and when please you to say so?
it is a kind of history.
too familiar is my dear son with such sour company. i bring thee tidings of the prince's doom.
like the case!
well, we'll see 't. come, madam wife, sit by my side and let the world slip. we shall ne'er be younger.
what less than doomsday is the prince's doom?
my visor is philemon's roof; within the house is jove.
tranio, since for the great desire i had to see fair padua, nursery of arts, i am arrived for fruitful lombardy, the pleasant garden of great italy, with his goodwill and thy good company. my trusty servant, well approved in all, here let us breathe and haply institute a course of learning and ingenious studies. gave me my being and my father first, a merchant of great traffic through the world, vincentio, come of the bentivolii. vincentio's son, brought up in florence, to deck his fortune with his virtuous deeds. and therefore, tranio, for the time i study virtue, and that part of philosophy will i apply that treats of happiness tell me thy mind, for i have pisa left and am to padua come, as he that leaves a shallow plash to plunge him in the deep and with satiety seeks to quench his thirst.
not body's death, but body's banishment.
why, then, your visor should be thatched.
i am in all affected as yourself, glad that you thus continue your resolve to suck the sweets of sweet philosophy. only, good master, while we do admire let's be no stoics nor no stocks, i pray, or so devote to aristotle's checks as ovid be an outcast quite abjured. balk logic with acquaintance that you have, music and poesy use to quicken you; the mathematics and the metaphysics, fall to them as you find your stomach serves you. no profit grows where is no pleasure ta'en.
ha, banishment! be merciful, say "death," for exile hath more terror in his look, much more than death. do not say "banishment."
speak low if you speak love.
gramercies, tranio, well dost thou advise. if, biondello, thou wert come ashore, we could at once put us in readiness and take a lodging fit to entertain but stay awhile. what company is this?
be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
well, i would you did like me.
master, some show to welcome us to town.
there is no world without verona walls but purgatory, torture, hell itself. hence "banishèd" is banished from the world,
so would not i for your own sake, for i have many ill qualities.
gentlemen, importune me no farther, for how i firmly am resolved you know, before i have a husband for the elder. if either of you both love katherina, because i know you well and love you well leave shall you have to court her at your pleasure.
is death mistermed. calling death "banishment," thou cutt'st my head off with a golden ax and smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
which is one?
there, there, hortensio, will you any wife?
o deadly sin! o rude unthankfulness! taking thy part, hath rushed aside the law, and turned that black word "death" to "banishment." this is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
i say my prayers aloud.
(to baptista) i pray you, sir, is it your will to make a stale of me amongst these mates?
'tis torture and not mercy. heaven is here, and little mouse, every unworthy thing, live here in heaven and may look on her, but romeo may not. more validity, more honorable state, more courtship lives on the white wonder of dear juliet's hand and steal immortal blessing from her lips, who even in pure and vestal modesty, still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin. flies may do this, but i from this must fly. they are free men, but i am banishèd. and sayst thou yet that exile is not death? hadst thou no poison mixed, no sharp-ground knife, but "banishèd" to kill me?, "banishèd"! o friar, the damnèd use that word in hell. howling attends it. how hast thou the heart, being a divine, a ghostly confessor, to mangle me with that word "banishèd"?
i love you the better; the hearers may cry "amen."
"mates," maid? how mean you that? no mates for you
thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
god match me with a good dancer!
i' faith, sir, you shall never need to fear. i wis it is not halfway to her heart. but if it were, doubt not her care should be to comb your noddle with a three-legged stool
oh, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
amen.
from all such devils, good lord, deliver us!
i'll give thee armor to keep off that word, to comfort thee though thou art banishèd.
and god keep him out of my sight when the dance is done! answer, clerk.
and me too, good lord!
yet "banishèd"? hang up philosophy! unless philosophy can make a juliet, displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
no more words. the clerk is answered.
(aside to lucentio) husht, master, here's some good pastime toward.
oh, then i see that madmen have no ears.
i know you well enough. you are signor antonio.
(aside to tranio) but in the other's silence do i see maid's mild behavior and sobriety. peace, tranio.
how should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
at a word, i am not.
(aside to lucentio) well said, master. mum, and gaze your fill.
let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
i know you by the waggling of your head.
gentlemen, that i may soon make good what i have said, bianca, get you in, and let it not displease thee, good bianca, for i will love thee ne'er the less, my girl.
thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel. an hour but married, tybalt murderèd, doting like me, and like me banishèd, then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair and fall upon the ground, as i do now,
to tell you true, i counterfeit him.
put finger in the eye, an she knew why.
arise. one knocks. good romeo, hide thyself.
you could never do him so ill-well unless you were the very he.
sister, content you in my discontent., sir, to your pleasure humbly i subscribe. my books and instruments shall be my company,
not i, unless the breath of heartsick groans, mistlike, infold me from the search of eyes.
at a word, i am not.
hark, tranio! thou may'st hear minerva speak.
hark, how they knock!, who's there?, romeo, arise.
come, come, do you think i do not know you by your excellent wit? can virtue hide itself? go to, mum, you are
signior baptista, will you be so strange? sorry am i that our goodwill effects bianca's grief.
run to my study., by and by!, god's will, what simpleness is this!, i come, i come.
will you not tell me who told you so?
signior baptista, for this fiend of hell and make her bear the penance of her tongue?
who knocks so hard? whence come you? what's your will?
no, you shall pardon me.
gentlemen, content ye. i am resolved., go in, bianca.
(from within) let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
nor will you not tell me who you are?
in music, instruments, and poetry, schoolmasters will i keep within my house, fit to instruct her youth. if you, hortensio, or, signior gremio, you know any such, i will be very kind, and liberal to mine own children in good bringing up. and so farewell., katherina, you may stay, for i have more to commune with bianca.
(opens the door) welcome then.
not now.
why, and i trust i may go too, may i not? what, shall i be appointed hours as though, belike, i knew not what to take and what to leave, ha?
o holy friar, o, tell me, holy friar, where is my lady's lord? where's romeo?
hundred merry tales! well this was signor benedick that said so.
you may go to the devil's dam! your gifts are so good here's none will hold you., their love is not so great, hortensio, but we may blow our nails together and fast it fairly out. our cake's dough on both sides. farewell. yet for the love i bear my sweet bianca, if i can by any means light on a fit man to teach her that wherein she delights, i will wish him to her father.
there on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
what's he?
so will i, signior gremio. but a word, i pray. though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked parle, know now upon advice, it toucheth us both, that we may yet again have access to our fair mistress and be happy rivals in bianca's love, to labor and effect one thing specially.
oh, he is even in my mistress' case, piteous predicament! even so lies she, blubbering and weeping, weeping and blubbering. stand up, stand up. stand, an you be a man. for juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand.
i am sure you know him well enough.
what's that, i pray?
nurse!
not i, believe me.
marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.
ah sir, ah sir. death's the end of all.
did he never make you laugh?
a husband? a devil!
spakest thou of juliet? how is it with her? doth she not think me an old murderer, with blood removed but little from her own? where is she? and how doth she? and what says my concealed lady to our canceled love?
i pray you, what is he?
i say a husband.
oh, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps, and "tybalt" calls, and then on romeo cries, and then down falls again.
why, he is the prince's jester, a very dull fool, only his gift is in devising impossible slanders. none but libertines in his villainy, for he both pleases men and angers them, and then they laugh at him and beat him. i am sure he is in the fleet. i would he had boarded me.
i say a devil. think'st thou, hortensio, though her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool to be married to hell?
as if that name, shot from the deadly level of a gun, did murder her, as that name's cursed hand in what vile part of this anatomy doth my name lodge? tell me, that i may sack the hateful mansion. (draws his dagger)
when i know the gentleman, i'll tell him what you say.
tush, gremio. though it pass your patience and mine to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good fellows in the world, an a man could light on them, would take her with all faults, and money enough.
hold thy desperate hand. art thou a man? thy form cries out thou art. the unreasonable fury of a beast. unseemly woman in a seeming man, and ill-beseeming beast in seeming both! thou hast amazed me. by my holy order, hast thou slain tybalt? wilt thou slay thyself, and slay thy lady that in thy life lives by doing damnèd hate upon thyself? why rail'st thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth? in thee at once, which thou at once wouldst lose? fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit, which, like a usurer, abound'st in all and usest none in that true use indeed thy noble shape is but a form of wax, digressing from the valor of a man; thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury, killing that love which thou hast vowed to cherish; misshapen in the conduct of them both, like powder in a skill-less soldier's flask, is set afire by thine own ignorance; and thou dismembered with thine own defence. for whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead, there art thou happy. tybalt would kill thee, but thou slew'st tybalt, there art thou happy. the law that threatened death becomes thy friend a pack of blessings light upon thy back, happiness courts thee in her best array,
peradventure not marked or not laughed at, strikes him into melancholy, and then there's a partridge wing saved, for the fool will eat no supper that night.
i cannot tell. but i had as lief take her dowry with this condition: to be whipped at the high cross every morning.
but, like a misbehaved and sullen wench, thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love. go, get thee to thy love, as was decreed. ascend her chamber, hence, and comfort her. but look thou stay not till the watch be set, for then thou canst not pass to mantua, to blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends, beg pardon of the prince, and call thee back with twenty hundred thousand times more joy than thou went'st forth in lamentation., and bid her hasten all the house to bed, which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto. romeo is coming.
we must follow the leaders.
faith, as you say, there's small choice in rotten apples. but come, since this bar in law makes us friends, it shall be so far forth friendly maintained till by helping baptista's eldest daughter to a husband we set his youngest free for a husband, and then have to 't afresh. sweet bianca! happy man be his dole! he that runs fastest gets the ring. how say you, signior gremio?
o lord, i could have stayed here all the night my lord, i'll tell my lady you will come.
in every good thing.
i am agreed, and would i had given him the best horse inv padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her, wed her, and bed her, and rid the house of her! come on.
do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
nay, if they lead to any ill, i will leave them at the next turning.
i pray, sir, tell me, is it possible that love should of a sudden take such hold?
here, sir, a ring she bid me give you, sir. (gives romeo juliet's ring)
(to borachio) sure my brother is amorous on hero, and hath withdrawn her father to break with him about it. the
o tranio, till i found it to be true, but see, while idly i stood looking on, i found the effect of love in idleness and now in plainness do confess to thee that art to me as secret and as dear tranio, i burn, i pine, i perish, tranio, if i achieve not this young modest girl. counsel me, tranio, for i know thou canst. assist me, tranio, for i know thou wilt.
how well my comfort is revived by this!
and that is claudio. i know him by his bearing.
affection is not rated from the heart. if love have touched you, naught remains but so: redime te captum quam queas minimo.
go hence. good night. and here stands all your state: either be gone before the watch be set, or by the break of day disguised from hence. and he shall signify from time to time every good hap to you that chances here. give me thy hand. 'tis late. farewell, good night.
(to claudio) are not you signor benedick?
gramercies, lad, go forward. this contents.
but that a joy past joy calls out on me, farewell.
you know me well. i am he.
master, you looked so longly on the maid, perhaps you marked not what's the pith of all.
things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily, that we have had no time to move our daughter. look you, she loved her kinsman tybalt dearly, and so did i. well, we were born to die. i promise you, but for your company, i would have been abed an hour ago.
signor, you are very near my brother in his love. he is is no equal for his birth. you may do the part of an honest man in it.
oh yes, i saw sweet beauty in her face such as the daughter of agenor had, when with his knees he kissed the cretan strand.
these times of woe afford no time to woo. madam, good night. commend me to your daughter.
how know you he loves her?
saw you no more? marked you not how her sister began to scold and raise up such a storm that mortal ears might hardly endure the din?
tonight she is mewed up to her heaviness.
i heard him swear his affection.
and with her breath she did perfume the air. sacred and sweet was all i saw in her.
sir paris, i will make a desperate tender of my child's love. i think she will be ruled in all respects by me. nay, more, i doubt it not., acquaint her here of my son paris' love, and bid her, mark you me, on wednesday next, but, soft! what day is this?
so did i too, and he swore he would marry her tonight.
(aside) nay, then, 'tis time to stir him from his trance., i pray, awake, sir! if you love the maid, her eldest sister is so curst and shrewd that till the father rid his hands of her, master, your love must live a maid at home, and therefore has he closely mewed her up,
monday, my lord.
come, let us to the banquet.
ah, tranio, what a cruel father's he! but art thou not advised, he took some care to get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
o' thursday let it be., o' thursday, tell her, she shall be married to this noble earl., will you be ready? do you like this haste? we'll keep no great ado, a friend or two. it may be thought we held him carelessly, being our kinsman, if we revel much. therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends, and there an end. but what say you to thursday?
(unmasking) thus answer i in the name of benedick, but hear these ill news with the ears of claudio. friendship is constant in all other things save in the office and affairs of love. therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues. let every eye nogetiate for itself against whose charms faith melteth into blood. this is an accident of hourly proof, which i mistrusted not. farewell, therefore, hero.
ay, marry, am i, sir; and now 'tis plotted!
my lord, i would that thursday were tomorrow.
count claudio?
i have it, tranio!
well get you gone. o' thursday be it, then., go you to juliet ere you go to bed. prepare her, wife, against this wedding day., farewell, my lord., light to my chamber, ho! that we may call it early by and by., good night.
yea, the same.
master, for my hand, both our inventions meet and jump in one.
wilt thou be gone? it is not yet near day. it was the nightingale, and not the lark, that pierced the fearful hollow of thine ear. nightly she sings on yon pomegranate tree.
come, will you go with me?
tell me thine first.
it was the lark, the herald of the morn, no nightingale. look, love, what envious streaks do lace the severing clouds in yonder east. night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day i must be gone and live, or stay and die.
whither?
you will be schoolmaster and undertake the teaching of the maid: that's your device.
yon light is not daylight, i know it, i. it is some meteor that the sun exhales to be to thee this night a torchbearer, therefore stay yet. thou need'st not to be gone.
even to the next willow, about your own business, county. what fashion will you wear the garland of? about your lieutenant's scarf? you must wear it one way, for the prince hath gat your hero.
it is. may it be done?
let me be ta'en. let me be put to death. i am content, so thou wilt have it so. i'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye. nor that is not the lark, whose notes do beat the vaulty heaven so high above our heads. i have more care to stay than will to go. come, death, and welcome! juliet wills it so., 
i wish him joy of her.
and be in padua here vincentio's son, keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends, visit his countrymen and banquet them?
it is, it is. hie hence! be gone, away! it is the lark that sings so out of tune, straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps. some say the lark makes sweet division. some say the lark and loathèd toad change eyes. oh, now i would they had changed voices too, since arm from arm that voice doth us affray, hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day.
why, that's spoken like an honest drover; so they sell you thus?
basta, content thee, for i have it full. nor can we be distinguished by our faces for man or master. then it follows thus: thou shalt be master, tranio, in my stead, keep house and port and servants as i should. some neapolitan, or meaner man of pisa. 'tis hatched, and shall be so. tranio, at once uncase thee. take my colored hat and cloak.
more light and light, more dark and dark our woes!
i pray you, leave me.
when biondello comes, he waits on thee,
madam.
ho, now you strike like the blind man. 'twas the boy that stole your meat, and you'll beat the post.
where have i been? nay, how now, where are you? master, has my fellow tranio stolen your clothes? or you stolen his? or both? pray, what's the news?
nurse?
if it will not be, i'll leave you.
sirrah, come hither: 'tis no time to jest, and therefore frame your manners to the time. your fellow tranio here, to save my life, and i for my escape have put on his; for in a quarrel since i came ashore i killed a man and fear i was descried. wait you on him, i charge you, as becomes, you understand me?
your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
alas, poor hurt fowl, now will he creep into sedges. but that my lady beatrice should know me, and not know me! the prince's fool! ha, it may be i go under that title because i am merry. yea, but so i am apt to do myself wrong. i am not so that puts the world into her person and so gives me out. well, i'll be revenged as i may.
aye, sir. (aside) ne'er a whit.
then, window, let day in and let life out.
now, signior, where's the count? did you see him?
and not a jot of "tranio" in your mouth. tranio is changed into lucentio.
farewell, farewell. one kiss, and i'll descend.
troth, my lord, i have played the part of lady fame. i him, and i think i told him true, that your grace had got the goodwill of this young lady, and i offered him my company to a willow tree, either to make him a garland, as being forsaken, or to bind him up a rod, as being worthy to be
the better for him. would i were so too.
art thou gone so, love, lord? ay, husband, friend, i must hear from thee every day in the hour, oh, by this count i shall be much in years ere i again behold my romeo.
to be whipped? what's his fault?
that lucentio indeed had baptista's youngest daughter. but, sirrah, not for my sake, but your master's, i advise you use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies. when i am alone, why then i am tranio;
farewell! i will omit no opportunity that may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
the flat transgression of a schoolboy who, being overjoyed with finding a birds' nest, shows it his companion, and he steals it.
tranio, let's go. one thing more rests, that thyself execute, to make one among these wooers. if thou ask me why, sufficeth my reasons are both good and weighty.
oh, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
is in the stealer.
my lord, you nod. you do not mind the play.
i doubt it not, and all these woes shall serve for sweet discourses in our time to come.
yet it had not been amiss the rod had been made, and the garland too, for the garland he might have worn himself and the rod he might have bestowed on you, who, as i take
yes, by saint anne, do i. a good matter, surely. comes there any more of it?
o god, i have an ill-divining soul. methinks i see thee now, thou art so low either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
i will but teach them to sing and restore them to the owner.
my lord, 'tis but begun.
and trust me, love, in my eye so do you. dry sorrow drinks our blood. adieu, adieu!
if their singing answer your saying, by my faith, you say honestly.
'tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady. would 'twere done.
o fortune, fortune! all men call thee fickle. that is renowned for faith? be fickle, fortune, for then, i hope, thou wilt not keep him long, but send him back.
the lady beatrice hath a quarrel to you. the gentleman
verona, for a while i take my leave, to see my friends in padua, but of all my best belovèd and approvèd friend, hortensio. and i trow this is his house.
(from within) ho, daughter, are you up?
o, she misused me past the endurance of a block! an oak but with one green leaf on it would have answered her. my very visor began to assume life and scold with her. she told me, not thinking i had been myself, that i was the prince's upon jest with such impossible conveyance upon me that i stood like a man at a mark with a whole army shooting at me. she speaks poniards, and every word stabs. if her breath were as terrible as her terminations, there were no not marry her, though she were endowed with all that adam had left him before he transgressed. she would have made hercules have turned spit, yea, and have cleft his club to make the fire, too. come, talk not of her. you shall find scholar would conjure her, for certainly, while she is here, a man may live as quiet in hell as in a sanctuary, and people sin upon purpose because they would go thither. so indeed all disquiet, horror and perturbation follows her.
knock, sir? whom should i knock? is there any man has rebused your worship?
is she not down so late or up so early? what unaccustomed cause procures her hither?
look, here she comes.
villain, i say, knock me here soundly.
why, how now, juliet?
will your grace command me any service to the world's end? i will go on the slightest errand now to the antipodes that you can devise to send me on. i will fetch you a toothpicker now from the furthest inch of asia, bring you great cham's beard, do you any embassage to the pygmies, rather than hold three words' conference with this harpy. you have no employment for me?
knock you here, sir? why, sir, what am i, sir, that i should knock you here, sir?
madam, i am not well.
none but to desire your good company.
villain, i say, knock me at this gate
evermore weeping for your cousin's death? an if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live. therefore, have done. some grief shows much of love, but much of grief shows still some want of wit.
lady tongue!
my master is grown quarrelsome. i should knock you first, and then i know after who comes by the worst.
yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
(to beatrice) come, lady, come, you have lost the heart of signior benedick.
will it not be? faith, sirrah, an you'll not knock, i'll ring it.
which you weep for.
indeed, my lord, he lent it me awhile, and i gave him use for won it of me with false dice. therefore your grace may well say i have lost it.
help, mistress, help! my master is mad.
feeling so the loss, cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
you have put him down, lady, you have put him down.
now knock when i bid you, sirrah villain.
well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death, as that the villain lives which slaughtered him.
so i would not he should do me, my lord, lest i should prove you sent me to seek.
how now, what's the matter? my old friend grumio and my good friend petruchio? how do you all at verona?
what villain, madam?
why, how now, count, wherefore are you sad?
signior hortensio, come you to part the fray?
that same villain, romeo.
not sad, my lord.
alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor mio petruchio., rise, grumio, rise. we will compound this quarrel.
(aside) villain and he be many miles asunder. (to lady capulet) god pardon him! i do, with all my heart, and yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
how then, sick?
nay, 'tis no matter, sir, what he 'leges in latin. if this be not a lawful case for me to leave his service, look you, sir: he bid me knock him and rap him soundly, sir. well, was it fit for a servant to use his master so, being perhaps, for aught i see, two-and-thirty, a pip out? whom, would to god, i had well knocked at first,
that is because the traitor murderer lives.
neither, my lord.
a senseless villain, good hortensio. i bade the rascal knock upon your gate and could not get him for my heart to do it.
would none but i might venge my cousin's death!
the count is neither sad, nor sick, nor merry, nor well, but civil count, civil as an orange, and something of that jealous complexion.
knock at the gate? o heavens! spake you not these words plain: "sirrah, knock me here, rap me here, knock me well, and knock me soundly"? and come you now with "knocking at the gate"?
we will have vengeance for it, fear thou not. then weep no more. i'll send to one in mantua, where that same banished runagate doth live, that he shall soon keep tybalt company. and then, i hope, thou wilt be satisfied.
i' faith, lady, i think your blazon to be true, though, i'll be have wooed in thy name, and fair hero is won. i have broke with her father and his goodwill obtained. name the day of marriage, and god give thee joy.
sirrah, begone or talk not, i advise you.
indeed, i never shall be satisfied with romeo, till i behold him, dead, madam, if you could find out but a man to bear a poison, i would temper it, that romeo should, upon receipt thereof, soon sleep in quiet. oh, how my heart abhors to wreak the love i bore my cousin upon his body that slaughtered him!
count, take of me my daughter, and with her my fortunes. to it.
petruchio, patience. i am grumio's pledge. why, this' a heavy chance 'twixt him and you, your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant grumio. and tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale
find thou the means, and i'll find such a man. but now i'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
speak, count, 'tis your cue.
such wind as scatters young men through the world to seek their fortunes farther than at home, where small experience grows. but in a few, signior hortensio, thus it stands with me: and i have thrust myself into this maze, happily to wive and thrive as best i may. crowns in my purse i have and goods at home, and so am come abroad to see the world.
what are they, beseech your ladyship?
silence is the perfectest herald of joy. i were but little happy if i could say how much., lady, as you are mine, i am exchange.
and wish thee to a shrewd, ill-favored wife? thou'dst thank me but a little for my counsel; and yet i'll promise thee she shall be rich, and very rich. but thou'rt too much my friend,
well, well, thou hast a careful father, child. one who, to put thee from thy heaviness, hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
speak, cousin, or if you cannot, stop his mouth with a kiss and let not him speak neither.
signior hortensio, 'twixt such friends as we few words suffice. and therefore, if thou know one rich enough to be petruchio's wife, as wealth is burden of my wooing dance, as old as sibyl and as curst and shrewd as socrates' xanthippe, or a worse, she moves me not, or not removes at least affection's edge in me, were she as rough i come to wive it wealthily in padua; if wealthily, then happily in padua.
madam, in happy time, what day is that?
in faith, lady, you have a merry heart.
(to hortensio) nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly what his mind is. why, give him gold enough and marry him to a puppet or an aglet-baby, or an old trot with ne'er a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases as two-and-fifty horses. why, nothing comes amiss, so money comes withal.
marry, my child, early next thursday morn, the gallant, young, and noble gentleman, the county paris, at saint peter's church,
of care. my cousin tells him in his ear that he is in her heart.
petruchio, since we are stepped thus far in, i can, petruchio, help thee to a wife with wealth enough, and young and beauteous, brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman. her only fault, and that is faults enough, and shrewd and froward, so beyond all measure that, were my state far worser than it is, i would not wed her for a mine of gold.
now, by saint peter's church and peter too, he shall not make me there a joyful bride. i wonder at this haste, that i must wed ere he, that should be husband, comes to woo. i will not marry yet. and when i do, i swear it shall be romeo, whom you know i hate, rather than paris. these are news indeed!
and so she doth, cousin.
hortensio, peace. thou know'st not gold's effect. for i will board her, though she chide as loud as thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
here comes your father. tell him so yourself,
good lord for alliance! thus goes everyone to the world but i, and i am sunburnt. i may sit in a corner and cry,
her father is baptista minola, an affable and courteous gentleman. renowned in padua for her scolding tongue.
when the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew, but for the sunset of my brother's son it rains downright. how now? a conduit, girl? what, still in tears, thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind, for still thy eyes, which i may call the sea, do ebb and flow with tears. the bark thy body is, sailing in this salt flood. the winds thy sighs, without a sudden calm will overset thy tempest-tossèd body., how now, wife? have you delivered to her our decree?
lady beatrice, i will get you one.
i know her father, though i know not her, and he knew my deceasèd father well. i will not sleep, hortensio, till i see her, to give you over at this first encounter, unless you will accompany me thither.
ay, sir, but she will none, she gives you thanks.
i would rather have one of your father's getting. hath your grace ne'er a brother like you? your father got excellent husbands, if a maid could come by them.
(to hortensio) i pray you, sir, let him go while the humor lasts. o' my word, an she knew him as well as i do, she would think scolding would do little good upon him. she may perhaps call him half a score knaves or so. why, that's nothing; an he begin once, he'll rail in his rope tricks. i'll tell you what sir: an she stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in her face and so disfigure her with it that she shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat. you know him not, sir.
soft, take me with you, take me with you, wife. how, will she none? doth she not give us thanks? is she not proud? doth she not count her blessed, unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
will you have me, lady?
tarry, petruchio, i must go with thee, he hath the jewel of my life in hold, his youngest daughter, beautiful bianca, and her withholds from me and other more, suitors to her and rivals in my love, for those defects i have before rehearsed, that ever katherina will be wooed. therefore this order hath baptista ta'en, that none shall have access unto bianca
not proud you have, but thankful that you have. proud can i never be of what i hate, but thankful even for hate that is meant love.
no, my lord, unless i might have another for working days. your grace is too costly to wear every day. but i beseech your grace pardon me. i was born to speak all mirth and no matter.
"katherine the curst!" a title for a maid of all titles the worst.
how, how, how, how? chopped logic! what is this? and yet "not proud"? mistress minion you, thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds, but fettle your fine joints 'gainst thursday next to go with paris to saint peter's church, out, you green sickness, carrion! out, you baggage! you tallow face!
becomes you, for out o' question you were born in a merry hour.
now shall my friend petruchio do me grace, and offer me disguised in sober robes well seen in music, to instruct bianca, that so i may, by this device at least, have leave and leisure to make love to her and, unsuspected, court her by herself.
fie, fie! what, are you mad?
no, sure, my lord, my mother cried, but then there was a star danced, and under that was i born., cousins, god
here's no knavery! see, to beguile the old folks, how the young folks lay their heads together!
good father, i beseech you on my knees, hear me with patience but to speak a word.
niece, will you look to those things i told you of?
master, master, look about you. who goes there, ha?
i tell thee what: get thee to church o' thursday, or never after look me in the face. speak not. reply not. do not answer me. my fingers itch., wife, we scarce thought us blest but now i see this one is one too much and that we have a curse in having her. out on her, hilding!
i cry you mercy, uncle., by your grace's pardon.
peace, grumio. it is the rival of my love. petruchio, stand by a while.
god in heaven bless her! you are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
by my troth, a pleasant-spirited lady.
(aside) a proper stripling, and an amorous.
good prudence. smatter with your gossips, go.
there's little of the melancholy element in her, my lord. she i have heard my daughter say she hath often dreamed of unhappiness and waked herself with laughing.
hark you, sir: i'll have them very fairly bound, all books of love. see that at any hand, and see you read no other lectures to her. you understand me. over and beside i'll mend it with a largess. take your paper too. and let me have them very well perfum'd for she is sweeter than perfume itself to whom they go to. what will you read to her?
i speak no treason.
she cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.
as for my patron, stand you so assured, as firmly as yourself were still in place, yea, and perhaps with more successful words than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
oh, god 'i' good e'en.
oh, by no means. she mocks all her wooers out of suit.
o this learning, what a thing it is!
may not one speak?
she were an excellent wife for benedict.
(aside) o this woodcock, what an ass it is!
peace, you mumbling fool! utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
o lord, my lord, if they were but a week married, they would talk themselves mad.
(aside) peace, sirrah!
you are too hot.
county claudio, when mean you to go to church?
(aside) grumio, mum! god save you, signior gremio.
god's bread! it makes me mad. day, night, hour, tide, time, work, play, alone, in company, still my care hath been to have her matched. and having now provided of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly trained, stuffed, as they say, with honorable parts, proportioned as one's thought would wish a man, and then to have a wretched puling fool, to answer "i'll not wed," "i cannot love," "i am too young," "i pray you, pardon me.", but, an you will not wed, i'll pardon you. graze where you will, you shall not house with me. thursday is near. lay hand on heart, advise. an you be mine, i'll give you to my friend. an you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets, for, by my soul, i'll ne'er acknowledge thee, trust to 't, bethink you. i'll not be forsworn.
tomorrow, my lord. time goes on crutches till love have all
and you are well met, signior hortensio. i promised to enquire carefully about a schoolmaster for the fair bianca, and by good fortune i have lighted well on this young man, for learning and behavior and other books, good ones, i warrant ye.
is there no pity sitting in the clouds that sees into the bottom of my grief?, o sweet my mother, cast me not away! or, if you do not, make the bridal bed in that dim monument where tybalt lies.
not till monday, my dear son, which is hence a just sevennight, and a time too brief, too, to have all things answer my mind.
'tis well. and i have met a gentleman hath promised me to help me to another, a fine musician to instruct our mistress. to fair bianca, so beloved of me.
talk not to me, for i'll not speak a word. do as thou wilt, for i have done with thee.
(to claudio) come, you shake the head at so long a dully by us. i will in the interim undertake one of hercules' labors, which is to bring signor benedick and the lady beatrice into a mountain of affection, th' one with th' other. i would fain have it a match, and i doubt not but to fashion give you direction.
beloved of me, and that my deeds shall prove.
my husband is on earth, my faith in heaven. how shall that faith return again to earth, unless that husband send it me from heaven by leaving earth? comfort me. counsel me., upon so soft a subject as myself., what sayst thou? hast thou not a word of joy? some comfort, nurse.
my lord, i am for you, though it cost me ten nights' watchings.
(aside) and that his bags shall prove.
faith, here it is. romeo is banishèd, and all the world to nothing or, if he do, it needs must be by stealth. then, since the case so stands as now it doth, i think it best you married with the county. oh, he's a lovely gentleman. hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye as paris hath. beshrew my very heart, i think you are happy in this second match, for it excels your first. or if it did not, as living here and you no use of him.
and i, my lord.
gremio, 'tis now no time to vent our love. i'll tell you news indifferent good for either.
speakest thou from thy heart?
and you too, gentle hero?
(presenting petruchio) here is a gentleman whom by chance i met, upon agreement from us to his liking, yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
and from my soul too, else beshrew them both.
i will do any modest office, my lord, to help my cousin to a good husband.
so said, so done, is well. hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
amen!
and benedick is not the unhopefulest husband that i know. thus far can i praise him: he is of a noble strain, of approved your cousin that she shall fall in love with benedick., and i, with your two helps, will so practice on benedick that, in despite of his quick wit and his queasy stomach, he shall fall in love with beatrice. if we can do this, cupid is no love gods. go in with me, and i will tell you my drift.
i know she is an irksome brawling scold.
what?
it is so. the count claudio shall marry the daughter of leonato.
no? say'st me so, friend? what countryman?
well, thou hast comforted me marvelous much. go in, and tell my lady i am gone, having displeased my father, to lawrence's cell to make confession and to be absolved.
yea, my lord, but i can cross it.
born in verona, old antonio's son. my father dead, my fortune lives for me. and i do hope good days and long to see.
marry, i will, and this is wisely done.
any bar, any cross, any impediment will be med'cinable to athwart his affection ranges evenly with mine. how canst thou cross this marriage?
but if you have a stomach, to 't, i' god's name: you shall have me assisting you in all. but will you woo this wildcat?
ancient damnation! o most wicked fiend! is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn, or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue which she hath praised him with above compare thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain. i'll to the friar to know his remedy. if all else fail, myself have power to die.
not honestly, my lord, but so covertly that no dishonesty shall appear in me.
will i live?
on thursday, sir? the time is very short.
show me briefly how.
will he woo her? ay, or i'll hang her.
my father capulet will have it so, and i am nothing slow to slack his haste.
i think i told your lordship a year since how much i am in the favor of margaret, the waiting gentlewoman to hero.
think you a little din can daunt mine ears? have i not in my time heard lions roar? have i not heard the sea, puffed up with winds, rage like an angry boar chafèd with sweat? and heaven's artillery thunder in the skies?
you say you do not know the lady's mind.
i remember.
have i not in a pitchèd battle heard loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets' clang? and do you tell me of a woman's tongue as will a chestnut in a farmer's fire? tush, tush! fear boys with bugs.
immoderately she weeps for tybalt's death, and therefore have i little talked of love, for venus smiles not in a house of tears. now, sir, her father counts it dangerous and in his wisdom hastes our marriage to stop the inundation of her tears, which, too much minded by herself alone, may be put from her by society.
i can, at any unseasonable instant of the night, appoint her
for he fears none.
(aside) i would i knew not why it should be slowed., look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
what life is in that to be the death of this marriage?
hortensio, hark. my mind presumes, for his own good and ours.
happily met, my lady and my wife.
the poison of that lies in you to temper. go you to the prince your brother. spare not to tell him that he hath wronged his honor in marrying the renowned claudio, contaminated stale, such a one as hero.
i promised we would be contributors and bear his charge of wooing, whatsoe'er.
that may be, sir, when i may be a wife.
what proof shall i make of that?
and so we will, provided that he win her.
that "may be" must be, love, on thursday next.
proof enough to misuse the prince, to vex claudio, to undo hero, and kill leonato. look you for any other issue?
i would i were as sure of a good dinner.
what must be shall be.
only to despite them, i will endeavor anything.
(as lucentio) gentlemen, god save you. if i may be bold, tell me, i beseech you, which is the readiest way to the house of signior baptista minola?
that's a certain text.
go then, find me a meet hour to draw don pedro and the count claudio alone. tell them that you know that hero loves me. intend a kind of zeal both to the prince and claudio, as in love of your brother's honor, who hath made be cozened with the semblance of a maid, that you have discovered thus. they will scarcely believe this without trial. offer them instances, which shall bear no less likelihood than to see me at her chamber window, hear me and bring them to see this the very night before the intended wedding, for in the meantime i will so fashion the matter that hero shall be absent, and there shall appear such seeming truth of hero's disloyalty that jealousy shall
he that has the two fair daughters, is 't he you mean?
come you to make confession to this father?
grow this to what adverse issue it can, i will put it in practice. be cunning in the working this, and thy fee is a thousand ducats.
(as lucentio) even he, biondello.
to answer that, i should confess to you.
be you constant in the accusation, and my cunning shall not
hark you, sir, you mean not her to, 
do not deny to him that you love me.
i will presently go learn their day of marriage.
(as lucentio) perhaps him and her, sir. what have you to do?
i will confess to you that i love him.
boy!
not her that chides, sir, at any hand, i pray.
so will ye, i am sure, that you love me.
signior?
(as lucentio) i love no chiders, sir. biondello, let's away.
if i do so, it will be of more price being spoke behind your back than to your face.
in my chamber window lies a book. bring it hither to me in the orchard.
(aside) well begun, tranio.
poor soul, thy face is much abused with tears.
i am here already, sir.
sir, a word ere you go. are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
the tears have got small victory by that, for it was bad enough before their spite.
i know that, but i would have thee hence and here again.
an if i be, sir, is it any offense?
thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
i do much wonder that one man, seeing how much another man is a fool when he dedicates his behaviors to love, will, after he hath laughed at such shallow follies in others, and such a man is claudio. i have known when there was no music with him but the drum and the fife, and now had he rather hear the tabor and the pipe. i have known when he would have walked ten mile afoot to see a good armor, and doublet. he was wont to speak plain and to the purpose, like an honest man and a soldier, and now is he turned orthography; his words are a very fantastical banquet, just so many strange dishes. may i be so converted and see with
no, if without more words you will get you hence.
that is no slander, sir, which is a truth,
i will not be sworn but love may transform me to an oyster, but i'll take my oath on it, till he have made an oyster of me, he shall never make me such a fool. one woman is fair, yet i am well; another is wise, yet i am well; another virtuous, woman shall not come in my grace. rich she shall be, that's certain; wise, or i'll none; virtuous, or i'll never cheapen her; fair, or i'll ever look on her; mild, or come not near me; noble, or not i for an angel; of good discourse, an please god. ha! the prince and monsieur love! i will hide me in the arbor.
(as lucentio) why, sir, i pray, are not the streets as free for me as for you?
thy face is mine, and thou hast slandered it.
come, shall we hear this music?
but so is not she.
it may be so, for it is not mine own., are you at leisure, holy father, now, or shall i come to you at evening mass?
yea, my good lord. how still the evening is,
for what reason, i beseech you?
my lord, we must entreat the time alone.
(aside to claudio) see you where benedick hath hid himself?
for this reason, if you'll know: that she's the choice love of signior gremio.
god shield i should disturb devotion!, juliet, on thursday early will i rouse ye. (kisses her) till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss.
(aside to don pedro) o, very well, my lord. the music ended,
that she's the chosen of signior hortensio.
come weep with me, past hope, past cure, past help.
come, balthasar, we'll hear that song again.
do me this right: hear me with patience. baptista is a noble gentleman, to whom my father is not all unknown, and were his daughter fairer than she is,
o juliet, i already know thy grief. it strains me past the compass of my wits. i hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
o, good my lord, tax not so bad a voice to slander music anymore than once.
fair leda's daughter had a thousand wooers; then well one more may fair bianca have. and so she shall. lucentio shall make one, though paris paris was the trojan prince who stole helen from her greek husband, starting the trojan war. paris came in hope to speed alone.
tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this, unless thou tell me how i may prevent it. if in thy wisdom thou canst give no help, do thou but call my resolution wise, (shows him a knife) god joined my heart and romeo's, thou our hands. and ere this hand, by thee to romeo sealed, shall be the label to another deed, turn to another, this shall slay them both. therefore out of thy long-experienced time, give me some present counsel, or, behold, 'twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife which the commission of thy years and art could to no issue of true honor bring. be not so long to speak. i long to die if what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
it is the witness still of excellency i pray thee, sing, and let me woo no more.
what! this gentleman will out-talk us all.
which craves as desperate an execution as that is desperate which we would prevent. if, rather than to marry county paris, thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself, a thing like death to chide away this shame, that copest with death himself to 'scape from it. an if thou darest, i'll give thee remedy.
because you talk of wooing, i will sing, since many a wooer doth commence his suit to her he thinks not worthy, yet he woos,
(as cambio) sir, give him head; i know he'll prove a jade.
o, bid me leap, rather than marry paris, or walk in thievish ways; or bid me lurk where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears; or shut me nightly in a charnel house, o'ercovered quite with dead men's rattling bones, or bid me go into a new-made grave and hide me with a dead man in his shroud, things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble, and i will do it without fear or doubt,
nay, pray thee, come, or, if thou wilt hold longer argument, do it in notes.
hortensio, to what end are all these words?
hold, then. go home, be merry. give consent to marry paris. wednesday is tomorrow. tomorrow night look that thou lie alone. let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber. take thou this vial, being then in bed, and this distillèd liquor drink thou off, when presently through all thy veins shall run a cold and drowsy humor, for no pulse no warmth, no breath shall testify thou livest. the roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade to paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall like death when he shuts up the day of life. shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death. and in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death thou shalt continue two and forty hours, and then awake as from a pleasant sleep. to rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead. then, as the manner of our country is, in thy best robes uncovered on the bier thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault in the meantime, against thou shalt awake, shall romeo by my letters know our drift, and hither shall he come, and he and i will watch thy waking, and that very night and this shall free thee from this present shame, if no inconstant toy, nor womanish fear, abate thy valor in the acting it.
note this before my notes: there's not a note of mine that's worth the noting.
(to tranio) sir, let me be so bold as ask you, did you yet ever see baptista's daughter?
give me, give me! o, tell not me of fear!
why, these are very crotchets that he speaks!
the one as famous for a scolding tongue as is the other for beauteous modesty.
hold. get you gone. be strong and prosperous in this resolve. i'll send a friar with speed to mantua with my letters to thy lord.
(aside) now, divine air! now is his soul ravished. is it not strange that sheeps' guts should hale souls out of men's bodies? well, a horn for my money, when all's done.
sir, sir, the first's for me; let her go by.
love give me strength, and strength shall help afford.
(singing) sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more, men were deceivers ever, one foot in sea and one on shore, to one thing constant never. then sigh not so, but let them go, and be you blithe and bonny, converting all your sounds of woe into hey, nonny nonny. sing no more ditties, sing no mo of dumps so dull and heavy. the fraud of men was ever so, since summer first was leavy. then sigh not so, but let them go and be you blithe and bonny, converting all your sounds of woe into hey, nonny nonny.
yea, leave that labor to great hercules,
(gives paper to first servingman) so many guests invite as here are writ.
by my troth, a good song.
(to tranio) sir, understand you this of me, in sooth: the youngest daughter, whom you hearken for, her father keeps from all access of suitors and will not promise her to any man the younger then is free, and not before.
(to second servingman) sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
and an ill singer, my lord.
(as lucentio) if it be so, sir, that you are the man must stead us all, and me amongst the rest, and if you break the ice and do this feat, for our access, whose hap shall be to have her will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
you shall have none ill, sir, for i'll try if they can lick their fingers.
ha, no, no, faith, thou sing'st well enough for a shift.
sir, you say well, and well you do conceive. and since you do profess to be a suitor, to whom we all rest generally beholding.
how canst thou try them so?
(aside) an he had been a dog that should have howled thus, they would have hanged him. and i pray god his bad voice come what plague could have come after it.
(as lucentio) sir, i shall not be slack; in sign whereof, please ye we may contrive this afternoon and quaff carouses to our mistress' health strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own fingers. therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with me.
yea, marry, dost thou hear, balthasar? i pray thee, get us some excellent music, for tomorrow night we would have it at the lady hero's chamber window
o excellent motion! fellows, let's be gone.
go, be gone. we shall be much unfurnished for this time.
the best i can, my lord.
the motion's good indeed and be it so., petruchio, i shall be your ben venuto.
what, is my daughter gone to friar lawrence?
do so. farewell.
good sister, wrong me not nor wrong yourself, to make a bondmaid and a slave of me. that i disdain. but for these other goods, unbind my hands, i'll pull them off myself, or what you will command me will i do, so well i know my duty to my elders.
ay, forsooth.
come hither, leonato. what was it you told me of today, that your niece beatrice was in love with signor benedick?
of all thy suitors here i charge thee tell whom thou lovest best. see thou dissemble not.
a peevish self-willed harlotry it is.
oh, ay. (aside to don pedro) stalk on, stalk on; the fowl man.
i never yet beheld that special face which i could fancy more than any other.
see where she comes from shrift with merry look.
no, nor i neither, but most wonderful that she should so dote on signor benedick, whom she hath in all outward behaviors seemed ever to abhor.
minion, thou liest. is 't not hortensio?
how now, my headstrong? where have you been gadding?
(aside) is 't possible? sits the wind in that corner?
if you affect him, sister, here i swear
where i have learned me to repent the sin to you and your behests, and am enjoined by holy lawrence to fall prostrate here to beg your pardon. (falls to her knees) pardon, i beseech you!
by my troth, my lord, i cannot tell what to think of it, but that she loves him with an enraged affection, it is past the infinite of thought.
oh, then belike you fancy riches more. you will have gremio to keep you fair.
send for the county. go tell him of this. i'll have this knot knit up tomorrow morning.
may be she doth but counterfeit.
is it for him you do envy me so? nay, then you jest, and now i well perceive i prithee, sister kate, untie my hands.
i met the youthful lord at lawrence' cell, and gave him what becomèd love i might,
faith, like enough.
if that be jest, then all the rest was so.
why, i am glad on 't. this is well. stand up.
o god! counterfeit? there was never counterfeit of passion came so near the life of passion as she discovers it.
why, how now, dame! whence grows this insolence?, bianca, stand aside., poor girl, she weeps! (to katherine) for shame, thou hilding of a devilish spirit! why dost thou wrong her that did ne'er wrong thee? when did she cross thee with a bitter word?
this is as 't should be., let me see the county. ay, marry, go, i say, and fetch him hither., now, afore god, this reverend holy friar!
why, what effects of passion shows she?
her silence flouts me, and i'll be revenged.
nurse, will you go with me into my closet to help me sort such needful ornaments as you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?
(aside to leonato) bait the hook well; this fish will bite.
what, in my sight?, bianca, get thee in.
no, not till thursday. there is time enough.
daughter tell you how.
what, will you not suffer me? nay, now i see she is your treasure, she must have a husband, i must dance barefoot on her wedding day and, for your love to her, lead apes in hell. till i can find occasion of revenge.
go, nurse. go with her. we'll to church tomorrow.
she did indeed.
was ever gentleman thus grieved as i? but who comes here?
we shall be short in our provision. 'tis now near night.
how, how i pray you? you amaze me. i would have thought her spirit had been invincible against all assaults of affection.
good morrow, neighbor baptista.
tush, i will stir about, and all things shall be well, i warrant thee, wife. go thou to juliet, help to deck up her. i'll play the housewife for this once.
benedick.
good morrow, neighbor gremio., god save you, gentlemen!
, what, ho? they are all forth?, well, i will walk myself to county paris, to prepare him up against tomorrow. my heart is wondrous light
(aside) i should think this a gull but that the white-bearded fellow speaks it. knavery cannot, sure, hide himself in such reverence.
and you, good sir. pray, have you not a daughter called katherina, fair and virtuous?
ay, those attires are best. but, gentle nurse, i pray thee, leave me to myself tonight, for i have need of many orisons to move the heavens to smile upon my state,
(aside to don pedro) he hath ta'en th' infection. hold it up.
i have a daughter, sir, called katherina.
what, are you busy, ho? need you my help?
hath she made her affection known to benedick?
(to petruchio) you are too blunt. go to it orderly.
no, madam. we have culled such necessaries as are behooveful for our state tomorrow. so please you, let me now be left alone, for, i am sure, you have your hands full all in this so sudden business.
no, and swears she never will. that's her torment.
you wrong me, signior gremio. give me leave., i am a gentleman of verona, sir, that hearing of her beauty and her wit, her affability and bashful modesty, am bold to show myself a forward guest within your house, to make mine eye the witness of that report which i so oft have heard. and, for an entrance to my entertainment, (presenting hortensio, disguised as litio) cunning in music and the mathematics, to instruct her fully in those sciences, whereof i know she is not ignorant. his name is litio, born in mantua.
good night. get thee to bed and rest, for thou hast need.
'tis true indeed, so your daughter says. "shall i," says she, "that have so oft encountered him with scorn, write to him
you're welcome, sir, and he for your good sake. but for my daughter katherine, this i know, she is not for your turn, the more my grief.
farewell!, god knows when we shall meet again. that almost freezes up the heat of life. i'll call them back again to comfort me., nurse!, what should she do here?
this says she now when she is beginning to write to him, for she'll be up twenty times a night, and there will she sit in her smock till she have writ a sheet of paper. my daughter tells us all.
or else you like not of my company.
my dismal scene i needs must act alone. what if this mixture do not work at all? shall i be married then tomorrow morning? no, no. this shall forbid it. lie thou there. (lays her knife down) subtly hath ministered to have me dead, lest in this marriage he should be dishonored because he married me before to romeo? i fear it is. and yet, methinks, it should not, how if, when i am laid into the tomb, i wake before the time that romeo come to redeem me? there's a fearful point. shall i not, then, be stifled in the vault and there die strangled ere my romeo comes? or, if i live, is it not very like the horrible conceit of death and night, together with the terror of the place, where for these many hundred years the bones of all my buried ancestors are packed; where bloody tybalt, yet but green in earth, lies festering in his shroud; where, as they say, alack, alack, is it not like that i, so early waking, what with loathsome smells, and shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth, that living mortals, hearing them, run mad, ?
your daughter told.
mistake me not. i speak but as i find. whence are you, sir? what may i call your name?
environèd with all these hideous fears, and madly play with my forefather's joints, and pluck the mangled tybalt from his shroud, and, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone, oh, look! methinks i see my cousin's ghost seeking out romeo, that did spit his body upon a rapier's point. stay, tybalt, stay! romeo, romeo, romeo! here's drink. i drink to thee.
oh, when she had writ it and was reading it over, she found "benedick" and "beatrice" between the sheet?
petruchio is my name, antonio's son,
hold, take these keys, and fetch more spices, nurse.
that.
i know him well. you are welcome for his sake.
they call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
herself that she should be so immodest to write to one that she knew would flout her. "i measure him," says she, "by my own spirit, for i should flout him if he writ to me, yea, though i love him, i should."
saving your tale, petruchio, i pray let us that are poor petitioners speak too. bacare, you are marvelous forward.
come, stir, stir, stir! the second cock hath crowed. the curfew bell hath rung. 'tis three o'clock., spare not for the cost.
heart, tears her hair, prays, curses: "o sweet benedick! god give me patience!"
oh, pardon me, signior gremio, i would fain be doing.
go, you cot-quean, go. get you to bed, faith. you'll be sick tomorrow for this night's watching.
she doth indeed, my daughter says so, and the ecstasy hath so much overborne her that my daughter is sometime she will do a desperate outrage to herself. it is very true.
i doubt it not, sir, but you will curse your wooing., neighbor, this is a gift very grateful, i am sure of it. to express the like kindness, myself, that have been more kindly beholding to you than any, freely give unto you this young scholar (presenting lucentio, disguised as cambio) that hath been long studying at rheims, as cunning in greek, latin, and other languages as the other in music and mathematics. his name is cambio. pray accept his service.
no, not a whit, what. i have watched ere now
it were good that benedick knew of it by some other, if she will not discover it.
a thousand thanks, signior gremio. welcome, good cambio. (to tranio as lucentio) but, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger. may i be so bold to know the cause of your coming?
ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time, but i will watch you from such watching now.
to what end? he would make but a sport of it and torment
(as lucentio) pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own, do make myself a suitor to your daughter, unto bianca, fair and virtuous. nor is your firm resolve unknown to me, in the preferment of the eldest sister. that, upon knowledge of my parentage, i may have welcome 'mongst the rest that woo and free access and favor as the rest. and toward the education of your daughters, and this small packet of greek and latin books. biondello brings the gifts forward if you accept them, then their worth is great.
a jealous hood, a jealous hood!
an he should, it were an alms to hang him. she's an excellent sweet lady, and, out of all suspicion, she is virtuous.
lucentio is your name. of whence, i pray?
now, fellow, what is there?
and she is exceeding wise.
(as lucentio) of pisa, sir, son to vincentio.
things for the cook, sir, but i know not what.
in every thing but in loving benedick.
a mighty man of pisa. by report i know him well. you are very welcome, sir. (to hortensio as litio) take you the lute, (to lucentio as cambio) and you the set of books. holla, within!
make haste, make haste, sirrah.
oh, my lord, wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body, we have ten proofs to one that blood hath the victory. i am sorry for her, as i have just cause, being her uncle and her guardian.
sirrah, lead these gentlemen to my daughters, and tell them both these are their tutors. bid them use them well.
(to second servingman) fetch drier logs. call peter. he will show thee where they are.
daffed all other respects and made her half myself. i pray you tell benedick of it and hear what he will say.
we will go walk a little in the orchard, and so i pray you all to think yourselves.
i have a head, sir, that will find out logs,
were it good, think you?
signior baptista, my business asketh haste, and every day i cannot come to woo. you knew my father well, and in him me, which i have bettered rather than decreased. then tell me, if i get your daughter's love, what dowry shall i have with her to wife?
mass, and well said. a merry whoreson, ha! thou shalt be loggerhead., good faith, 'tis day. the county will be here with music straight, for so he said he would. i hear him near., 
hero thinks surely she will die, for she says she will die if he and she will die if he woo her rather than she will bate one breath of her accustomed crossness.
after my death, the one half of my lands,
nurse! wife! what, ho? what, nurse, i say!
she doth well. if she should make tender of her love, 'tis very possible he'll scorn it, for the man, as you know all,
and, for that dowry, i'll assure her of her widowhood, be it that she survive me, in all my lands and leases whatsoever. let specialties be therefore drawn between us,
go waken juliet. go and trim her up. i'll go and chat with paris. hie, make haste, make haste. the bridegroom he is come already. make haste, i say.
he is a very proper man.
ay, when the special thing is well obtained, that is, her love, for that is all in all.
mistress! what, mistress! juliet!, fast, i warrant her, she., why, lamb! why, lady! fie, you slug-a-bed. why, love, i say. madam! sweet-heart! why, bride! what, not a word? you take your pennyworths now. the county paris hath set up his rest that you shall rest but little., god forgive me, marry, and amen. how sound is she asleep! i must needs wake her., madam, madam, madam! he'll fright you up, i' faith. will it not be? (opens the bed curtains) what, dressed and in your clothes, and down again? i must needs wake you. lady, lady, lady!, oh, welladay, that ever i was born!, some aqua vitae, ho!, my lord! my lady!
he hath indeed a good outward happiness.
why, that is nothing. for i tell you, father, i am as peremptory as she proud-minded; they do consume the thing that feeds their fury. though little fire grows great with little wind, yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all. so i to her and so she yields to me,
what noise is here?
before god, and in my mind, very wise.
well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed. but be thou armed for some unhappy words.
o lamentable day!
he doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit.
ay, to the proof, as mountains are for winds, that shakes not, though they blow perpetually.
what is the matter?
and i take him to be valiant.
how now, my friend, why dost thou look so pale?
look, look. o heavy day!
as hector, i assure you, and in the managing of quarrels you may say he is wise, for either he avoids them with great discretion or undertakes them with a most christian-like fear.
(as litio) for fear, i promise you, if i look pale.
revive, look up, or i will die with thee!, help, help! call help.
break the peace, he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling.
what, will my daughter prove a good musician?
for shame, bring juliet forth. her lord is come.
and so will he do, for the man doth fear god, howsoever it seems not in him by some large jests he will make. well, i him of her love?
i think she'll sooner prove a soldier. iron may hold with her, but never lutes.
she's dead, deceased, she's dead. alack the day!
never tell him, my lord, let her wear it out with good counsel.
why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?
alack the day. she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
nay, that's impossible. she may wear her heart out first.
why, no, for she hath broke the lute to me. i did but tell her she mistook her frets, and bowed her hand to teach her fingering, when, with a most impatient devilish spirit, and with that word she struck me on the head, and through the instrument my pate made way,
ha? let me see her. out, alas! she's cold. her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff. life and these lips have long been separated. death lies on her like an untimely frost
the while. i love benedick well, and i could wish he would modestly examine himself to see how much he is unworthy so good a lady.
and there i stood amazèd for a while as on a pillory, looking through the lute, and "twangling jack"; with twenty such vile terms, as had she studied to misuse me so.
o lamentable day!
my lord, will you walk? dinner is ready.
now, by the world, it is a lusty wench. i love her ten times more than e'er i did.
o woeful time.
upon this, i will never trust my expectation.
(to hortensio as litio) well, go with me and be not so discomfited. proceed in practice with my younger daughter. she's apt to learn and thankful for good turns. or shall i send my daughter kate to you?
death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail, ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
(aside to leonato) let there be the same net spread for her, and that must your daughter and her gentlewomen carry. the sport will be when they hold one an opinion of i would see, which will be merely a dumb show. let us send her to call him in to dinner.
i pray you do.
come, is the bride ready to go to church?
(coming forward) this can be no trick. the conference was sadly borne; they have the truth of this from hero; they bent. love me? why, it must be requited! i hear how i am censured. they sy i will bear myself proudly if i perceive the love come from her. they say, too, that she will rather die than give any sign of affection. i did never think to their detractions and can put them to mending. they say the lady is fair; 'tis a truth, i can bear them witness. and virtuous; 'tis so, i cannot reprove it. and wise, but for loving me; by my troth, it is no addition to her wit, nor no with her! i may chance have some odd quirks and remnants of wit broken on me because i have railed so long against marriage, but doth not the appetite alter? a man loves the meat in his youth that he cannot endure in his age. shall brain awe a man from the career of his humor? no! the world must be peopled. when i said i would die a bachelor, i did not think i should live till i were married. here comes beatrice. by this day, she's a fair lady. i do spy
i'll attend her here and woo her with some spirit when she comes. say that she rail; why then i'll tell her plain say that she frown; i'll say she looks as clear as morning roses newly washed with dew. say she be mute and will not speak a word; then i'll commend her volubility, if she do bid me pack, i'll give her thanks, as though she bid me stay by her a week. if she deny to wed, i'll crave the day when i shall ask the banns and when be marrièd.
o son! the night before thy wedding day hath death lain with thy wife. there she lies, flower as she was, deflowered by him.
against my will, i am sent to bid you come in to dinner.
good morrow, kate, for that's your name, i hear.
death is my son-in-law. death is my heir. and leave him all. life, living, all is death's.
fair beatrice, i thank you for your pains.
well have you heard, but something hard of hearing. they call me katherine that do talk of me.
have i thought long to see this morning's face, and doth it give me such a sight as this?
i took no more pains for those thanks than you take pains to thank me. if it had been painful, i would not have come.
you lie, in faith, for you are called plain kate, but kate, the prettiest kate in christendom, kate of kate hall, my super-dainty kate, for dainties are all kates, and therefore, kate, take this of me, kate of my consolation: thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded, yet not so deeply as to thee belongs, myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.
accursed, unhappy, wretched, hateful day! in lasting labor of his pilgrimage. but one, poor one, one poor and loving child, but one thing to rejoice and solace in, and cruel death hath catched it from my sight!
you take pleasure then in the message?
"moved," in good time. let him that moved you hither you were a moveable.
most lamentable day, most woeful day that ever, ever, i did yet behold! o day, o day, o day, o hateful day! never was seen so black a day as this.
yea, just so much as you may take upon a knife's point and choke a daw withal. you have no stomach, signior. fare you well.
why, what's a moveable?
beguiled, divorcèd, wrongèd, spited, slain! most detestable death, by thee beguiled, by cruel, cruel thee quite overthrown! o love! o life! not life, but love in death.
ha! "against my will i am sent to bid you come in to pains for those thanks than you took pains to thank me." that's as much as to say, "any pains that i take for you is as easy as thanks." if i do not take pity of her, i am a villain. if i do not love her, i am a jew. i will go get her picture.
a joint stool.
uncomfortable time, why camest thou now to murder, murder our solemnity? o child, o child! my soul, and not my child! dead art thou! alack, my child is dead,
good margaret, run thee to the parlor. there shalt thou find my cousin beatrice proposing with the prince and claudio. whisper her ear and tell her i and ursula is all of her. say that thou overheardst us, and bid her steal into the pleachèd bower where honeysuckles ripened by the sun forbid the sun to enter, like favorites against that power that bred it. there will she hide her to listen our propose. this is thy office. bear thee well in it and leave us alone.
thou hast hit it. come, sit on me.
peace, ho, for shame! confusion's cure lives not in these confusions. heaven and yourself had part in this fair maid. now heaven hath all,
i'll make her come, i warrant you, presently.
asses are made to bear, and so are you.
and all the better is it for the maid. but heaven keeps his part in eternal life. the most you sought was her promotion, for 'twas your heaven she should be advanced. and weep ye now, seeing she is advanced oh, in this love, you love your child so ill that you run mad, seeing that she is well. she's not well married that lives married long, but she's best married that dies married young. on this fair corse, and, as the custom is, and in her best array, bear her to church. for though some nature bids us all lament, yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
as we do trace this alley up and down, our talk must only be of benedick. when i do name him, let it be thy part to praise him more than ever man did merit. is sick in love with beatrice. of this matter is little cupid's crafty arrow made, that only wounds by hearsay.
women are made to bear, and so are you.
turn from their office to black funeral. our instruments to melancholy bells, our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast. our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change, and all things change them to the contrary.
now begin, for look where beatrice like a lapwing runs
no such jade as you, if me you mean.
sir, go you in, and, madam, go with him; and go, sir paris. every one prepare to follow this fair corse unto her grave. move them no more by crossing their high will.
(aside to hero) the pleasant'st angling is to see the fish cut with her golden oars the silver stream and greedily devour the treacherous bait. is couchèd in the woodbine coverture. fear you not my part of the dialogue.
alas, good kate, i will not burden thee, for knowing thee to be but young and light, 
faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
(aside to ursula) then go we near her, that her ear lose nothing (approaching the bower) no, truly, ursula, she is too disdainful. i know her spirits are as coy and wild as haggards of the rock.
too light for such a swain as you to catch, and yet as heavy as my weight should be.
honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up, for, well you know, this is a pitiful case.
but are you sure
"should be", should buzz!
ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
so says the prince and my new-trothèd lord.
well ta'en, and like a buzzard.
musicians, o musicians, "heart's ease," "heart's ease." o, an you will have me live, play "heart's ease."
and did they bid you tell her of it, madam?
o slow-winged turtle, shall a buzzard take thee?
why "heart's ease?"
they did entreat me to acquaint her of it, but i persuaded them, if they loved benedick, and never to let beatrice know of it.
ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.
o musicians, because my heart itself plays "my heart is full." o, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
why did you so? doth not the gentleman deserve as full as fortunate a bed as ever beatrice shall couch upon?
come, come, you wasp. i' faith, you are too angry.
not a dump, we. 'tis no time to play now.
as much as may be yielded to a man, but nature never framed a woman's heart of prouder stuff than that of beatrice. disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes, values itself so highly that to her all matter else seems weak. she cannot love nor take no shape nor project of affection she is so self-endeared.
if i be waspish, best beware my sting.
you will not then?
sure, i think so, she knew his love, lest she make sport at it.
my remedy is then to pluck it out.
no.
why, you speak truth. i never yet saw man, how wise, how noble, young, how rarely featured but she would spell him backward. if fair-faced, if black, why, nature, drawing of an antic, made a foul blot; if tall, a lance ill-headed; if low, an agate very vilely cut; if speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds; so turns she every man the wrong side out and never gives to truth and virtue that which simpleness and merit purchaseth.
ay, if the fool could find it where it lies.
i will then give it you soundly.
sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.
who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting? in his tail.
what will you give us?
as beatrice is, cannot be commendable. but who dare tell her so? if i should speak, she would mock me into air. o, she would laugh me out of myself, press me to death with wit.
in his tongue.
no money, on my faith, but the gleek. i will give you the minstrel.
consume away in sighs, waste inwardly. it were a better death than die with mocks, which is as bad as die with tickling.
whose tongue?
then i will give you the serving creature.
yet tell her of it. hear what she will say.
yours, if you talk of tales. and so farewell.
then will i lay the serving creature's dagger on your pate. i will carry no crotchets. i'll re you, i'll fa you. do you note me?
and counsel him to fight against his passion; and truly i'll devise some honest slanders to stain my cousin with. one doth not know how much an ill word may empoison liking.
what, with my tongue in your tail? nay, come again, good kate. i am a gentleman.
an you re us and fa us, you note us.
she cannot be so much without true judgment, having so swift and excellent a wit as she is prized to have, as to refuse so rare a gentleman as signior benedick.
that i'll try.
pray you, put up your dagger and put out your wit.
always excepted my dear claudio.
i swear i'll cuff you if you strike again.
then have at you with my wit. i will dry-beat you with an iron wit and put up my iron dagger. answer me like men.
i pray you, be not angry with me, madam, speaking my fancy. signor benedick, for shape, for bearing, argument and valor,
so may you lose your arms. and if no gentleman, why then no arms.
(sings) when griping grief the heart doth wound and doleful dumps the mind oppress, then music with her silver sound, 
indeed, he hath an excellent good name.
a herald, kate? oh, put me in thy books!
(speaks) why "silver sound"? why "music with her silver sound"? what say you, simon catling?
his excellence did earn it, ere he had it. when are you married, madam?
what is your crest? a coxcomb?
marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
why, every day, tomorrow. come, go in. which is the best to furnish me tomorrow.
a combless cock, so kate will be my hen.
prates., what say you, hugh rebeck?
(aside to hero) she's limed, i warrant you. we have caught her, madam.
no cock of mine. you crow too like a craven.
i say, "silver sound" because musicians sound for silver.
(aside to ursula) some cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.
nay, come, kate, come. you must not look so sour.
prates too., what say you, james soundpost?
(coming forward) what fire is in mine ears? can this be true? stand i condemned for pride and scorn so much? no glory lives behind the back of such. and benedick, love on; i will requite thee, taming my wild heart to thy loving hand. if thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee for others say thou dost deserve, and i believe it better than reportingly.
it is my fashion, when i see a crab.
faith, i know not what to say.
i do but stay till your marriage be consummate, and then go i toward aragon.
why, here's no crab, and therefore look not sour.
oh, i cry you mercy, you are the singer. i will say for you. it is "music with her silver sound" because musicians have no gold for sounding.
i'll bring you thither, my lord, if you'll vouchsafe me.
there is, there is.
(sings) then music with her silver sound with speedy help doth lend redress.
nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your wear it. i will only be bold with benedick for his company, for from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot he is all mirth. he hath twice or thrice cut cupid's bow-string, and the little hangman dare not shoot at him. he hath a heart as heart thinks, his tongue speaks.
then show it me.
what a pestilent knave is this same!
gallants, i am not as i have been.
had i a glass, i would.
hang him, jack! come, we'll in here, tarry for the mourners and stay dinner.
so say i. methinks you are sadder.
what, you mean my face?
if i may trust the flattering truth of sleep, my dreams presage some joyful news at hand. my bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne, and all this day an unaccustomed spirit i dreamt my lady came and found me dead, strange dream, that gives a dead man leave to think, and breathed such life with kisses in my lips that i revived and was an emperor. when but love's shadows are so rich in joy!
i hope he be in love.
well aimed of such a young one.
news from verona!, how now, balthasar? dost thou not bring me letters from the friar? how doth my lady? is my father well? for nothing can be ill if she be well.
be truly touched with love. if he be sad, he wants money.
now, by saint george, i am too young for you.
then she is well, and nothing can be ill. her body sleeps in capels' monument, and her immortal part with angels lives. and presently took post to tell it you. o, pardon me for bringing these ill news, since you did leave it for my office, sir.
i have the toothache.
yet you are withered.
is it e'en so? then i defy you, stars! and hire post horses. i will hence tonight.
draw it.
'tis with cares.
i do beseech you, sir, have patience. your looks are pale and wild, and do import some misadventure.
hang it!
i care not.
leave me and do the thing i bid thee do. hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
you must hang it first, and draw it afterwards.
nay, hear you, kate: in sooth you 'scape not so.
no, my good lord.
what, sigh for the toothache?
i chafe you, if i tarry. let me go.
no matter. get thee gone,
where is but a humor or a worm.
no, not a whit. i find you passing gentle. 'twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen, for thou are pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous, but slow in speech, yet sweet as springtime flowers. thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance, nor bite the lip as angry wenches will, but thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers, with gentle conference, soft and affable. why does the world report that kate doth limp?
well, juliet, i will lie with thee tonight. let's see for means. o mischief, thou art swift to enter in the thoughts of desperate men! i do remember an apothecary, in tattered weeds, with overwhelming brows, culling of simples. meager were his looks, sharp misery had worn him to the bones, and in his needy shop a tortoise hung, of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves a beggarly account of empty boxes, green earthen pots, bladders and musty seeds, remnants of packthread and old cakes of roses,
well, everyone can master a grief but he that has it.
o slanderous world! kate like the hazel-twig as hazel nuts, and sweeter than the kernels. oh, let me see thee walk! thou dost not halt.
noting this penury, to myself i said, "an if a man did need a poison now", whose sale is present death in mantua, "here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him." and this same needy man must sell it me. as i remember, this should be the house. being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. what, ho! apothecary!
yet say i, he is in love.
go, fool, and whom thou keep'st command.
who calls so loud?
that he hath to strange disguises, as to be a dutchman today, a frenchman tomorrow, or in the shape of two countries at once, as a german from the waist downward, all slops, and a spaniard from the hip upward, no doublet. he is no fool for fancy, as you would have it appear he is.
did ever dian so become a grove oh, be thou dian, and let her be kate, and then let kate be chaste and dian sportful.
hold, there is forty ducats. let me have a dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear as will disperse itself through all the veins that the life-weary taker may fall dead, as violently as hasty powder fired doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
if he be not in love with some woman, there is no believing old signs. he brushes his hat o' mornings. what should that bode?
where did you study all this goodly speech?
such mortal drugs i have, but mantua's law is death to any he that utters them.
hath any man seen him at the barber's?
it is extempore, from my mother wit.
and fear'st to die? famine is in thy cheeks. need and oppression starveth in thine eyes. contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back. the world is not thy friend nor the world's law. then be not poor, but break it, and take this. (holds out money)
no, but the barber's man hath been seen with him, and the old ornament of his cheek hath already stuffed tennis balls.
a witty mother! witless else her son.
my poverty, but not my will, consents.
indeed, he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.
am i not wise?
i pay thy poverty and not thy will.
nay, he rubs himself with civet. can you smell him out by
yes, keep you warm.
and drink it off; and, if you had the strength of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
that's as much as to say, the sweet youth's in love.
marry, so i mean, sweet katherine, in thy bed. and therefore, setting all this chat aside, thus in plain terms: your father hath consented and, will you, nill you, i will marry you. now, kate, i am a husband for your turn, for, by this light, whereby i see thy beauty, thy beauty that doth make me like thee well, for i am he am born to tame you, kate, and bring you from a wild kate to a kate conformable as other household kates.
(gives apothecary money) there is thy gold, worse poison to men's souls, than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell. i sell thee poison. thou hast sold me none. farewell. buy food, and get thyself in flesh., come, cordial and not poison, go with me
the greatest note of it is his melancholy.
here comes your father. never make denial.
holy franciscan friar! brother, ho!
and when was he wont to wash his face?
now, signior petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?
this same should be the voice of friar john. welcome from mantua. what says romeo? or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
yea, or to paint himself? for the which i hear what they say
how but well, sir? how but well? it were impossible i should speed amiss.
one of our order, to associate me, here in this city visiting the sick, and finding him, the searchers of the town, suspecting that we both were in a house sealed up the doors and would not let us forth. so that my speed to mantua there was stayed.
nay, but his jesting spirit, which is now crept into a lute string and now governed by stops, 
why, how now, daughter katherine? in your dumps?
who bare my letter, then, to romeo?
indeed, that tells a heavy tale for him. conclude, conclude, he is in love.
you have showed a tender fatherly regard to wish me wed to one half lunatic, a mad-cup ruffian and a swearing jack, that thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
i could not send it, here it is again, nor get a messenger to bring it thee, so fearful were they of infection.
nay, but i know who loves him.
that talked of her have talked amiss of her. if she be curst, it is for policy, for she's not froward, but modest as the dove. she is not hot, but temperate as the morn. and roman lucrece for her chastity. and to conclude, we have 'greed so well together, that upon sunday is the wedding day.
unhappy fortune! by my brotherhood, the letter was not nice but full of charge, may do much danger. friar john, go hence. get me an iron crow and bring it straight unto my cell.
that would i know too. i warrant, one that knows him not.
i'll see thee hanged on sunday first.
brother, i'll go and bring it thee.
yes, and his ill conditions, and, in despite of all, dies for him.
hark, petruchio: she says she'll see thee hanged first.
now must i to the monument alone. she will beshrew me much that romeo hath had no notice of these accidents. but i will write again to mantua, and keep her at my cell till romeo come.
she shall be buried with her face upwards.
is this your speeding? nay, then, good night our part.
give me thy torch, boy. hence, and stand aloof. yet put it out, for i would not be seen. under yon yew trees lay thee all along, holding thine ear close to the hollow ground, being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves, but thou shalt hear it. whistle then to me, as signal that thou hear'st something approach. give me those flowers. do as i bid thee, go.
aside with me. i have studied eight or nine wise words to speak to you, which these hobbyhorses must not hear.
be patient, gentlemen. i choose her for myself. if she and i be pleased, what's that to you? 'tis bargained 'twixt us twain, being alone, i tell you, 'tis incredible to believe how much she loves me. o, the kindest kate! she hung about my neck, and kiss on kiss she vied so fast, protesting oath on oath, o, you are novices! 'tis a world to see, how tame, when men and women are alone, a meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew., give me thy hand, kate. i will unto venice provide the feast, father, and bid the guests. i will be sure my katherine shall be fine.
here in the churchyard. yet i will adventure.
for my life, to break with him about beatrice!
i know not what to say, but give me your hands. god send you joy, petruchio. 'tis a match.
(scatters flowers at juliet's closed tomb) sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed i strew, o woe! thy canopy is dust and stones, or, wanting that, with tears distilled by moans, the obsequies that i for thee will keep nightly shall be to strew thy grave and weep.
'tis even so. hero and margaret have by this played their another when they meet.
amen, say we. we will be witnesses.
the boy gives warning something doth approach. to cross my obsequies and true love's rite? what with a torch! muffle me, night, awhile.
my lord and brother, god save you.
father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu. i will to venice. sunday comes apace. we will have rings, and things, and fine array, and kiss me, kate. we will be married o' sunday.
give me that mattock and the wrenching iron. (takes them from balthasar) see thou deliver it to my lord and father. (gives letter to balthasar) give me the light. (takes torch from balthasar) upon thy life i charge thee, and do not interrupt me in my course. why i descend into this bed of death is partly to behold my lady's face, but chiefly to take thence from her dead finger in dear employment. therefore hence, be gone. but if thou, jealous, dost return to pry in what i farther shall intend to do, by heaven, i will tear thee joint by joint the time and my intents are savage, wild, more fierce and more inexorable far than empty tigers or the roaring sea. 
good e'en, brother.
was ever match clapped up so suddenly?
i will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
if your leisure served, i would speak with you.
faith, gentlemen, now i play a merchant's part, and venture madly on a desperate mart.
so shalt thou show me friendship. take thou that. (gives balthasar money) live and be prosperous, and farewell, good fellow.
in private?
(as lucentio) 'twas a commodity lay fretting by you. 'twill bring you gain or perish on the seas.
(aside) for all this same, i'll hide me hereabout.
if it please you. yet count claudio may hear, for what i would speak of concerns him.
the gain i seek is quiet in the match.
thou detestable maw, thou womb of death, gorged with the dearest morsel of the earth, thus i enforce thy rotten jaws to open, and in despite i'll cram thee with more food!
what's the matter?
no doubt but he hath got a quiet catch. but now, baptista, to your younger daughter. now is the day we long have lookèd for. i am your neighbor, and was suitor first.
(aside) this is that banished haughty montague, that murdered my love's cousin, with which grief, it is supposed the fair creature died. and here is come to do some villainous shame to the dead bodies. i will apprehend him.
(to claudio) means your lordship to be married tomorrow?
than words can witness or your thoughts can guess.
(to romeo) stop thy unhallowed toil, vile montague! can vengeance be pursued further than death? condemnèd villain, i do apprehend thee. obey and go with me, for thou must die.
you know he does.
youngling, thou canst not love so dear as i.
i must indeed, and therefore came i hither. good gentle youth, tempt not a desperate man. fly hence and leave me. think upon these gone. let them affright thee. i beseech thee, youth, by urging me to fury. o, be gone! by heaven, i love thee better than myself, for i come hither armed against myself. stay not, be gone. live, and hereafter say
i know not that, when he knows what i know.
(as lucentio) graybeard, thy love doth freeze.
i do defy thy commination and apprehend thee for a felon here.
if there be any impediment, i pray you discover it.
but thine doth fry.
wilt thou provoke me? then have at thee, boy!
you may think i love you not. let that appear hereafter, and aim better at me by that i now will manifest. for my hath holp to effect your ensuing marriage, surely suit ill spent and labor ill bestowed.
(as lucentio) but youth in ladies' eyes that flourisheth.
o lord, they fight! i will go call the watch.
why, what's the matter?
content you, gentlemen. i will compound this strife. 'tis deeds must win the prize, and he of both that can assure my daughter greatest dower say, signior gremio, what can you assure her?
open the tomb. lay me with juliet.
i came hither to tell you; and, circumstances shortened, for
first, as you know, my house within the city is richly furnishèd with plate and gold, basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands; in ivory coffers i have stuffed my crowns, in cypress chests my arras counterpoints, costly apparel, tents, and canopies, fine linen, turkey cushions bossed with pearl, pewter and brass, and all things that belong to house or housekeeping. then, at my farm i have a hundred milch-kine to the pail, six score fat oxen standing in my stalls, myself am struck in years, i must confess, and if i die tomorrow this is hers, if whilst i live she will be only mine.
in faith, i will., let me peruse this face. mercutio's kinsman, noble county paris. what said my man, when my betossèd soul he told me paris should have married juliet. said he not so? or did i dream it so? or am i mad, hearing him talk of juliet, to think it was so?, o, give me thy hand, i'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
who, hero?
(as lucentio) i am my father's heir and only son. if i may have your daughter to my wife, i'll leave her houses three or four as good, within rich pisa walls, as any one besides two thousand ducats by the year of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure., what, have i pinched you, signior gremio?
a grave? oh, no. a lantern, slaughtered youth, for here lies juliet, and her beauty makes this vault a feasting presence full of light. (lays paris in the tomb)
even she: leonato's hero, your hero, every man's hero.
two thousand ducats by the year of land! that she shall have, besides an argosy that now is lying in marcellus' road. (to tranio) what, have i choked you with an argosy?
how oft when men are at the point of death have they been merry, which their keepers call a lightning before death! oh, how may i death, that hath sucked the honey of thy breath, hath had no power yet upon thy beauty. thou art not conquered. beauty's ensign yet is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks, tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet? o, what more favor can i do to thee, than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain to sunder his that was thine enemy? why art thou yet so fair? shall i believe that unsubstantial death is amorous, and that the lean abhorrèd monster keeps thee here in dark to be his paramour? and never from this palace of dim night depart again. here, here will i remain with worms that are thy chamber maids. oh, here will i set up my everlasting rest, from this world-wearied flesh. eyes, look your last. arms, take your last embrace. and, lips, o you the doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss a dateless bargain to engrossing death. come, bitter conduct, come, unsavoury guide. thou desperate pilot, now at once run on the dashing rocks thy seasick, weary bark. here's to my love! (drinks the poison) o true apothecary,
disloyal?
(as lucentio) gremio, 'tis known my father hath no less and twelve tight galleys. these i will assure her, and twice as much whate'er thou offer'st next.
saint francis be my speed! how oft tonight have my old feet stumbled at graves!, who's there?
the word is too good to paint out her wickedness. i could her to it. wonder not till further warrant. go but with me tonight, you shall see her chamber window entered, even the night before her wedding day. if you love her then, tomorrow wed her. but it would better fit your honor to
nay, i have offered all, i have no more, and she can have no more than all i have.
here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
(to don pedro) may this be so?
(as lucentio) why, then the maid is mine from all the world, by your firm promise. gremio is outvied.
bliss be upon you! tell me, good my friend, to grubs and eyeless skulls? as i discern, it burneth in the capels' monument.
i will not think it.
i must confess your offer is the best, she is your own; else, you must pardon me. if you should die before him, where's her dower?
it doth so, holy sir, and there's my master, one that you love.
if you dare not trust that you see, confess not that you know. if you will follow me, i will show you enough, and when
(as lucentio) that's but a cavil: he is old, i young.
who is it?
if i see anything tonight why i should not marry her, tomorrow in the congregation, where i should wed, there will i shame her.
and may not young men die as well as old?
romeo.
and as i wooed for thee to obtain her, i will join with thee
on sunday next, you know my daughter katherina is to be married. (to tranio as lucentio) now, on the sunday following, shall bianca if not, to signior gremio. and so i take my leave, and thank you both.
how long hath he been there?
i will disparage her no farther till you are my witnesses. bear it coldly but till midnight and let the issue show itself.
adieu, good neighbor.
full half an hour.
o day untowardly turned!
now i fear thee not. sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool set foot under thy table. tut, a toy! an old italian fox is not so kind, my boy.
go with me to the vault.
o mischief strangely thwarting!
a vengeance on your crafty withered hide! yet i have faced it with a card of ten. i see no reason but supposed lucentio must get a father, called "supposed vincentio", and that's a wonder. fathers commonly do get their children. but in this case of wooing,
i dare not, sir. my master knows not but i am gone hence, and fearfully did menace me with death if i did stay to look on his intents.
have seen the sequel.
(as cambio) fiddler, forbear. you grow too forward, sir. have you so soon forgot the entertainment her sister katherina welcomed you withal?
oh, much i fear some ill unthrifty thing.
are you good men and true?
(as litio) but, wrangling pedant, this is then give me leave to have prerogative, and when in music we have spent an hour, your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
as i did sleep under this yew tree here, i dreamt my master and another fought, and that my master slew him.
yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer salvation, body and soul.
(as cambio) preposterous ass, that never read so far was it not to refresh the mind of man after his studies or his usual pain? then give me leave to read philosophy and, while i pause, serve in your harmony.
romeo!, alack, alack, what blood is this, which stains the stony entrance of the sepulcher? what mean these masterless and gory swords to lie discolored by this place of peace? romeo! o, pale!, who else? what, paris too? and steeped in blood?, ah, what an unkind hour is guilty of this lamentable chance! the lady stirs.
nay, that were a punishment too good for them, if they prince's watch.
(as litio) sirrah, i will not bear these braves of thine.
i do remember well where i should be, and there i am. where is my romeo?
well, give them their charge, neighbor dogberry.
why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong to strive for that which resteth in my choice. i am no breeching scholar in the schools. i'll not be tied to hours nor 'pointed times and, to cut off all strife, here sit we down.
i hear some noise. lady, come from that nest of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep. hath thwarted our intents. come, come away. thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead, and paris too. come, i'll dispose of thee among a sisterhood of holy nuns. come, go, good juliet. i dare no longer stay.
first, who think you the most desartless man to be constable?
(to hortensio) take you your instrument, play you the whiles. his lecture will be done ere you have tuned.
go, get thee hence, for i will not away., 
hugh otecake, sir, or george seacole, for they can write
(as litio) you'll leave his lecture when i am in tune?
what's here? a cup, closed in my true love's hand? poison, i see, hath been his timeless end., to help me after? i will kiss thy lips. haply some poison yet doth hang on them, to make me die with a restorative. (kisses romeo)
come hither, neighbor seacole. god hath blessed you with a good name. to be a well-favored man is the gift of fortune, but to write and read comes by nature.
(aside) that will be never. (to hortensio) tune your instrument.
(to page) lead, boy. which way?
both which, master constable, 
where left we last?
yea, noise? then i'll be brief. o happy dagger, this is thy sheath. there rust and let me die. (stabs herself with romeo's dagger and dies)
favor, sir, why, give god thanks, and make no boast of it, and for your writing and reading, let that appear when there is no need of such vanity. you are thought here to be the most senseless and fit man for the constable of the watch;
here, madam: hic ibat simois, hic est sigeia tellus,
this is the place. there, where the torch doth burn.
you shall comprehend all vagrom men; you are to bid any man stand, in the prince's name.
conster them.
the ground is bloody., search about the churchyard. go, some of you. whoe'er you find, attach.
how if he will not stand?
hic ibat, as i told you before, simois, i am lucentio, hic est, son unto vincentio of pisa, sigeia tellus, disguised thus to get your love, hic steterat, and that "lucentio" that comes a-wooing, priami is my man tranio, regia, bearing my port, celsa senis, that we might beguile the old pantaloon.
pitiful sight! here lies the county slain, and juliet bleeding, warm and newly dead, go, tell the prince. run to the capulets. raise up the montagues. some others search.
why, then, take no note of him, but let him go and you are rid of a knave.
(as litio) madam, my instrument's in tune.
we see the ground whereon these woes do lie, we cannot without circumstance descry.
if he will not stand when he is bidden, he is none of the prince's subjects.
let's hear. (he plays) o fie! the treble jars.
here's romeo's man. we found him in the churchyard.
true, and they are to meddle with none but the prince's for the watch to babble and to talk is most tolerable and not to be endured.
(as cambio) spit in the hole, man, and tune again.
hold him in safety till the prince come hither.
we will rather sleep than talk. we know what belongs to a watch.
now let me see if i can conster it. hic ibat simois, i know you not, hic est sigeia tellus, i trust you not, hic steterat priami, take heed he hear us not, regia, presume not, celsa senis, despair not.
here is a friar that trembles, sighs and weeps. as he was coming from this churchyard's side.
for i cannot see how sleeping should offend. only have a care that your bills be not stolen. well, you are to call at all the alehouses and bid those that are drunk get them to bed.
(as litio) madam, 'tis now in tune.
a great suspicion. stay the friar too.
how if they will not?
(as cambio) all but the base.
what misadventure is so early up that calls our person from our morning rest?
you not then the better answer, you may say they are not the men you took them for.
(as litio) the base is right; 'tis the base knave that jars. now, for my life, the knave doth court my love. pedascule, i'll watch you better yet.
what should it be that is so shrieked abroad?
well, sir.
(to lucentio) in time i may believe, yet i mistrust.
oh, the people in the street cry "romeo," some "juliet," and some "paris," and all run with open outcry toward our monument.
if you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by virtue of your you meddle or make with them, why the more is for your honesty.
mistrust it not, for sure aeacides
what fear is this which startles in our ears?
if we know him to be a thief, shall we not lay hands on him?
i must believe my master; else, i promise you, i should be arguing still upon that doubt. but let it rest., now, litio, to you. good master, take it not unkindly, pray,
and romeo dead, and juliet, dead before, warm and new killed.
truly, by your office you may, but i think they that touch you do take a thief, is to let him show himself what he is and steal out of your company.
(as litio, to lucentio) you may go walk, and give me leave awhile. my lessons make no music in three parts.
search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
you have been always called a merciful man, partner.
(as cambio) are you so formal, sir? well, i must wait. our fine musician groweth amorous.
here is a friar, and slaughtered romeo's man, these dead men's tombs.
who hath any honesty in him.
(as litio) madam, before you touch the instrument, to learn the order of my fingering i must begin with rudiments of art, more pleasant, pithy, and effectual than hath been taught by any of my trade. and there it is in writing, fairly drawn.
o heavens! o wife, look how our daughter bleeds! this dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house is empty on the back of montague,
(to the watch) if you hear a child cry in the night, you must call to the nurse and bid her still it.
why, i am past my gamut long ago.
o me! this sight of death is as a bell, that warns my old age to a sepulcher.
how if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us?
yet read the gamut of hortensio.
come, montague, for thou art early up to see thy son and heir now early down.
crying, for the ewe that will not hear her lamb when it baas will never answer a calf when he bleats.
(reads) "gamut i am, the ground of all accord: a re, to plead hortensio's passion; b mi, bianca, take him for thy lord, d sol re, one clef, two notes have i; e la mi, show pity, or i die." call you this "gamut"? tut, i like it not. old fashions please me best. i am not so nice
grief of my son's exile hath stopped her breath. what further woe conspires against mine age?
'tis very true.
mistress, your father prays you leave your books and help to dress your sister's chamber up. you know tomorrow is the wedding day.
look, and thou shalt see.
this is the end of the charge. you, constable, are to present you may stay him.
farewell, sweet masters both. i must be gone.
(to romeo) o thou untaught! what manners is in this,
nay, by 'r lady, that i think he cannot.
(as cambio) faith, mistress, then i have no cause to stay.
seal up the mouth of outrage for a while, till we can clear these ambiguities and know their spring, their head, their true descent, and then will i be general of your woes, and let mischance be slave to patience., bring forth the parties of suspicion.
five shillings to one on 't, with any man that knows the statutes, he may stay him, marry, not without the prince and it is an offense to stay a man against his will.
but i have cause to pry into this pedant. methinks he looks as though he were in love. yet if thy thoughts, bianca, be so humble to cast thy wand'ring eyes on every stale, hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.
i am the greatest, able to do least, yet most suspected, as the time and place and here i stand, both to impeach and purge, myself condemnèd and myself excused.
by 'r lady, i think it be so.
(to tranio) signior lucentio, this is the 'pointed day that katherine and petruchio should be married, and yet we hear not of our son-in-law. what will be said? what mockery will it be, to speak the ceremonial rites of marriage? what says lucentio to this shame of ours?
then say at once what thou dost know in this.
ha, ha, ha!, well, masters, good night. an there be any matter of weight chances, call up me. keep your fellows'
no shame but mine. i must, forsooth, be forced to give my hand, opposed against my heart, who wooed in haste and means to wed at leisure. i told you, i, he was a frantic fool, hiding his bitter jests in blunt behavior, and, to be noted for a merry man, make friends, invite, and proclaim the banns, yet never means to wed where he hath wooed. now must the world point at poor katherine and say, "lo, there is mad petruchio's wife,
i will be brief, for my short date of breath romeo, there dead, was husband to that juliet, and she, there dead, that romeo's faithful wife. i married them, and their stol'n marriage day was tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death for whom, and not for tybalt, juliet pined. you, to remove that siege of grief from her, betrothed and would have married her perforce to county paris. then comes she to me, to rid her from this second marriage, or in my cell there would she kill herself. then gave i her, so tutored by my art, a sleeping potion, which so took effect the form of death.
well, masters, we hear our charge. let us go sit here upon the church bench till two, and then all to bed.
(as lucentio) patience, good katherine, and baptista too. upon my life, petruchio means but well, whatever fortune stays him from his word: though he be blunt, i know him passing wise;
meantime i writ to romeo, that he should hither come as this dire night, to help to take her from her borrowed grave, being the time the potion's force should cease. was stayed by accident, and yesternight returned my letter back. then all alone at the prefixèd hour of her waking came i to take her from her kindred's vault, till i conveniently could send to romeo, but when i came, some minute ere the time of her awakening, here untimely lay the noble paris and true romeo dead. and bear this work of heaven with patience. but then a noise did scare me from the tomb, and she, too desperate, would not go with me, but, as it seems, did violence on herself. her nurse is privy. and if aught in this miscarried by my fault, let my old life be sacrificed some hour before his time unto the rigor of severest law.
one word more, honest neighbors. i pray you watch about signior leonato's door, for the wedding being there i beseech you.
would katherine had never seen him, though!
where's romeo's man? what can he say in this?
what conrade!
go, girl. i cannot blame thee now to weep, for such an injury would vex a very saint, much more a shrew of thy impatient humor.
i brought my master news of juliet's death, and then in post he came from mantua to this same place, to this same monument. and threatened me with death, going in the vault, if i departed not and left him there.
(aside) peace! stir not.
master, master! news, old news, and such news as you never heard of!
give me the letter. i will look on it. (takes letter from balthasar) sirrah, what made your master in this place?
conrade, i say!
is it new and old too? how may that be?
he came with flowers to strew his lady's grave, and bid me stand aloof, and so i did. anon comes one with light to ope the tomb, and then i ran away to call the watch.
here, man. i am at thy elbow.
why, is it not news to hear of petruchio's coming?
(skims the letter) this letter doth make good the friar's words, their course of love, the tidings of her death. and here he writes that he did buy a poison came to this vault to die and lie with juliet. where be these enemies?, capulet! montague! see what a scourge is laid upon your hate, that heaven finds means to kill your joys with love! have lost a brace of kinsmen. all are punished.
mass, and my elbow itched, i thought there would a scab follow.
is he come?
o brother montague, give me thy hand. this is my daughter's jointure, for no more can i demand.
i will owe thee an answer for that. and now forward with thy tale.
why, no, sir.
but i can give thee more, that whiles verona by that name is known, there shall no figure at such rate be set as that of true and faithful juliet.
rain, and i will, like a true drunkard, utter all to thee.
what then?
as rich shall romeo's by his lady's lie,
(aside) some treason, masters. yet stand close.
he is coming.
a glooming peace this morning with it brings. the sun, for sorrow, will not show his head. go hence, to have more talk of these sad things. some shall be pardoned, and some punishèd. than this of juliet and her romeo.
therefore know i have earned of don john a thousand ducats.
when will he be here?
is it possible that any villainy should be so dear?
when he stands where i am and sees you there.
before we proceed any further, hear me speak.
thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any villainy should be so rich. for when rich villains have need of poor ones, poor ones may make what price they will.
(as lucentio) but say, what to thine old news?
speak, speak.
i wonder at it.
why, petruchio is coming in a new hat and an old jerkin, a pair of old breeches thrice turned, a pair of boots that have been candle cases, one buckled, another laced; an old rusty sword ta'en out of the town armory, with a broken hilt and chapeless; with two broken points; his horse hipped, with an old mothy saddle and stirrups of no kindred, besides possessed with the glanders and like to mose in the chine, troubled with the lampass, infected with the fashions, full of wingdalls, sped with spavins, rayed with yellows, past cure of the fives, stark spoiled with the staggers, begnawn with the bots, swayed in the back and shoulder-shotten, near-legged before and with a half-checked bit and a headstall of sheeps leather, which, being restrained to keep him from stumbling, hath been often burst, and now repaired with knots, one girth six times pieced, and a woman's crupper of velour, which hath two letters for her name fairly set down in studs, and here and there pieced with packthread.
you are all resolved rather to die than to famish?
fashion of a doublet, or a hat, or a cloak, is nothing to a man.
who comes with him?
resolved. resolved.
yes, it is apparel.
o, sir, his lackey, for all the world caparisoned like the horse; with a linen stock on one leg and a kersey boot-hose on the other, gartered with a red and blue list; an old hat and the humor of forty fancies pricked in 't for a feather. a monster, a very monster in apparel, and not like a christian footboy or a gentleman's lackey.
first, you know caius martius is chief enemy to the people.
i mean the fashion.
(as lucentio) yet oftentimes he goes but mean-appareled.
we know't, we know't.
yes, the fashion is the fashion.
i am glad he's come, howsoe'er he comes.
let us kill him, and we'll have corn at our own price. is't a verdict?
what a deformed thief this fashion is?
why, sir, he comes not.
no more talking on't; let it be done: away, away!
(aside) i know that deformed. he has been a vile thief this seven year. he goes up and down like a gentleman. i remember his name.
didst thou not say he comes?
one word, good citizens.
didst thou not hear somebody?
who? that petruchio came?
we are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good. what authority surfeits on would relieve us: if they would yield us but the superfluity, while it were wholesome, we might guess they relieved us humanely; afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an inventory to particularise their abundance; our sufferance is a gain to them. let us revenge this with our pikes, ere we become rakes: for the gods know i
no, 'twas the vane on the house.
ay, that petruchio came.
would you proceed especially against caius martius?
seest thou not, i say, what a deformed thief this fashion is, how giddily he turns about all the hot bloods between fourteen and five-and-thirty, sometimes fashioning them like god bel's priests in the old church-window, sometime like the shaven hercules in the smirched worm-eaten tapestry, where his codpiece seems as massy as his club?
no, sir, i say his horse comes, with him on his back.
against him first: he's a very dog to the commonalty.
all this i see, and i see that the fashion wears out more the fashion too, that thou hast shifted out of thy tale into telling me of the fashion?
why, that's all one.
consider you what services he has done for his country?
not so, neither. but know that i have tonight wooed margaret, the lady hero's gentlewoman, by the name of bids me a thousand times good night. i tell this tale vilely. i should first tell thee how the prince, claudio and my master, planted and placed and possessed by my master don john, saw afar off in the orchard this amiable
nay, by saint jamy, a horse and a man is more than one and yet not many.
very well; and could be content to give him good
and thought they margaret was hero?
come, where be these gallants? who's at home?
nay, but speak not maliciously.
two of them did, the prince and claudio, but the devil my master knew she was margaret; and partly by his oaths, which first possessed them, partly by the dark night, which confirm any slander that don john had made, away went claudio enraged, swore he would meet her as he was appointed next morning at the temple, and there, before the whole congregation, shame her with what he saw o'ernight
you are welcome, sir.
i say unto you, what he hath done famously, he did it to that end: though soft-conscienced men can be content to say it was for his country he did it to is, even till the altitude of his virtue.
we charge you, in the prince's name, stand!
and yet i come not well.
what he cannot help in his nature, you account a vice in him. you must in no way say he is covetous.
call up the right master constable. we have here recovered the most dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known in the commonwealth.
and yet you halt not.
if i must not, i need not be barren of accusations;
lock.
(as lucentio) not so well appareled as i wish you were.
what shouts are these? the other side o' the city is risen: why stay we prating here? to the capitol!
masters, masters, 
were it better i should rush in thus, how does my father? gentles, methinks you frown. and wherefore gaze this goodly company as if they saw some wondrous monument, some comet or unusual prodigy?
come, come.
(to borachio) you'll be made bring deformed forth, i warrant you.
first were we sad, fearing you would not come, now sadder that you come so unprovided. fie, doff this habit, shame to your estate, an eyesore to our solemn festival.
soft! who comes here?
with us.
hath all so long detained you from your wife and sent you hither so unlike yourself.
the people.
we are like to prove a goodly commodity, being taken up of these men's bills.
tedious it were to tell and harsh to hear. sufficeth i am come to keep my word, which, at more leisure, i will so excuse as you shall well be satisfied withal. but where is kate? i stay too long from her. the morning wears. 'tis time we were at church.
he's one honest enough: would all the rest were so!
a commodity in question, i warrant you., come, we'll
go to my chamber, put on clothes of mine.
what work's, my countrymen, in hand? where go you with bats and clubs? the matter? speak, i pray you.
good ursula, wake my cousin beatrice and desire her to rise.
not i, believe me. thus i'll visit her.
had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do, which now we'll show 'em in deeds. they say poor suitors have strong breaths: they shall know we have strong arms too.
i will, lady.
but thus, i trust, you will not marry her.
will you undo yourselves?
and bid her come hither.
good sooth, even thus. therefore, ha' done with words: could i repair what she will wear in me as i can change these poor accoutrements, 'twere well for kate and better for myself. but what a fool am i to chat with you, and seal the title with a lovely kiss!
we cannot, sir, we are undone already.
well.
he hath some meaning in his mad attire. we will persuade him, be it possible, to put on better ere he go to church.
i tell you, friends, most charitable care have the patricians of you. for your wants, strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them against the roman state, whose course will on the way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs of more strong link asunder than can ever the gods, not the patricians, make it, and your knees to them, not arms, must help. alack, you are transported by calamity thither where more attends you, and you slander when you curse them as enemies.
troth, i think your other rebato were better.
i'll after him, and see the event of this.
care for us! true, indeed! they ne'er cared for us yet: suffer us to famish, and their store-houses crammed with grain; make edicts for usury, to established against the rich, and provide more piercing statutes daily, to chain up and restrain the poor. if the wars eat us not up, they will; and there's all the love they bear us.
no, pray thee, good meg, i'll wear this.
but sir, to love concerneth us to add her father's liking, which to bring to pass, as i before unparted to your worship, i am to get a man, whate'er he be and he shall be "vincentio of pisa" and make assurance here in padua of greater sums than i have promisèd. so shall you quietly enjoy your hope
confess yourselves wondrous malicious, or be accused of folly. i shall tell you a pretty tale: it may be you have heard it; but, since it serves my purpose, i will venture
by my troth, 's not so good, and i warrant your cousin will say so.
were it not that my fellow schoolmaster doth watch bianca's steps so narrowly, 'twere good, methinks, to steal our marriage, which, once performed, let all the world say no,
well, i'll hear it, sir: yet you must not think to fob off our disgrace with a tale: but, an 't please you, deliver.
this.
that by degrees we mean to look into and watch our vantage in this business. we'll overreach the graybeard, gremio, the narrow-prying father, minola, all for my master's sake, lucentio.
there was a time when all the body's members that only like a gulf it did remain i' the midst o' the body, idle and unactive, still cupboarding the viand, never bearing like labour with the rest, where the other instruments and, mutually participate, did minister unto the appetite and affection common of the whole body. the belly answer'd, 
i like the new tire within excellently, if the hair were a thought browner; and your gown's a most rare fashion, i' faith. i saw the duchess of milan's gown that they praise so.
signior gremio, came you from the church?
well, sir, what answer made the belly?
oh, that exceeds, they say.
as willingly as e'er i came from school.
which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus, for, look you, i may make the belly smile as well as speak, it tauntingly replied to the discontented members, the mutinous parts as you malign our senators for that they are not such as you.
by my troth, 's but a nightgown in respect of yours, cloth o' gold, and cuts, and laced with silver, set with pearls, down sleeves, side sleeves, and skirts, round underborne with a bluish tinsel. but for a fine, quaint, graceful, and
(as lucentio) and is the bride and bridegroom coming home?
your belly's answer? what! the kingly-crowned head, the vigilant eye, our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter. with other muniments and petty helps in this our fabric, if that they, 
god give me joy to wear it, for my heart is exceeding heavy.
a grumbling groom, and that the girl shall find.
what then?
'twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man.
(as lucentio) curster than she? why, 'tis impossible.
should by the cormorant belly be restrain'd, who is the sink o' the body,, 
fie upon thee! art not ashamed?
why, he's a devil, a devil, a very fiend.
well, what then?
of what, lady? of speaking honorably? is not marriage marriage? i think you would have me say, "saving your reverence, a husband." an bad thinking do not wrest true speaking, i'll offend nobody. is there any harm in "the heavier for a husband"? none, i think, an it be the right heavy. ask my lady beatrice else. here she comes.
(as lucentio) why, she's a devil, a devil, the devil's dam.
the former agents, if they did complain,
good morrow, coz.
i'll tell you, sir lucentio: when the priest should ask if katherine should be his wife, "ay, by gogs wouns!" quoth he, and swore so loud that, all amazed, the priest let fall the book, the mad-brained bridegroom took him such a cuff that down fell priest and book, and book and priest. "now take them up," quoth he, "if any list."
i will tell you if you'll bestow a small, of what you have little, patience awhile, you'll hear the belly's answer.
good morrow, sweet hero.
(as lucentio) what said the wench when he rose again?
ye're long about it.
why, how now? do you speak in the sick tune?
as if the vicar meant to cozen him. but after many ceremonies done, he calls for wine. "a health!" quoth he, as if he had been aboard, carousing to his mates and threw the sops all in the sexton's face, having no other reason but that his beard grew thin and hungerly and seemed to ask him sops as he was drinking. and kissed her lips with such a clamorous smack that at the parting all the church did echo. and i, seeing this, came thence for very shame, and after me, i know, the rout is coming.
your most grave belly was deliberate, not rash like his accusers, and thus answer'd: 'true is it, my incorporate friends,' quoth he, 'that i receive the general food at first, because i am the store-house and the shop of the whole body: but, if you do remember, i send it through the rivers of your blood, even to the court, the heart, to the seat o' the brain; the strongest nerves and small inferior veins from me receive that natural competency whereby they live: and though that all at once, you, my good friends,', this says the belly, mark me,, 
i am out of all other tune, methinks.
hark, hark! i hear the minstrels play.
ay, sir; well, well.
clap 's into "light o' love." that goes without a burden. do you sing it, and i'll dance it.
gentlemen and friends, i thank you for you i know you think to dine with me today and have prepared great store of wedding cheer, and therefore here i mean to take my leave.
'though all at once cannot see what i do deliver out to each, yet i can make my audit up, that all from me do back receive the flour of all,
ye light o' love, with your heels! then, if your husband have stables enough, you'll see he shall lack no barns.
is 't possible you will away tonight?
it was an answer: how apply you this?
o illegitimate construction! i scorn that with my heels.
i must away today, before night come. make it no wonder. if you knew my business, and, honest company, i thank you all, that have beheld me give away myself to this most patient, sweet and virtuous wife. dine with my father, drink a health to me,
the senators of rome are this good belly, and you the mutinous members; for examine their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly no public benefit which you receive but it proceeds or comes from them to you and no way from yourselves. what do you think, you, the great toe of this assembly?
'tis almost five o'clock, cousin. 'tis time you were ready. by my troth, i am exceeding ill. heigh-ho!
(as lucentio) let us entreat you stay till after dinner.
i the great toe! why the great toe?
for a hawk, a horse, or a husband?
it may not be.
for that, being one o' the lowest, basest, poorest, of this most wise rebellion, thou go'st foremost: thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run, lead'st first to win some vantage. rome and her rats are at the point of battle; the one side must have bale.
for the letter that begins them all, h.
let me entreat you.
hail, noble martius!
the star.
it cannot be.
thanks. what's the matter, you dissentious rogues, make yourselves scabs?
what means the fool, trow?
let me entreat you.
we have ever your good word.
nothing, i; but god send everyone their heart's desire.
i am content.
he that will give good words to thee will flatter beneath abhorring. what would you have, you curs, the other makes you proud. he that trusts to you, where he should find you lions, finds you hares; where foxes, geese: you are no surer, no, than is the coal of fire upon the ice, to make him worthy whose offence subdues him and curse that justice did it. who deserves greatness deserves your hate; and your affections are which would increase his evil. he that depends upon your favours swims with fins of lead and hews down oaks with rushes. hang ye! trust ye? with every minute you do change a mind, him vile that was your garland. what's the matter, that in these several places of the city you cry against the noble senate, who, under the gods, keep you in awe, which else
these gloves the count sent me, they are an excellent
are you content to stay?
for corn at their own rates; whereof, they say, the city is well stored.
i am stuffed, cousin. i cannot smell.
i am content you shall entreat me stay, but yet not stay, entreat me how you can.
hang 'em! they say! they'll sit by the fire, and presume to know who thrives and who declines; side factions and give out conjectural marriages; making parties strong and feebling such as stand not in their liking grain enough! would the nobility lay aside their ruth, and let me use my sword, i'll make a quarry with thousands of these quarter'd slaves, as high
a maid, and stuffed! there's goodly catching of cold.
now, if you love me, stay.
nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded; for though abundantly they lack discretion, yet are they passing cowardly. but, i beseech you, what says the other troop?
oh, god help me, god help me! how long have you professed apprehension?
grumio, my horse.
they said they were an-hungry; sigh'd forth proverbs, that hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat, that meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent not corn for the rich men only: with these shreds and a petition granted them, a strange one, to break the heart of generosity, and make bold power look pale, they threw their caps as they would hang them on the horns o' the moon,
even since you left it. doth not my wit become me rarely?
ay, sir, they be ready. the oats have eaten the horses.
what is granted them?
it is not seen enough; you should wear it in your cap. by my troth, i am sick.
do what thou canst, i will not go today, no, nor tomorrow, not till i please myself. the door is open, sir. there lies your way. you may be jogging whiles your boots are green. 'tis like you'll prove a jolly surly groom, that take it on you at the first so roundly.
five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms, of their own choice: one's junius brutus, sicinius velutus, and i know not, 'sdeath! ere so prevail'd with me: it will in time win upon power and throw forth greater themes for insurrection's arguing.
get you some of this distilled carduus benedictus and lay it to your heart. it is the only thing for a qualm.
o kate, content thee. prithee, be not angry.
this is strange.
there thou prick'st her with a thistle.
i will be angry. what hast thou to do?, 
(to the rebels) go, get you home, you fragments!
benedictus! why benedictus? you have some moral in this benedictus?
ay, marry, sir, now it begins to work.
where's caius martius?
moral! no, by my troth, i have no moral meaning. i meant plain holy thistle. you may think perchance that i think you what i list, nor i list not to think what i can, nor indeed i cannot think, if i would think my heart out of thinking, that you are in love or that you will be in love or that you can be in love. yet benedick was such another, and now is he now, in despite of his heart, he eats his meat without grudging. and how you may be converted i know not, but methinks you look with your eyes as other women do.
gentlemen, forward to the bridal dinner. i see a woman may be made a fool if she had not a spirit to resist.
here: what's the matter?
what pace is this that thy tongue keeps?
obey the bride, you that attend on her. go to the feast, revel and domineer, carouse full measure to her maidenhead, be mad and merry, or go hang yourselves. nay, look not big, nor stamp, nor stare, nor fret; i will be master of what is mine own. she is my goods, my chattels; she is my house, my household stuff, my field, my barn, and here she stands, touch her whoever dare. i'll bring mine action on the proudest he that stops my way in padua., grumio, draw forth thy weapon, we are beset with thieves. fear not, sweet wench, they shall not touch thee, kate. i'll buckler thee against a million.
the news is, sir, the volsces are in arms.
not a false gallop.
nay, let them go, a couple of quiet ones.
i am glad on 't: then we shall ha' means to vent
madam, withdraw: the prince, the count, signor benedick, don john, and all the gallants of the town are come to fetch you to church.
went they not quickly, i should die with laughing.
martius, 'tis true that you have lately told us; the volsces are in arms.
help to dress me, good coz, good meg, good ursula.
(as lucentio) of all mad matches never was the like.
they have a leader, tullus aufidius, that will put you to 't. and were i any thing but what i am, i would wish me only he.
what would you with me, honest neighbor?
(as cambio) mistress, what's your opinion of your sister?
you have fought together.
marry, sir, i would have some confidence with you that decerns you nearly.
that, being mad herself, she's madly mated.
were half to half the world by the ears and he. only my wars with him: he is a lion that i am proud to hunt.
brief, i pray you, for you see it is a busy time with me.
i warrant him, petruchio is kated.
then, worthy martius, attend upon cominius to these wars.
marry, this it is, sir.
neighbors and friends, though bride and bridegroom wants you know there wants no junkets at the feast.
it is your former promise.
yes, in truth it is, sir.
(to tranio) lucentio, you shall supply the bridegroom's place, and let bianca take her sister's room.
sir, it is; and i am constant. titus lartius, thou shalt see me once more strike at tullus' face. what, art thou stiff? stand'st out?
what is it, my good friends?
(as lucentio) shall sweet bianca practice how to bride it?
i'll lean upon one crutch and fight with t'other, ere stay behind this business.
goodman verges, sir, speaks a little off the matter. an old man, sir, and his wits are not so blunt as, god help, i would his brows.
she shall, lucentio. come, gentlemen, let's go.
o, true-bred!
yes, i thank god i am as honest as any man living that is an old man and no honester than i.
fie, fie on all tired jades, on all mad masters, and all foul ways! was ever man so beaten? was ever man so 'rayed? was ever man so weary? i am sent before to make a fire, and they are coming after to warm them. now, were not i a little pot and soon hot, my very lips might freeze to my teeth, my tongue to the roof of my mouth, my heart in my belly, ere i should come by a fire to thaw me. but i with blowing the fire shall warm myself. for, considering the weather, a taller man than i will take cold., holla, ho! curtis!
your company to the capitol; where, i know,
comparisons are odorous. palabras, neighbor verges.
who is that calls so coldly?
[to cominius] lead you on.
neighbors, you are tedious.
a piece of ice. if thou doubt it, thou mayst slide from my shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my neck. a fire, good curtis.
right worthy you priority.
it pleases your worship to say so, but we are the poor duke's officers. but truly, for mine own part, if i were as tedious as a king, i could find it in my heart to bestow it all of your worship.
is my master and his wife coming, grumio?
noble martius!
all thy tediousness on me, ah?
oh, ay, curtis, ay, and therefore fire, fire. cast on no water.
[to the citizens] hence to your homes; be gone!
yea, an 'twere a thousand pound more than 'tis, for i hear as good exclamation on your worship as of any man in the city, and though i be but a poor man, i am glad to hear it.
is she so hot a shrew as she's reported?
the volsces have much corn; take these rats thither to gnaw their garners. worshipful mutiners, your valour puts well forth: pray, follow.
and so am i.
she was, good curtis, before this frost. but thou knowest winter tames man, woman and beast, for it hath tamed my old master and my new mistress and myself, fellow curtis.
was ever man so proud as is this martius?
i would fain know what you have to say.
away, you three-inch fool! i am no beast.
he has no equal.
marry, sir, our watch tonight, excepting your worship's presence, ha' ta'en a couple of as arrant knaves as any in messina.
am i but three inches? why, thy horn is a foot, and so long am i, at the least. but wilt thou make a fire, or shall i complain on thee to our mistress, whose hand, she being now at hand, thou shalt soon feel, to thy cold comfort, for being slow in thy hot office?
when we were chosen tribunes for the people,, 
a good old man, sir. he will be talking. as they say, "when well said, i' faith, neighbor verges., well, god's a good man. an two men ride of a horse, one must ride behind. an honest soul, i' faith, sir, by my troth he is, as ever broke bread, but god is to be worshipped, all men are not alike,
i prithee, good grumio, tell me, how goes the world?
mark'd you his lip and eyes?
indeed, neighbor, he comes too short of you.
a cold world, curtis, in every office but thine, and therefore fire! do thy duty, and have thy duty, for my master and mistress are almost frozen to death.
nay. [b]ut his taunts.
gifts that god gives.
there's fire ready. and therefore, good grumio, the news.
being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods.
i must leave you.
why, "jack, boy! ho, boy!" and as much news as wilt thou.
be-mock the modest moon.
one word, sir. our watch, sir, have indeed comprehended morning examined before your worship.
come, you are so full of cony-catching!
the present wars devour him: he is grown too proud to be so valiant.
take their examination yourself and bring it me. i am now in great haste, as it may appear unto you.
why, therefore fire, for i have caught extreme cold. where's the cook? is supper ready, the house trimmed, rushes strewed, cobwebs swept, the servingmen in their new fustian, their white stockings, and every officer his wedding garment on? be the jacks fair within, the jills fair without, the carpets laid, and everything in order?
such a nature, tickled with good success, disdains the shadow his insolence can brook to be commanded under cominius.
it shall be suffigance.
all ready. and therefore, i pray thee, news.
fame, at the which he aims, in whom already he's well graced, can not a place below the first: for what miscarries shall be the general's fault, though he perform to the utmost of a man, and giddy censure will then cry out of martius 'o if he
drink some wine ere you go. fare you well.
first, know my horse is tired, my master and mistress fallen out.
besides, if things go well, opinion that so sticks on martius shall of his demerits rob cominius.
my lord, they stay for you to give your daughter to her husband.
how?
come: though martius earned them not, and all his faults to martius shall be honours, though indeed in aught he merit not.
i'll wait upon them. i am ready.
out of their saddles into the dirt, and thereby hangs a tale.
let's hence, and hear more than his singularity, he goes upon this present action.
go, good partner, go, get you to francis seacole. bid him examination these men.
let's ha' 't, good grumio.
lets along.
and we must do it wisely.
lend thine ear.
so, your opinion is, aufidius, that they of rome are entered in our counsels and know how we proceed.
we will spare for no wit, i warrant you. here's that shall drive some of them to a noncome. only get the learned the jail.
here.
is it not yours? that could be brought to bodily act ere rome had circumvention? 'tis not four days gone since i heard thence; these are the words: i think i have the letter here; yes, here it is.
come, friar francis, be brief, only to the plain form of marriage, and you shall recount their particular duties afterwards.
there!
whether for east or west: the dearth is great; the people mutinous; and it is rumour'd, cominius, martius your old enemy, who is of rome worse hated than of you, these three lead on this preparation whither 'tis bent: most likely 'tis for you: consider of it.'
(to claudio) you come hither, my lord, to marry this lady?
this 'tis to feel a tale, not to hear a tale.
our army's in the field to answer us.
no.
and therefore 'tis called a sensible tale. and this cuff was but to knock at your ear and beseech list'ning. now i begin: imprimis, we came down a foul hill, my master riding behind my mistress, 
nor did you think it folly to keep your great pretences veil'd till when they needs must show themselves; which it seem'd, appear'd to rome. by the discovery. we shall be shorten'd in our aim, which was to take in many towns ere almost rome should know we were afoot.
to be married to her., friar, you come to marry her.
both of one horse?
take your commission; hie you to your bands: let us alone to guard corioli: if they set down before 's, for the remove bring your army; but, i think, you'll find
lady, you come hither to be married to this count?
what's that to thee?
o, doubt not that; i speak from certainties. nay, more, some parcels of their power are forth already, and only hitherward. i leave your honours. 'tis sworn between us we shall ever strike till one can do no more.
i do.
why, a horse.
the gods assist you!
if either of you know any inward impediment why you it.
tell thou the tale! but hadst thou not crossed me, thou shouldst have heard how her horse fell, and she under her horse. thou shouldst have heard in how miry a place, how she was bemoiled, how he left her with the horse upon her, how he beat me because her horse stumbled, how she waded through the dirt to pluck him off me, how he swore, how she prayed that never prayed before, how i cried, how the horses ran away, how her bridle was burst, how i lost my crupper, with many things of worthy memory which now shall die in oblivion, and thou return unexperienced to thy grave.
and keep your honours safe!
know you any, hero?
by this reck'ning he is more shrew than she.
farewell.
none, my lord.
ay, and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find when he comes home. but what talk i of this? call forth nathaniel, joseph, nicholas, philip, walter, sugarsop, and the rest. let their heads be slickly combed, their blue coats brushed, and their garters of an indifferent knit. let them curtsy with their left legs, and not presume to touch a hair of my master's horse-tail till they kiss their hands. are they all ready?
farewell.
know you any, count?
they are.
farewell.
i dare make his answer, none.
call them forth.
i pray you, daughter, sing; or express yourself in a more comfortable sort: if my son were my husband, i should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein he won honour than in the embracements of his bed where tender-bodied and the only son of my womb, when youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way, when for a day of kings' entreaties a mother should not sell him an hour from her beholding, i, considering no better than picture-like to hang by the wall, if renown made it not stir, was pleased to let him seek danger where he was like to find fame. to a cruel war i sent him; from whence he returned, his brows more in joy at first hearing he was a man-child than now in first seeing he had proved himself a man.
o, what men dare do! what men may do! what men daily do, not knowing what they do!
(calling offstage) do you hear, ho? you must meet my master to countenance my mistress.
but had he died in the business, madam; how then?
how now, interjections? why, then, some be of laughing, as, ah, ha, he!
why, she hath a face of her own.
therein would have found issue. hear me profess sincerely: had i a dozen sons, each in my love alike and none less dear than thine and my good martius, i had rather had eleven die nobly for their
will you with free and unconstrainèd soul give me this maid, your daughter?
who knows not that?
(to volumnia) madam, the lady valeria is come to visit you.
as freely, son, as god did give her me.
thou, it seems, that calls for company to countenance her.
beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.
and what have i to give you back whose worth
i call them forth to credit her.
indeed, you shall not. methinks i hear hither your husband's drum, as children from a bear, the volsces shunning him: methinks i see him stamp thus, and call thus: 'come on, you cowards! you were got in fear, though you were born in rome:' his bloody brow like to a harvest-man that's task'd to mow or all or lose his hire.
nothing, unless you render her again.
why, she comes to borrow nothing of them.
his bloody brow! o jupiter, no blood!
sweet prince, you learn me noble thankfulness., there, leonato, take her back again. give not this rotten orange to your friend. behold how like a maid she blushes here! oh, what authority and show of truth can cunning sin cover itself withal! comes not that blood as modest evidence all you that see her, that she were a maid by these exterior shows? but she is none. she knows the heat of a luxurious bed. her blush is guiltiness, not modesty.
welcome home, grumio.
away, you fool! it more becomes a man when she did suckle hector, look'd not lovelier than hector's forehead when it spit forth blood at grecian sword, contemning. tell valeria, we are fit to bid her welcome.
what do you mean, my lord?
how now, grumio?
heavens bless my lord from fell aufidius!
not to be married, not to knit my soul to an approvèd wanton.
what, grumio!
he'll beat aufidius' head below his knee and tread upon his neck.
dear my lord, if you in your own proof have vanquished the resistance of her youth and made defeat of her virginity, 
fellow grumio!
my ladies both, good day to you.
you will say she did embrace me as a husband, and so extenuate the forehand sin. no, leonato, i never tempted her with word too large bashful sincerity and comely love.
how now, old lad?
sweet madam.
and seemed i ever otherwise to you?
welcome, you!, how now, you?, what, you!, fellow, you!, and thus much for greeting. now, my spruce companions, is all ready, and all things neat?
i am glad to see your ladyship.
out on thee, seeming! i will write against it. you seem to me as dian in her orb, but you are more intemperate in your blood than venus, or those pampered animals that rage in savage sensuality.
all things is ready. how near is our master?
how do you both? you are manifest house-keepers. (to volumnia) what are you sewing here? a fine spot, in good faith. (to virgilia) how does your little son?
is my lord well, that he doth speak so wide?
e'en at hand, alighted by this. and therefore be not, cock's passion, silence! i hear my master.
i thank your ladyship; well, good madam.
sweet prince, why speak not you?
where be these knaves? what, no man at door where is nathaniel, gregory, philip?
look upon his school-master.
what should i speak? i stand dishonored, that have gone about to link my dear friend to a common stale.
here, here, sir! here, sir!
o' my word, the father's son: i'll swear, 'tis a very pretty boy. o' my troth, i looked upon him o' wednesday half an hour together: has such a butterfly: and when he caught it, he let it go again; and after it again; and over and over he comes, and again; catched it again; or whether his fall enraged him, or how 'twas, he did so set his it!
are these things spoken, or do i but dream?
"here, sir! here, sir! here, sir! here, sir!" you loggerheaded and unpolished grooms! where is the foolish knave i sent before?
one on 's father's moods.
sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.
here, sir, as foolish as i was before.
indeed, la, 'tis a noble child.
this looks not like a nuptial.
you peasant swain! you whoreson malt-horse drudge! did i not bid thee meet me in the park
a crack, madam.
true! o god!
nathaniel's coat, sir, was not fully made, and gabriel's pumps were all unpinked i' th' heel. there was no link to color peter's hat, and walter's dagger was not come from sheathing. the rest were ragged, old, and beggarly. yet, as they are, here are they come to meet you.
the idle husewife with me this afternoon.
leonato, stand i here? is this the prince? is this the prince's brother? is this face hero's? are our eyes our own?
go, rascals, go, and fetch my supper in.
no, good madam; i will not out of doors.
all this is so, but what of this, my lord?
singing where are those, sit down, kate, and welcome., soud, soud, soud, soud!
not out of doors!
let me but move one question to your daughter, and by that fatherly and kindly power that you have in her, bid her answer truly.
why, when, i say?, nay, good sweet kate, be merry., off with my boots, you rogues! you villains, when?
she shall, she shall.
i charge thee do so, as thou art my child.
it was the friar of orders gray, as he forth walkèd on his way:, a servant tries to take off petruchio's boots. out, you rogue! you pluck my foot awry. strikes him be merry, kate., some water, here, what, ho! where's my spaniel troilus? sirrah, get you hence and bid my cousin ferdinand come hither.
threshold till my lord return from the wars.
what kind of catechizing call you this?
where are my slippers? shall i have some water?, 
fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably: come, you must go visit the good lady that lies in.
to make you answer truly to your name.
come, kate, and wash, and welcome heartily., you whoreson villain! will you let it fall? strikes him
i will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with
is it not hero? who can blot that name with any just reproach?
patience, i pray you! 'twas a fault unwilling.
why, i pray you?
marry, that can hero! what man was he talked with you yesternight out at your window betwixt twelve and one? now, if you are a maid, answer to this.
a whoreson, beetle-headed, flap-eared knave!, come, kate, sit down. i know you have a stomach. will you give thanks, sweet kate, or else shall i?, what's this? mutton?
'tis not to save labour, nor that i want love.
i talked with no man at that hour, my lord.
ay.
you would be another penelope: yet, they say, all the yarn she spun in ulysses' absence did but fill were sensible as your finger, that you might leave pricking it for pity. come, you shall go with us.
i am sorry you must hear. upon mine honor, myself, my brother, and this grievèd count did see her, hear her, at that hour last night talk with a ruffian at her chamber window confessed the vile encounters they have had a thousand times in secret.
who brought it?
no, good madam, pardon me; indeed, i will not forth.
fie, fie, they are not to be named, my lord, not to be spoke of! without offense, to utter them., thus, pretty lady, i am sorry for thy much misgovernment.
i.
in truth, la, go with me; and i'll tell you
o hero, what a hero hadst thou been if half thy outward graces had been placed but fare thee well, most foul, most fair! farewell, thou pure impiety and impious purity. for thee i'll lock up all the gates of love, and on my eyelids shall conjecture hang, and never shall it more be gracious.
'tis burnt, and so is all the meat. what dogs are these! where is the rascal cook? how durst you, villains, bring it from the dresser and serve it thus to me that love it not? throws the meat, & c. about the stage you heedless joltheads and unmannered slaves! what, do you grumble? i'll be with you straight.
o, good madam, there can be none yet.
hath no man's dagger here a point for me?
i pray you, husband, be not so disquiet.
verily, i do not jest with you; there came news from him last night.
why, how now, cousin! wherefore sink you down?
i tell thee, kate, 'twas burnt and dried away. and i expressly am forbid to touch it, for it engenders choler, planteth anger; and better 'twere that both of us did fast, than feed it with such over-roasted flesh. be patient, tomorrow 't shall be mended, and, for this night, we'll fast for company.
indeed, madam?
come, let us go. these things, come thus to light,
come, i will bring thee to thy bridal chamber.
thus it is: the volsces have an army forth; against whom cominius the general is gone, with one part of our roman power: your lord and titus lartius are set down before their city corioli; they nothing doubt on mine honour; and so, i pray, go with us.
how doth the lady?
peter, didst ever see the like?
give me excuse, good madam; i will obey you in every thing hereafter.
dead, i think., help, uncle!, hero, why, hero! uncle! signor benedick! friar!
he kills her in her own humor.
(to valeria) let her alone, lady: as she is now, she will but
o fate! take not away thy heavy hand! death is the fairest cover for her shame
where is he?
in troth, i think she would. fare you well, then. come, good sweet lady. prithee, virgilia, turn thy solemness out o' door and go along with us.
how now, cousin hero!
in her chamber, making a sermon of continency to her, knows not which way to stand, to look, to speak, and sits as one new-risen from a dream. away, away, for he is coming hither!
no, at a word, madam; indeed, i must not. i wish
(to hero) have comfort, lady.
thus have i politicly begun my reign, my falcon now is sharp and passing empty, and, till she stoop, she must not be full-gorged, for then she never looks upon her lure. another way i have to man my haggard,
well, then, farewell.
(to hero) dost thou look up?
that is, to watch her, as we watch these kites that bate and beat and will not be obedient. she ate no meat today, nor none shall eat. last night she slept not, nor tonight she shall not. i'll find about the making of the bed, and here i'll fling the pillow, there the bolster, this way the coverlet, another way the sheets. ay, and amid this hurly i intend and, in conclusion, she shall watch all night, and if she chance to nod i'll rail and brawl, and with the clamor keep her still awake. this is a way to kill a wife with kindness, he that knows better how to tame a shrew, now let him speak; 'tis charity to show.
yonder comes news. a wager they have met.
yea, wherefore should she not?
(as lucentio) is 't possible, friend litio, that mistress bianca doth fancy any other but lucentio? i tell you, sir, she bears me fair in hand.
my horse to yours, no.
wherefore! why, doth not every earthly thing the story that is printed in her blood?, do not live, hero, do not ope thine eyes, for, did i think thou wouldst not quickly die, thought i thy spirits were stronger than thy shames, strike at thy life. grieved i i had but one? chid i for that at frugal nature's frame? o, one too much by thee! why had i one? why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes? took up a beggar's issue at my gates, who, smirchèd thus, and mired with infamy, i might have said, "no part of it is mine; this shame derives itself from unknown loins"?
stand by and mark the manner of his teaching. they stand aside
'tis done.
and mine that i was proud on, mine so much that i myself was to myself not mine, valuing of her, why, she, o she is fall'n into a pit of ink, that the wide sea and salt too little which may season give to her foul tainted flesh!
(as cambio) now, mistress, profit you in what you read?
agreed.
sir, sir, be patient. for my part, i am so attired in wonder i know not what to say.
what, master, read you? first resolve me that.
say, has our general met the enemy?
oh, on my soul, my cousin is belied!
(as cambio) i read that i profess, the art to love.
they lie in view; but have not spoke as yet.
lady, were you her bedfellow last night?
and may you prove, sir, master of your art.
so, the good horse is mine.
no, truly not, although until last night i have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow.
(as cambio) while you, sweet dear, prove mistress of my heart!
i'll buy him of you.
confirmed, confirmed! oh, that is stronger made would the two princes lie and claudio lie, who loved her so that, speaking of her foulness, washed it with tears? hence from her. let her die.
(as litio) quick proceeders, marry! now, tell me, i pray, you that durst swear that your mistress bianca
no, i'll nor sell nor give him: lend you him i will
hear me a little, and given way unto this course of fortune, by noting of the lady. i have marked a thousand blushing apparitions to start into her face, a thousand innocent shames and in her eye there hath appeared a fire to burn the errors that these princes hold against her maiden truth. call me a fool,
(as lucentio) o despiteful love! unconstant womankind! i tell thee, litio, this is wonderful!
how far off lie these armies?
trust not my reading nor my observations, the tenor of my book; trust not my age, my reverence, calling, nor divinity, if this sweet lady lie not guiltless here under some biting error.
mistake no more. i am not litio, nor a musician as i seem to be, for such a one as leaves a gentlema and makes a god of such a cullion. know, sir, that i am called hortensio.
within this mile and half.
friar, it cannot be. is that she will not add to her damnation a sin of perjury. she not denies it. why seek'st thou then to cover with excuse that which appears in proper nakedness?
(as lucentio) signior hortensio, i have often heard and since mine eyes are witness of her lightness, i will with you, if you be so contented, forswear bianca and her love for ever.
then shall we hear their 'larum, and they ours. now, mars, i prithee, make us quick in work, to help our fielded friends! come, blow thy blast.
lady, what man is he you are accused of?
see how they kiss and court! signior lucentio, never to woo her more, but do forswear her as one unworthy all the former favors that i have fondly flattered her withal.
(to the senators) tutus aufidius, is he within your walls?
they know that do accuse me. i know none. if i know more of any man alive than that which maiden modesty doth warrant, let all my sins lack mercy!, o my father, at hours unmeet, or that i yesternight maintained the change of words with any creature, refuse me, hate me, torture me to death!
and here i take the like unfeignèd oath fie on her! see how beastly she doth court him!
no, nor a man that fears you less than he, that's lesser than a little.
there is some strange misprision in the princes.
would all the world but he had quite forsworn! for me, that i may surely keep mine oath, i will be married to a wealthy widow, as i have loved this proud disdainful haggard. and so farewell, signior lucentio. kindness in women, not their beauteous looks, shall win my love, and so i take my leave,
are bringing forth our youth. we'll break our walls, rather than they shall pound us up: our gates, which yet seem shut, we, have but pinn'd with rushes; they'll open of themselves.
and if their wisdoms be misled in this, the practice of it lives in john the bastard, whose spirits toil in frame of villainies.
mistress bianca, bless you with such grace as 'longeth to a lover's blessèd case! nay, i have ta'en you napping, gentle love, and have forsworn you with hortensio.
there is aufidius; list, what work he makes amongst your cloven army.
i know not. if they speak but truth of her, the proudest of them shall well hear of it. time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine nor age so eat up my invention nor fortune made such havoc of my means but they shall find, awaked in such a kind, both strength of limb and policy of mind, ability in means and choice of friends, to quit me of them throughly.
tranio, you jest. but have you both forsworn me?
o, they are at it!
pause awhile, your daughter here the princes left for dead. let her awhile be secretly kept in and publish it that she is dead indeed. maintain a mourning ostentation, hang mournful epitaphs and do all rites that appertain unto a burial.
mistress, we have.
their noise be our instruction. ladders, ho!
what shall become of this? what will this do?
then we are rid of litio.
now put your shields before your hearts, and fight with hearts more proof than shields. advance, brave titus: they do disdain us much beyond our thoughts, he that retires i'll take him for a volsce, and he shall feel mine edge.
marry, this, well carried, shall on her behalf but not for that dream i on this strange course, but on this travail look for greater birth. she, dying, as it must so be maintained, upon the instant that she was accused, of every hearer. for it so falls out that what we have we prize not to the worth whiles we enjoy it, but being lacked and lost, why then we rack the value, then we find
i' faith, he'll have a lusty widow now that shall be wooed and wedded in a day.
all the contagion of the south light on you, you shames of rome! you herd of, boils and plagues further than seen and one infect another against the wind a mile! you souls of geese, that bear the shapes of men, how have you run from slaves that apes would beat! pluto and hell! with flight and agued fear! mend and charge home, or, by the fires of heaven, i'll leave the foe and make my wars on you: look to't: come on; if you'll stand fast, we'll beat them to their wives,
whiles it was ours. so will it fare with claudio. when he shall hear she died upon his words, the idea of her life shall sweetly creep into his study of imagination, shall come apparelled in more precious habit, more moving, delicate and full of life, into the eye and prospect of his soul than when she lived indeed. then shall he mourn, and wish he had not so accused her, no, though he thought his accusation true. let this be so, and doubt not but success will fashion the event in better shape but if all aim but this be leveled false, the supposition of the lady's death will quench the wonder of her infamy. and if it sort not well, you may conceal her, in some reclusive and religious life, out of all eyes, tongues, minds, and injuries.
god give him joy!
so, now the gates are ope: now prove good seconds: 'tis for the followers fortune widens them, not for the fliers: mark me, and do the like.
signior leonato, let the friar advise you. and though you know my inwardness and love yet, by mine honor, i will deal in this as secretly and justly as your soul should with your body.
ay, and he'll tame her.
fool-hardiness; not i.
being that i flow in grief, the smallest twine may lead me.
he says so, tranio?
nor i.
for to strange sores strangely they strain the cure., come, lady, die to live. this wedding day perhaps is but prolonged. have patience and endure.
faith, he is gone unto the taming school.
see, they have shut him in.
lady beatrice, have you wept all this while?
the taming school? what, is there such a place?
to the pot, i warrant him.
yea, and i will weep a while longer.
ay, mistress, and petruchio is the master, to tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue.
what is become of martius?
i will not desire that.
o master, master, i have watched so long that i am dog-weary, but at last i spied an ancient angel coming down the hill
slain, sir, doubtless.
you have no reason. i do it freely.
what is he, biondello?
with them he enters; who, upon the sudden, clapp'd to their gates: he is himself alone, to answer all the city.
surely i do believe your fair cousin is wronged.
master, a marcantant, or a pedant, i know not what, but formal in apparel, in gait and countenance surely like a father.
o noble fellow! and, when it bows, stands up. thou art left, martius: a carbuncle entire, as big as thou art, were not so rich a jewel. thou wast a soldier even to cato's wish, not fierce and terrible the thunder-like percussion of thy sounds, thou madst thine enemies shake, as if the world were feverous and did tremble.
ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would
and what of him, tranio?
look, sir.
is there any way to show such friendship?
i'll make him glad to seem vincentio and give assurance to baptista minola as if he were the right vincentio. take in your love, and then let me alone.
let's fetch him off, or make remain alike.
a very even way, but no such friend.
god save you, sir.
this will i carry to rome.
may a man do it?
(as lucentio) and you, sir. you are welcome. travel you far on, or are you at the farthest?
and i this.
it is a man's office, but not yours.
sir, at the farthest for a week or two, but then up farther, and as far as rome,
a murrain on't! i took this for silver.
strange?
(as lucentio) what countryman, i pray?
see here these movers that do prize their hours irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would bury with those that wore them, these base slaves, ere yet the fight be done, pack up: down with them! and hark, what noise the general makes! to him! piercing our romans: then, valiant titus, take convenient numbers to make good the city; whilst i, with those that have the spirit, will haste to help cominius.
as strange as the thing i know not. it were as possible for me to say i loved nothing so well as you, but believe me not, and yet i lie not, i confess nothing, nor i deny nothing. i am
of mantua.
thy exercise hath been too violent for a second course of fight.
by my sword, beatrice, thou lovest me.
(as lucentio) of mantua, sir? marry, god forbid! and come to padua, careless of your life?
sir, praise me not; my work hath yet not warm'd me: fare you well: than dangerous to me: to aufidius thus i will appear, and fight.
do not swear, and eat it.
my life, sir! how, i pray? for that goes hard.
now the fair goddess, fortune, fall deep in love with thee; and her great charms prosperity be thy page!
i will swear by it that you love me, and i will make him eat it that says i love not you.
to come to padua. know you not the cause? your ships are stayed at venice, and the duke, for private quarrel 'twixt your duke and him, hath published and proclaimed it openly. you might have heard it else proclaimed about.
thy friend no less than those she placeth highest! so, farewell.
will you not eat your word?
alas, sir, it is worse for me than so, for i have bills for money by exchange from florence, and must here deliver them.
thou worthiest martius!
with no sauce that can be devised to it. i protest i love thee.
this will i do, and this i will advise you. first tell me, have you ever been at pisa?
call thither all the officers o' the town, where they shall know our mind: away!
why then, god forgive me.
ay, sir, in pisa have i often been, pisa renownèd for grave citizens.
breathe you, my friends: well fought; we are come off like romans, neither foolish in our stands, nor cowardly in retire: believe me, sirs, by interims and conveying gusts we have heard the charges of our friends. ye roman gods! lead their successes as we wish our own, that both our powers, with smiling may give you thankful sacrifice.
what offense, sweet beatrice?
(as lucentio) among them know you one vincentio?
thy news?
you have stayed me in a happy hour. i was about to protest
i know him not, but i have heard of him: a merchant of incomparable wealth.
the citizens of corioli have issued, and given to lartius and to martius battle: and then i came away.
and do it with all thy heart.
(as lucentio) he is my father, sir, and sooth to say, in count'nance somewhat doth resemble you.
though thou speak'st truth, methinks thou speak'st not well. how long is't since?
i love you with so much of my heart that none is left to protest.
(aside) as much as an apple doth an oyster, and all one.
above an hour, my lord.
come, bid me do anything for thee.
(as lucentio) to save your life in this extremity, this favor will i do you for his sake, and think it not the worst of all your fortunes that you are like to sir vincentio, and in my house you shall be friendly lodged. look that you take upon you as you should. you understand me, sir. so shall you stay till you have done your business in the city.
'tis not a mile; briefly we heard their drums: how couldst thou in a mile confound an hour, and bring thy news so late?
kill claudio.
o sir, i do, and will repute you ever the patron of my life and liberty.
spies of the volsces three or four miles about, else had i, sir, half an hour since brought my report.
ha! not for the wide world.
(as lucentio) then go with me to make the matter good. this, by the way, i let you understand: to pass assurance of a dower in marriage 'twixt me and one baptista's daughter here. in all these circumstances i'll instruct you. go with me to clothe you as becomes you.
who's yonder, that does appear as he were flay'd? o gods before-time seen him thus.
you kill me to deny it. farewell.
no, no, forsooth, i dare not for my life.
[within] come i too late?
tarry, sweet beatrice.
the more my wrong, the more his spite appears. what, did he marry me to famish me? beggars that come unto my father's door if not, elsewhere they meet with charity. but i, who never knew how to entreat, nor never needed that i should entreat, am starved for meat, giddy for lack of sleep, and that which spites me more than all these wants, he does it under name of perfect love, as who should say, if i should sleep or eat, 'twere deadly sickness or else present death. i care not what, so it be wholesome food.
the shepherd knows not thunder from a tabour more than i know the sound of martius' tongue
i am gone, though i am here. there is no love in you. nay,
what say you to a neat's foot?
come i too late?
beatrice, 
'tis passing good. i prithee let me have it.
ay, if you come not in the blood of others, but mantled in your own.
in faith, i will go.
i fear it is too choleric a meat.
o, let me clip ye as merry as when our nuptial day was done, and tapers burn'd to bedward!
we'll be friends first.
i like it well. good grumio, fetch it me.
flower of warriors, how is it with titus lartius?
you dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine
i cannot tell. i fear 'tis choleric. what say you to a piece of beef and mustard?
condemning some to death, and some to exile; ransoming him, or pitying, threatening the other; holding corioli in the name of rome, even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,
is claudio thine enemy?
a dish that i do love to feed upon.
where is that slave which told me they had beat you to your trenches? where is he? call him hither.
is he not approved in the height a villain, that hath slandered, scorned, dishonored my kinswoman? oh, that i were a man! what, bear her in hand until they come to take slander, unmitigated rancor, o god, that i were a man! i would eat his heart in the marketplace.
ay, but the mustard is too hot a little.
let him alone; the common file, a plague! tribunes for them!-- the mouse ne'er shunn'd the cat as they did budge from rascals worse than they.
hear me, beatrice, 
why then, the beef, and let the mustard rest.
but how prevail'd you?
talk with a man out at a window! a proper saying!
nay then, i will not. you shall have the mustard or else you get no beef of grumio.
where is the enemy? are you lords o' the field? if not, why cease you till you are so?
nay, but beatrice, 
then both, or one, or anything thou wilt.
martius, we have at disadvantage fought and did
sweet hero, she is wronged, she is slandered, she is undone.
why then, the mustard without the beef.
how lies their battle? know you on which side they have placed their men of trust?
beat, 
beats him that feed'st me with the very name of meat. sorrow on thee and all the pack of you that triumph thus upon my misery.
as i guess, martius, their bands i' the vaward are the antiates, their very heart of hope.
princes and counties! surely, a princely testimony, a goodly were a man for his sake! or that i had any friend would be a man for my sake! but manhood is melted into curtsies, valor into compliment, and men are only turned into tongue, and trim ones too. he is now as valiant as hercules wishing, therefore i will die a woman with grieving.
how fares my kate? what, sweeting, all amort?
i do beseech you, by all the battles wherein we have fought, by the blood we have shed together, by the vows set me against aufidius and his antiates; and that you not delay the present, but, filling the air with swords advanced and darts, we prove this very hour.
tarry, good beatrice. by this hand, i love thee.
mistress, what cheer?
you were conducted to a gentle bath and balms applied to, you, yet dare i never deny your asking: take your choice of those that best can aid your action.
use it for my love some other way than swearing by it.
faith, as cold as can be.
that most are willing. if any such be here, as it were sin to doubt, that love this painting wherein you see me smear'd; if any fear lesser his person than an ill report; and that his country's dearer than himself; let him alone, or so many so minded, wave thus, to express his disposition, and follow martius.
think you in your soul the count claudio hath wronged
pluck up thy spirits. look cheerfully upon me. here love, thou seest how diligent i am, i am sure, sweet kate, this kindness merits thanks. what, not a word? nay, then thou lov'st it not and all my pains is sorted to no proof. here, take away this dish.
if these shows be not outward, which of you but is four volsces? none of you but is able to bear against the great aufidius a shield as hard as his. a certain number, from all: the rest shall bear the business in some other fight, as cause will be obey'd. please you to march; and four shall quickly draw out my command,
yea, as sure as i have a thought or a soul.
i pray you, let it stand.
march on, my fellows: make good this ostentation, and you shall divide in all with us.
enough, i am engaged. i will challenge him. i will kiss your hand, and so i leave you. by this hand, claudio shall render me a dear account. as you hear of me, so think of me. go farewell.
and so shall mine, before you touch the meat.
so, let the ports be guarded: keep your duties, as i have set them down. if i do send, dispatch those centuries to our aid: the rest will serve for a short holding: if we lose the field,
is our whole dissembly appeared?
i thank you, sir.
fear not our care, sir.
oh, a stool and a cushion for the sexton.
signior petruchio, fie, you are to blame. come, mistress kate, i'll bear you company.
hence, and shut your gates upon's. our guider, come; to the roman camp conduct us.
which be the malefactors?
eat it up all, hortensio, if thou lovest me., much good do it unto thy gentle heart. kate, eat apace. and now, my honey love, will we return unto thy father's house with silken coats and caps and golden rings, with ruffs and cuffs and farthingales and things, with scarves and fans and double change of brav'ry, with amber bracelets, beads, and all this knav'ry. to deck thy body with his ruffling treasure.
i'll fight with none but thee; for i do hate thee worse than a promise-breaker.
marry, that am i and my partner.
come, tailor, let us see these ornaments. lay forth the gown.
we hate alike: not afric owns a serpent i abhor
nay, that's certain; we have the exhibition to examine.
what news with you, sir?
let the first budger die the other's slave, and the gods doom him after!
but which are the offenders that are to be examined? let them come before master constable.
here is the cap your worship did bespeak.
if i fly, martius, holloa me like a hare.
yea, marry, let them come before me. what is your name, friend?
a velvet dish! fie, fie, 'tis lewd and filthy! why, 'tis a cockle or a walnut shell, a knack, a toy, a trick, a baby's cap. away with it! come, let me have a bigger.
alone i fought in your corioli walls, and made what work i pleased: 'tis not my blood wherein thou seest me mask'd; for thy revenge wrench up thy power to the highest.
what's your name, friend?
and gentlewomen wear such caps as these.
that was the whip of your bragg'd progeny, thou shouldst not scape me here.
borachio.
when you are gentle, you shall have one too, and not till then.
officious, and not valiant, you have shamed me in your condemned seconds.
pray, write down, "borachio.", yours, sirrah?
(aside) that will not be in haste.
if i should tell thee o'er this thy day's work, thou'ldst not believe thy deeds: but i'll report it where senators shall mingle tears with smiles, where great patricians shall attend and shrug, and, gladly quaked, hear more; where the dull tribunes, that, with the fusty plebeians, hate thine honours, shall say against their hearts 'we thank the gods yet camest thou to a morsel of this feast, having fully dined before.
i am a gentleman, sir, and my name is conrade.
and speak i will. i am no child, no babe. your betters have endured me say my mind, and if you cannot, best you stop your ears. my tongue will tell the anger of my heart and, rather than it shall, i will be free even to the uttermost, as i please, in words.
o general, here is the steed, we the caparison:
write down "master gentleman conrade.", masters, do
why, thou say'st true. it is a paltry cap, a custard-coffin, a bauble, a silken pie.
pray now, no more: my mother, who has a charter to extol her blood, when she does praise me grieves me. i have done as you have done; that's what i can; induced he that has but effected his good will hath overta'en mine act.
yea, sir, we hope.
love me or love me not, i like the cap, and it i will have, or i will have none.
you shall not be the grave of your deserving; rome must know worse than a theft, no less than a traducement, to hide your doings; and to silence that, which, to the spire and top of praises vouch'd, would seem but modest: therefore, i beseech you what you have done, before our army hear me.
write down that they hope they serve god; and write god first, for god defend but god should go before such villains!, masters, it is proved already that you are little shortly. how answer you for yourselves?
thy gown? why, ay. come, tailor, let us see 't. o mercy, god! what masking stuff is here?
i have some wounds upon me, and they smart to hear themselves remember'd.
marry, sir, we say we are none.
what, up and down, carved like an apple tart? here's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash, like to a censer in a barber's shop. why, what i' devil's name, tailor, call'st thou this?
should they not, and tent themselves with death. of all the horses, whereof we have ta'en good and good store, of all the treasure in this field achieved and city, we render you the tenth, to be ta'en forth, your only choice.
a marvelous witty fellow, i assure you, but i will go about with him., come you hither, sirrah, a word in your ear.
(aside) i see she's like to have neither cap nor gown.
i thank you, general; but cannot make my heart consent to take a bribe to pay my sword: i do refuse it; that have beheld the doing.
sir, i say to you we are none.
you bid me make it orderly and well, according to the fashion and the time.
may these same instruments, which you profane, never sound more! when drums and trumpets shall i' the field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be when steel grows soft as the parasite's silk, let him be made a coverture for the wars! no more, i say! for that i have not wash'd my nose that bled, or foil'd some debile wretch., you shout me forth in acclamations hyperbolical; as if i loved my little should be dieted in praises sauced with lies.
well, stand aside., 'fore god, they are both in a ale. have you writ down that they are none?
marry, and did. but if you be remembered, i did not bid you mar it to the time. for you shall hop without my custom, sir. i'll none of it. hence, make your best of it.
more cruel to your good report than grateful to us that give you truly: by your patience, if 'gainst yourself you be incensed, we'll put you, like one that means his proper harm, in manacles, as to us, to all the world, that caius martius wears this war's garland: in token of the which, my noble steed, known to the camp, i give him, with all his trim belonging; and from this time, with all the applause and clamour of the host, caius martius coriolanus! bear the addition nobly ever!
master constable, you go not the way to examine. you
i never saw a better-fashioned gown, more quaint, more pleasing, nor more commendable.
caius martius coriolanus!
yea, marry, that's the eftest way., let the watch come forth. masters, i charge you in the prince's name, accuse these men.
why, true, he means to make a puppet of thee.
and when my face is fair, you shall perceive whether i blush or no: howbeit, i thank you. i mean to stride your steed, and at all times to undercrest your good addition
this man said, sir, that don john, the prince's brother, was
she says your worship means to make a puppet of her.
so, to our tent; where, ere we do repose us, we will write to rome of our success. you, titus lartius, must to corioli back: send us to rome for their own good and ours.
write down prince john a villain. why, this is flat perjury, to call a prince's brother villain.
o monstrous arrogance! thou liest, thou thread, thou thimble, thou yard, three-quarters, half-yard, quarter, nail! braved in mine own house with a skein of thread? away, thou rag, thou quantity, thou remnant, or i shall so be-mete thee with thy yard as thou shalt think on prating whilst thou liv'st!
i shall, my lord.
master constable, 
your worship is deceived. the gown is made just as my master had direction. grumio gave order how it should be done.
the gods begin to mock me. i, that now refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg
pray thee, fellow, peace. i do not like thy look, i promise
i gave him no order. i gave him the stuff.
take't; 'tis yours. what is't?
(to watch) what heard you him say else?
but how did you desire it should be made?
i sometime lay here in corioli at a poor man's house; he used me kindly: he cried to me; i saw him prisoner; and wrath o'erwhelm'd my pity: i request you to give my poor host freedom.
marry, that he had received a thousand ducats of don john for accusing the lady hero wrongfully.
marry, sir, with needle and thread.
o, well begg'd! were he the butcher of my son, he should
flat burglary as ever was committed.
but did you not request to have it cut?
martius, his name?
yea, by mass, that it is.
thou hast faced many things.
by jupiter! forgot. i am weary; yea, my memory is tired. have we no wine here?
what else, fellow?
i have.
the blood upon your visage dries; 'tis time it should be look'd to: come.
and that count claudio did mean upon his words to disgrace hero before the whole assembly, and not marry her.
face not me. thou hast braved many men; brave not me. i will neither be faced nor braved. i say unto thee, i bid thy master cutout the gown, but i did not bid him cut it to pieces. ergo, thou liest.
the town is ta'en!
everlasting redemption for this.
why, here is the note of the fashion to testify.
'twill be deliver'd back on good condition.
what else?
read it.
condition! i would i were a roman; for i cannot, what good condition can a treaty find i' the part that is at mercy? five times, martius, i have fought with thee: so often hast thou beat me, and wouldst do so, i think, should we encounter if e'er again i meet him beard to beard, he's mine, or i am his: mine emulation hath not that honour in't it had; for where i thought to crush him in an equal force, or wrath or craft may get him.
this is all.
the note lies in 's throat, if he say i said so.
he's the devil.
and this is more, masters, than you can deny. prince john manner accused, in this very manner refused, and upon the grief of this, suddenly died., master constable, let these men be bound and brought to leonato's. i will go before and show him their examination.
(reads) "imprimis, a loose-bodied gown, "
bolder, though not so subtle. my valour's poison'd with only suffering stain by him; for him being naked, sick, nor fane nor capitol, the prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice, embarquements all of fury, shall lift up their rotten privilege and custom 'gainst at home, upon my brother's guard, even there, against the hospitable canon, would i wash my fierce hand in's heart. go you to the city; learn how 'tis held; and what they are that must
come, let them be opinioned.
master, if ever i said "loose-bodied gown," sew me in the skirts of it, and beat me to death with a bottom of brown thread. i said "a gown."
will not you go?
let them be in the hands, 
proceed.
i am attended at the cypress grove: i pray you, 'tis south the city mills, bring me word thither how the world goes, that to the pace of it
off, coxcomb!
(reads) "with a small-compassed cape, "
i shall, sir.
god's my life, where's the sexton? let him write down the prince's officer "coxcomb." come, bind them., thou
i confess the cape.
the augurer tells me we shall have news to-night.
away! you are an ass, you are an ass!
(reads) "with a trunk sleeve, "
good or bad?
dost thou not suspect my place? dost thou not suspect my years? oh, that he were here to write me down an ass! but masters, remember that i am an ass, though it be not villain, thou art full of piety, as shall be proved upon thee by good witness. i am a wise fellow and, which is more, an officer and, which is more, a householder and, which is more, as pretty a piece of flesh as any is in messina, and one and a fellow that hath had losses, and one that hath two gowns and everything handsome about him., bring him away., oh, that i had been writ down an ass!
i confess two sleeves.
not according to the prayer of the people, for they love not martius.
if you go on thus, you will kill yourself, and 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief against yourself.
(reads) "the sleeves curiously cut."
nature teaches beasts to know their friends.
i pray thee, cease thy counsel, which falls into mine ears as profitless nor let no comforter delight mine ear but such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine. bring me a father that so loved his child, whose joy of her is overwhelmed like mine, measure his woe the length and breadth of mine, and let it answer every strain for strain, as thus for thus and such a grief for such, in every lineament, branch, shape, and form. bid sorrow wag, cry "hem" when he should groan, patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk with candle-wasters, bring him yet to me and i of him will gather patience. can counsel and speak comfort to that grief which they themselves not feel, but, tasting it, their counsel turns to passion which before would give preceptial med'cine to rage, charm ache with air, and agony with words.
ay, there's the villany.
pray you, who does the wolf love?
no, no, 'tis all men's office to speak patience to those that wring under the load of sorrow, but no man's virtue nor sufficiency the like himself. therefore give me no counsel. my griefs cry louder than advertisement.
error i' the bill, sir, error i' the bill! i commanded the sleeves should be cut out and sewed up again, and that i'll prove upon thee, though thy little finger be armed in a thimble.
the lamb.
therein do men from children nothing differ.
this is true that i say: an i had thee in place where, thou shouldst know it.
ay, to devour him; as the hungry plebeians would the noble martius.
i pray thee, peace. i will be flesh and blood, that could endure the toothache patiently, however they have writ the style of gods and made a push at chance and sufferance.
i am for thee straight. take thou the bill, give me thy mete- yard, and spare not me.
he's a lamb indeed, that baes like a bear.
yet bend not all the harm upon yourself.
god-a-mercy, grumio! then he shall have no odds.
he's a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb. you two are old men: tell me one thing that i shall ask you.
there thou speak'st reason. nay, i will do so. my soul doth tell me hero is belied, and that shall claudio know; so shall the prince and all of them that thus dishonor her.
well, sir, in brief, the gown is not for me.
well, sir.
here comes the prince and claudio hastily.
you are i' the right, sir, 'tis for my mistress.
in what enormity is martius poor in, that you two
good e'en, good e'en.
go, take it up unto thy master's use.
he's poor in no one fault, but stored with all.
good day to both of you.
villain, not for thy life! take up my mistress' gown for thy master's use!
especially in pride.
hear you, my lords, 
why, sir, what's your conceit in that?
and topping all others in boasting.
we have some haste, leonato.
o, sir, the conceit is deeper than you think for. take up my mistress' gown to his master's use! o, fie, fie, fie!
this is strange now: do you two know how you are right-hand file? do you?
some haste, my lord! well, fare you well, my lord. are you so hasty now? well, all is one.
(to tailor) go, take it hence. begone, and say no more.
why, how are we censured?
nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.
(aside to tailor) tailor, i'll pay thee for thy gown tomorrow. take no unkindness of his hasty words.
because you talk of pride now,, will you not be angry?
if he could right himself with quarreling, some of us would lie low.
well, come, my kate. we will unto your father's even in these honest mean habiliments. our purses shall be proud, our garments poor, for 'tis the mind that makes the body rich, so honor peereth in the meanest habit. what, is the jay more precious than the lark because his feathers are more beautiful? or is the adder better than the eel
well, well, sir, well.
who wrongs him?
oh, no, good kate. neither art thou the worse for this poor furniture and mean array. if thou account'st it shame, lay it on me, and therefore frolic! we will hence forthwith (to grumio) go, call my men, and let us straight to him, and bring our horses unto long lane end. there will we mount, and thither walk on foot. let's see, i think 'tis now some seven o'clock,
occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience: give your dispositions the reins, and be angry at your pleasures; at the least if you take it as a pleasure to you in being so. you blame martius for
marry, thou dost wrong me, thou dissembler, thou. nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword.
i dare assure you, sir, 'tis almost two, and 'twill be supper time ere you come there.
we do it not alone, sir.
marry, beshrew my hand if it should give your age such cause of fear. in faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.
it shall be seven ere i go to horse. look what i speak, or do, or think to do, i will not go today, and ere i do it shall be what o'clock i say it is.
i know you can do very little alone; for your helps are many, or else your actions would grow wondrous single: your abilities are too infant-like for could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks, and make but an interior survey of your good selves! o that you could!
tush, tush, man, never fleer and jest at me. i speak not like a dotard nor a fool, what i have done being young, or what would do were i not old. know, claudio, to thy head, thou hast so wronged mine innocent child and me that i am forced to lay my reverence by, do challenge thee to trial of a man. i say thou hast belied mine innocent child. thy slander hath gone through and through her heart, and she lies buried with her ancestors, save this of hers, framed by thy villainy.
(aside) why, so this gallant will command the sun.
what then, sir?
my villainy?
(as lucentio) sir, this is the house. please it you that i call?
proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias fools, as any in rome.
thine, claudio, thine, i say.
ay, what else? and but i be deceived, signior baptista may remember me, near twenty years ago, in genoa,
menenius, you are known well enough too.
you say not right, old man.
(as lucentio) 'tis well; and hold your own, in any case, with such austerity as 'longeth to a father.
i am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that tiber in't; said to be something imperfect in favouring the first complaint; hasty and tinder-like upon too trivial motion; one that converses more with the buttock of the night than with the forehead malice in my breath. meeting two such wealsmen as you are, i cannot call you lycurguses, if the drink you give me touch my palate adversely, i make a crooked face at it. i can't say your worships have compound with the major part of your syllables: and though i must be content to bear with those that say you are reverend grave men, yet they lie deadly that tell you you have good faces. if you see this in well enough too? what barm can your bisson conspectuities glean out of this character, if i be known well enough too?
my lord, my lord, i'll prove it on his body if he dare, his may of youth and bloom of lustihood.
i warrant you.
come, sir, come, we know you well enough.
away! i will not have to do with you.
but, sir, here comes your boy. 'twere good he were schooled.
are ambitious for poor knaves' caps and legs: you wear out a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a cause between an orange wife and a fosset-seller; and then rejourn the controversy of three pence to a matter between party and party, if you chance to be pinched with the colic, you make faces like mummers; set up the bloody flag against all patience; and, in roaring for a chamber-pot, by your hearing: all the peace you make in their cause is, calling both the parties knaves. you are a pair of strange ones.
canst thou so daff me? thou hast killed my child. if thou kill'st me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.
now do your duty throughly, i advise you. imagine 'twere the right vincentio.
come, come, you are well understood to be a bencher in the capitol.
but that's no matter. let him kill one first. win me and wear me! let him answer me., come, follow me, boy. come, sir boy, come, follow me. sir boy, i'll whip you from your foining fence,
tut, fear not me.
our very priests must become mockers, if they shall encounter such ridiculous subjects as you are. when you speak best unto the purpose, it is not worth the so honourable a grave as to stuff a botcher's cushion, or to be entombed in an ass's pack- saddle. yet you must be saying, martius is proud; who in a cheap estimation, is worth predecessors best of 'em were hereditary hangmen. god-den to your worships: more of your conversation would infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly plebeians: i will be bold to take my leave of you.
brother, 
(as lucentio) but hast thou done thy errand to baptista?
were she earthly, no nobler,, whither do you follow your eyes so fast?
content yourself. god knows i loved my niece, and she is dead, slandered to death by villains that dare as well answer a man indeed boys, apes, braggarts, jacks, milksops!
and that you looked for him this day in padua.
honourable menenius, my boy martius approaches; for the love of juno, let's go.
brother anthony, 
(as lucentio) thou'rt a tall fellow. hold thee that to drink. gives money
ha! martius coming home!
hold you content. what, man! i know them, yea, and what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple, that lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander, go anticly and show outward hideousness, and speak off half a dozen dang'rous words how they might hurt their enemies, if they durst,
here comes baptista. set your countenance, sir.
ay, worthy menenius; and with most prosperous approbation.
but brother anthony, 
sir, this is the gentleman i told you of. i pray you stand good father to me now. give me bianca for my patrimony.
take my cap, jupiter, and i thank thee. hoo! martius coming home!
come, 'tis no matter. do not you meddle. let me deal in this.
(as vincentio) soft son., to gather in some debts, my son lucentio made me acquainted with a weighty cause of love between your daughter and himself. and, for the good report i hear of you and she to him, to stay him not too long, i am content, in a good father's care, to have him matched. and if you please to like no worse than i, upon some agreement with one consent to have her so bestowed, for curious i cannot be with you, signior baptista, of whom i hear so well.
nay, 'tis true.
gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience. my heart is sorry for your daughter's death, but what was true and very full of proof.
sir, pardon me in what i have to say. right true it is your son lucentio here doth love my daughter and she loveth him, or both dissemble deeply their affections. and therefore, if you say no more than this, and pass my daughter a sufficient dower, the match is made, and all is done. your son shall have my daughter with consent.
another, his wife another; and, i think, there's one at home for you.
my lord, my lord, 
(as lucentio) we be affied and such assurance ta'en as shall with either part's agreement stand?
i will make my very house reel tonight: a letter for me!
i will not hear you.
not in my house, lucentio, for you know pitchers have ears, and i have many servants. and happily we might be interrupted.
yes, certain, there's a letter for you; i saw't.
no? come, brother; away! i will be heard.
(as lucentio) then at my lodging, an it like you. there doth my father lie, and there this night we'll pass the business privately and well. my boy shall fetch the scrivener presently. the worst is this, that at so slender warning you are like to have a thin and slender pittance.
a letter for me! it gives me an estate of seven years' health; in which time i will make a lip at the physician: the most sovereign prescription in galen is but empiricutic, and, to this preservative, not wounded? he was wont to come home wounded.
and shall, or some of us will smart for it.
it likes me well., cambio, hie you home, and, if you will, tell what hath happenèd: lucentio's father is arrived in padua, and how she's like to be lucentio's wife.
o, no, no, no.
see, see, here comes the man we went to seek.
i pray the gods she may, with all my heart!
o, he is wounded; i thank the gods for't.
now, signior, what news?
signior baptista, shall i lead the way? welcome! one mess is like to be your cheer. come, sir, we will better it in pisa.
so do i too, if it be not too much: brings a'
(to don pedro) good day, my lord.
i follow you.
on's brows: menenius, he comes the third time home with the oaken garland.
welcome, signior. you are almost come to part almost a
cambio.
has he disciplined aufidius soundly?
we had like to have had our two noses snapped off with two old men without teeth.
what sayest thou, biondello?
titus lartius writes, they fought together, but
leonato and his brother. what think'st thou? had we fought, i doubt we should have been too young for them.
you saw my master wink and laugh upon you?
and 'twas time for him too, i'll warrant him that: an he had stayed by him, i would not have been so fidiused for all the chests in corioli, and the gold that's in them. is the senate possessed of this?
both.
biondello, what of that?
has letters from the general, wherein he gives my son the whole name of the war: he hath in this action outdone his former deeds doubly
we have been up and down to seek thee, for we are high- proof melancholy and would fain have it beaten away. wilt thou use thy wit?
faith, nothing; but 'has left me here behind to expound the meaning or moral of his signs and tokens.
in troth, there's wondrous things spoke of him.
it is in my scabbard. shall i draw it?
i pray thee, moralize them.
true purchasing.
dost thou wear thy wit by thy side?
then thus: baptista is safe, talking with the deceiving father of a deceitful son.
the gods grant them true!
never any did so, though very many have been beside their wit. i will bid thee draw, as we do the minstrels: draw to pleasure us.
and what of him?
true! pow, wow.
angry?
his daughter is to be brought by you to the supper.
true! i'll be sworn they are true.
(to benedick) what, courage, man! what though care killed a cat? thou hast mettle enough in thee to kill care.
and then?
god save your good worships! martius is coming home: he has more cause to be proud. where is he wounded?
sir, i shall meet your wit in the career, an you charge it
the old priest at saint luke's church is at your command at all hours.
i' the shoulder and i' the left arm there will be large cicatrices to show the people, when he shall tarquin seven hurts i' the body.
(to don pedro) nay, then, give him another staff. this last was broke 'cross.
and what of all this?
one i' the neck, and two i' the thigh,, there's nine that i know.
by this light, he changes more and more. i think he be angry indeed.
i cannot tell, except they are busied about a counterfeit assurance. take you assurance of her cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum. to th' church take the priest, clerk, and some sufficient honest witnesses. if this be not that you look for, i have no more to say, but bid bianca farewell forever and a day.
he had, before this last expedition, twenty-five
if he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.
hear'st thou, biondello?
now it's twenty-seven: every gash was an enemy's grave.
shall i speak a word in your ear?
i cannot tarry. i knew a wench married in an afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit, and so may you, sir. and so adieu, sir. my master hath appointed me to go to saint luke's to bid the priest be ready to come against you come with your appendix.
hark! the trumpets.
god bless me from a challenge!
i may, and will, if she be so contented. she will be pleased. then wherefore should i doubt? hap what hap may, i'll roundly go about her.
these are the ushers of martius: before him he carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears: which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.
(aside to claudio) you are a villain. i jest not. i will make it good how you dare, with what you dare, and when you have killed a sweet lady, and her death shall fall heavy on you. let me hear from you.
come on, i' god's name, once more toward our father's. good lord, how bright and goodly shines the moon!
know, rome, that all alone martius did fight within corioli gates: where he hath won, with fame, a name to caius martius; these welcome to rome, renowned coriolanus!
well, i will meet you, so i may have good cheer.
the moon? the sun! it is not moonlight now.
welcome to rome, renowned coriolanus!
what, a feast, a feast?
i say it is the moon that shines so bright.
no more of this; it does offend my heart: pray now, no more.
capon, the which if i do not carve most curiously, say my knife's naught. shall i not find a woodcock too?
i know it is the sun that shines so bright.
look, sir, your mother!
sir, your wit ambles well; it goes easily.
now, by my mother's son, and that's myself, it shall be moon, or star, or what i list, or e'er i journey to your father's house. (to servants) go on, and fetch our horses back again., 
o, you have, i know, petition'd all the gods for my prosperity!
i'll tell thee how beatrice praised thy wit he other day. i one." "no," said i, "a great wit." "right," says she, "a great gross one." "nay," said i, "a good wit." "just," said she, "it hurts nobody." "nay," said i, "the gentleman is wise." "certain," said she, "a wise gentleman." "nay," said i, "he a thing to me on monday night, which he forswore on tuesday morning; there's a double tongue, there's two tongues." thus did she an hour together transshape thy particular virtues. yet at last she concluded with a sigh,
(to katherine) say as he says, or we shall never go.
nay, my good soldier, up; by deed-achieving honour newly named,, what is it?, coriolanus must i call thee?, but o, thy wife!
for the which she wept heartily and said she cared not.
forward, i pray, since we have come so far, and be it moon, or sun, or what you please. an if you please to call it a rush candle,
my gracious silence, hail! that weep'st to see me triumph? ay, my dear, such eyes the widows in corioli wear, and mothers that lack sons.
yea, that she did. but yet for all that, an if she did not hate him deadly, she would love him dearly. the old man's daughter told us all.
i say it is the moon.
now, the gods crown thee!
the garden.
i know it is the moon.
(to valeria) o my sweet lady, pardon.
but when shall we set the savage bull's horns on the sensible benedick's head?
nay, then you lie. it is the blessèd sun.
i know not where to turn: o, welcome home: and welcome, general: and ye're welcome all.
yea, and text underneath: "here dwells benedick the
then god be blessed, it is the blessèd sun. and the moon changes even as your mind. what you will have it named, even that it is, and so it shall be so for katherine.
a hundred thousand welcomes. i could weep a curse begin at very root on's heart, that is not glad to see thee! you are three that rome should dote on: yet, by the faith of men, we have some old crab-trees here be grafted to your relish. yet welcome, warriors: we call a nettle but a nettle and the faults of fools but folly.
fare you well, boy. you know my mind. i will leave you now to your gossip-like humor. you break jests as braggarts do their blades, which, god be thanked, hurt not., my lord, for your many courtesies i thank you. i must discontinue
petruchio, go thy ways; the field is won.
ever right.
your brother the bastard is fled from messina. you have among you killed a sweet and innocent lady. for my lord lackbeard there, he and i shall meet, and till then peace be with him.
and not unluckily against the bias. but, soft! company is coming here.
menenius ever, ever.
he is in earnest.
(to vincentio) good morrow, gentle mistress, where away?, hast thou beheld a fresher gentlewoman? such war of white and red within her cheeks! what stars do spangle heaven with such beauty as those two eyes become that heavenly face?, sweet kate, embrace her for her beauty's sake.
give way there, and go on!
in most profound earnest, and, i'll warrant you, for the love of beatrice.
(aside) he will make the man mad, to make a woman of him.
[to volumnia and virgilia] your hand, and yours: ere in our own house i do shade my head, the good patricians must be visited; but with them change of honours.
and hath challenged thee?
young budding virgin, fair and fresh and sweet, whither away, or where is thy abode? happier the man whom favorable stars allot thee for his lovely bedfellow!
i have lived to see inherited my very wishes and the buildings of my fancy: only our rome will cast upon thee.
most sincerely.
why, how now, kate! i hope thou art not mad. this is a man, old, wrinkled, faded, withered, 
know, good mother, i had rather be their servant in my way, than sway with them in theirs.
hose and leaves off his wit!
pardon, old father, my mistaking eyes that have been so bedazzled with the sun that everything i look on seemeth green. now i perceive thou art a reverend father.
on, to the capitol!
he is then a giant to an ape; but then is an ape a doctor to such a man.
do, good old grandsire, and withal make known which way thou travellest. if along with us, we shall be joyful of thy company.
all tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights are spectacled to see him: your prattling nurse into a rapture lets her baby cry while she chats him: the kitchen malkin pins clambering the walls to eye him: stalls, bulks, windows, are smother'd up, leads fill'd, and ridges horsed with variable complexions, all agreeing in earnestness to see him: seld-shown flamens to win a vulgar station: or veil'd dames commit the war of white and damask in their nicely-gawded cheeks to the wanton spoil of phoebus' burning kisses: such a pother were slily crept into his human powers and gave him graceful posture.
but soft you, let me be. pluck up, my heart, and be sad. did
fair sir, and you, my merry mistress, my name is called vincentio, my dwelling pisa, and bound i am to padua, there to visit a son of mine which long i have not seen.
on the sudden, i warrant him consul.
come you, sir. if justice cannot tame you, she shall ne'er weigh more reasons in her balance. nay, an you be a cursing hypocrite once, you must be looked to.
what is his name?
during his power, go sleep.
how now? two of my brother's men bound! borachio one!
lucentio, gentle sir.
he cannot temperately transport his honours from where he should begin and end, but will lose those he hath won.
hearken after their offense, my lord.
happily met, the happier for thy son. and now by law as well as reverend age, i may entitle thee my loving father. the sister to my wife, this gentlewoman, nor be grieved. she is of good esteem, her dowry wealthy, and of worthy birth. beside, so qualified as may beseem the spouse of any noble gentleman.
in that there's comfort.
officers, what offense have these men done?
and wander we to see thy honest son, who will of thy arrival be full joyous.
doubt not the commoners, for whom we stand, but they upon their ancient malice will forget with the least cause these his new honours, which as he is proud to do't.
marry, sir, they have committed false report; moreover, they have spoken untruths; secondarily, they are slanders; sixth and lastly, they have belied a lady; thirdly, they have knaves.
but is this true, or is it else your pleasure, like pleasant travelers, to break a jest
i heard him swear, were he to stand for consul, never would he appear i' the market-place nor on him put nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds to the people, beg their stinking breaths.
first, i ask thee what they have done; thirdly, i ask thee what's their offense; sixth and lastly, why they are committed; and, to conclude, what you lay to their charge.
i do assure thee, father, so it is.
'tis right.
troth, there's one meaning well suited.
come, go along and see the truth hereof, for our first merriment hath made thee jealous.
it was his word: o, he would miss it rather and the desire of the nobles.
(to borachio and conrade) who have you offended, masters, that you are thus bound to your answer? this learned constable is too cunning to be understood. what's
well, petruchio, this has put me in heart. then hast thou taught hortensio to be untoward.
i wish no better than have him hold that purpose and to put it in execution.
sweet prince, let me go no farther to mine answer. do you hear me, and let this count kill me. i have deceived even your very eyes. what your wisdoms could not discover, these shallow fools have brought to light, who in the night brother incensed me to slander the lady hero, how you were brought into the orchard and saw me court margaret in hero's garments, how you disgraced her when you should marry her. my villainy they have upon record, which i had lady is dead upon mine and my master's false accusation. and, briefly, i desire nothing but the reward of a villain.
softly and swiftly, sir, for the priest is ready.
'tis most like he will.
(to claudio) runs not this speech like iron through your blood?
i fly, biondello. but they may chance to need thee at home. therefore leave us.
it shall be to him then as our good wills, a sure destruction.
i have drunk poison whiles he uttered it.
nay, faith, i'll see the church a' your back, and then come back to my master's as soon as i can.
so it must fall out to him or our authorities. for an end, he still hath held them; that to's power he would have made them mules, silenced their pleaders and dispropertied their freedoms, holding them, in human action and capacity, than camels in the war, who have their provand only for bearing burdens, and sore blows for sinking under them.
(to borachio) but did my brother set thee on to this?
i marvel cambio comes not all this while.
this, as you say, suggested shall touch the people, which time shall not want, if he be put upon 't; and that's as easy as to set dogs on sheep, will be his fire to kindle their dry stubble; and their blaze
yea, and paid me richly for the practice of it.
sir, here's the door. this is lucentio's house. my father's bears more toward the marketplace. thither must i, and here i leave you, sir.
what's the matter?
he is composed and framed of treachery, and fled he is upon this villainy.
you shall not choose but drink before you go. and, by all likelihood, some cheer is toward.
you are sent for to the capitol. 'tis thought that martius shall be consul: i have seen the dumb men throng to see him and ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchers, upon him as he pass'd: the nobles bended, as to jove's statue, and the commons made a shower and thunder with their caps and shouts:
in the rare semblance that i loved it first.
they're busy within. you were best knock louder.
let's to the capitol; and carry with us ears and eyes for the time, but hearts for the event.
come, bring away the plaintiffs. by this time our sexton hath reformed signior leonato of the matter. and, masters, do not forget to specify, when time and place shall
(as vincentio) what's he that knocks as he would beat down the gate?
have with you.
here, here comes master signior leonato, and the sexton too.
is signior lucentio within, sir?
come, come, they are almost here. how many stand for consulships?
which is the villain? let me see his eyes, that, when i note another man like him,
(as vincentio) he's within, sir, but not to be spoken withal.
three, they say: but 'tis thought of every one coriolanus will carry it.
if you would know your wronger, look on me.
what if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to make merry withal?
loves not the common people.
art thou the slave that with thy breath hast killed mine innocent child?
(as vincentio) keep your hundred pounds to yourself. he shall need none so long as i live.
faith, there had been many great men that have flattered the people, who ne'er loved them; and there be many that they have loved, they know not they hate upon no better a ground: therefore, for coriolanus neither to care whether they love or hate him manifests the true knowledge he has in their disposition; and out of his noble carelessness lets
yea, even i alone.
(to vincentio) nay, i told you your son was well beloved in padua., do you hear, sir? to leave frivolous circumstances, i pray you tell signior lucentio that his father is come from pisa and is here at the door to speak with him.
if he did not care whether he had their love or no, he waved indifferently 'twixt doing them neither good nor harm: but he seeks their hate with greater devotion than can render it him; and leaves opposite. now, to seem to affect the malice and displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he dislikes, to flatter them for their love.
no, not so, villain, thou beliest thyself. a third is fled, that had a hand in it., i thank you, princes, for my daughter's death. record it with your high and worthy deeds. 'twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it.
(as vincentio) thou liest. his father is come from padua and here looking out at the window.
he hath deserved worthily of his country: and his having been supple and courteous to the people, bonneted, without any further deed to have them at all into their estimation and report: but he hath so planted his honours in their eyes, and his actions silent, and not confess so much, were a kind of ingrateful injury; to report otherwise, were a malice, that, giving itself the lie, would pluck reproof and rebuke from every ear that heard it.
yet i must speak. choose your revenge yourself. impose me to what penance your invention can lay upon my sin. yet sinned i not but in mistaking.
art thou his father?
are coming.
by my soul, nor i, i would bend under any heavy weight that he'll enjoin me to.
(as vincentio) ay, sir, so his mother says, if i may believe her.
having determined of the volsces and to send for titus lartius, it remains, as the main point of this our after-meeting, hath thus stood for his country: therefore, please you, most reverend and grave elders, to desire the present consul, and last general a little of that worthy work perform'd by caius martius coriolanus, whom we met here both to thank and to remember with honours like himself. (coriolanus sits)
i cannot bid you bid my daughter live, that were impossible, but, i pray you both, how innocent she died. and if your love can labor ought in sad invention, hang her an epitaph upon her tomb and sing it to her bones. sing it tonight. and since you could not be my son-in-law, be yet my nephew. my brother hath a daughter, almost the copy of my child that's dead, and she alone is heir to both of us. and so dies my revenge.
(to vincentio) why, how now, gentleman! why, this is flat knavery to take upon you another man's name.
leave nothing out for length, and make us think rather our state's defective for requital than we to stretch it out. (to the tribunes) we do request your kindest ears, and after, your loving motion toward the common body, to yield what passes here.
o noble sir! your overkindness doth wring tears from me. i do embrace your offer; and dispose for henceforth of poor claudio.
(as vincentio) lay hands on the villain. i believe he means to cozen somebody in this city under my countenance.
we are convented inclinable to honour and advance the theme of our assembly.
tonight i take my leave. this naughty man shall face to face be brought to margaret, who i believe was packed in all this wrong, hired to it by your brother.
'em good shipping! but who is here? mine old master vincentio! now we are undone and brought to nothing.
which the rather we shall be blest to do, if he remember he hath hereto prized them at.
nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me, but always hath been just and virtuous in any thing that i do know by her.
(to biondello) come hither, crack-hemp.
that's off, that's off; i would you rather had been silent. please you to hear cominius speak?
(to leonato) moreover, sir, which indeed is not under ass. i beseech you, let it be remembered in his punishment. and also the watch heard them talk of one deformed. they say he wears a key in his ear and a lock hanging by it and borrows money in god's name, the which he hath used so will lend nothing for god's sake. pray you, examine him upon that point.
hope i may choose, sir.
but yet my caution was more pertinent than the rebuke you give it.
i thank thee for thy care and honest pains.
come hither, you rogue! what, have you forgot me?
he loves your people but tie him not to be their bedfellow.
your worship speaks like a most thankful and reverent
forgot you! no, sir. i could not forget you, for i never saw you before in all my life.
nay, keep your place.
(giving him money) there's for thy pains.
what, you notorious villain, didst thou never see thy master's father, vincentio?
sit, coriolanus; never shame to hear what you have nobly done.
god save the foundation!
what, my old worshipful old master? yes, marry, sir. see where he looks out of the window.
your horror's pardon: than hear say how i got them.
go, i discharge thee of thy prisoner, and i thank thee.
is 't so, indeed.
sir, i hope my words disbench'd you not.
i leave an arrant knave with your worship, which i beseech god keep your worship! i wish your worship well. god restore you to health! i humbly give you leave to depart, and if a merry meeting may be wished, god prohibit it!, come, neighbor.
help, help, help! here's a madman will murder me.
no, sir: yet oft, you soothed not, therefore hurt not: but your people, i love them as they weigh.
until tomorrow morning, lords, farewell.
(as vincentio) help, son! help, signior baptista!
pray now, sit down.
farewell, my lords. we look for you tomorrow.
prithee, kate, let's stand aside and see the end of this controversy.
when the alarum were struck than idly sit to hear my nothings monster'd.
we will not fail.
(as lucentio) sir, what are you that offer to beat my servant?
masters of the people, your multiplying spawn how can he flatter, he had rather venture all his limbs for honour than one on's ears to hear it? proceed, cominius.
tonight i'll mourn with hero.
what am i, sir! nay, what are you, sir? o immortal gods! o fine villain! a silken doublet, a velvet hose, a scarlet cloak, and a copatain hat! oh, i am undone, i am undone! while i play the good husband at home, my son and my servant spend all at the university.
i shall lack voice: the deeds of coriolanus should not be utter'd feebly. it is held most dignifies the haver: if it be, the man i speak of cannot in the world be singly counterpoised. at sixteen years, when tarquin made a head for rome, he fought whom with all praise i point at, saw him fight, when with his amazonian chin he drove the bristled lips before him: be bestrid an o'er-press'd roman and i' the consul's view and struck him on his knee: in that day's feats, when he might act the woman in the scene, he proved best man i' the field, and for his meed was brow-bound with the oak. his pupil age and in the brunt of seventeen battles since he lurch'd all swords of the garland. for this last, before and in corioli, let me say, i cannot speak him home: he stopp'd the fliers; turn terror into sport: as weeds before a vessel under sail, so men obey'd and fell below his stem: his sword, death's stamp, where it did mark, it took; from face to foot was timed with dying cries: alone he enter'd the mortal gate of the city, which he painted with shunless destiny; aidless came off, and with a sudden reinforcement struck when, by and by, the din of war gan pierce his ready sense; then straight his doubled spirit re-quicken'd what in flesh was fatigate, and to the battle came he; where he did both field and city ours, he never stood to ease his breast with panting.
(to the watch) how her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.
(as lucentio) how now, what's the matter?
worthy man!
pray thee, sweet mistress margaret, deserve well at my hands by helping me to the speech of beatrice.
what, is the man lunatic?
he cannot but with measure fit the honours
will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty?
(as lucentio) sir, you seem a sober ancient gentleman by your habit, but your words show you a madman. why, sir, what 'cerns it you if i wear pearl and gold? i thank my good father i am able to maintain it.
our spoils he kick'd at, and look'd upon things precious as they were the common muck of the world: he covets less than misery itself would give; rewards to spend the time to end it.
in so high a style, margaret, that no man living shall come
thy father! o villain! he is a sailmaker in bergamo.
he's right noble: let him be call'd for.
to have no man come over me! why, shall i always keep below stairs?
you mistake, sir, you mistake, sir. pray, what do you think is his name?
call coriolanus.
thy wit is as quick as the greyhound's mouth; it catches.
his name! as if i knew not his name! i have brought him up ever since he was three years old, and his name is tranio.
he doth appear.
and yours as blunt as the fencer's foils, which hit but hurt
(as vincentio) away, away, mad ass! his name is lucentio and he is mine only son, and heir to the lands of me, signior vincentio.
the senate, coriolanus, are well pleased to make thee consul.
a most manly wit, margaret, it will not hurt a woman. and so, i pray thee, call beatrice. i give thee the bucklers.
lucentio! oh, he hath murdered his master! lay hold on him, i charge you in the duke's name. o my son, my son! tell me, thou villain, where is my son lucentio?
i do owe them still my life and services.
give us the swords; we have bucklers of our own.
(as lucentio) call forth an officer.
that you do speak to the people.
if you use them, margaret, you must put in the pikes with
carry this mad knave to the jail., father baptista, i charge you see that he be forthcoming.
i do beseech you, let me o'erleap that custom, for i cannot put on the gown, stand naked and entreat them, that i may pass this doing.
well, i will call beatrice to you, who i think hath legs.
carry me to the jail?
sir, the people must have their voices; neither will they bate one jot of ceremony.
and therefore will come.
stay, officer. he shall not go to prison.
pray you, go fit you to the custom and take to you, as your predecessors have, your honour with your form.
(sings) the god of love, that sits above, and knows me, and knows me, how pitiful i deserve, i mean in singing. but in loving, leander the good swimmer, troilus the first employer of panders, and a whole bookful of these quondam carpetmongers, whose names yet run smoothly in the even road of a blank verse, why, they were never so truly turned over and over as my poor self in love. marry, i cannot show it in rhyme. i have tried. i can find out no rhyme to "lady" but "baby", an innocent rhyme; for "scorn," "horn", a hard rhyme; for, "school," "fool", a babbling rhyme; very ominous endings. no, i was not born under a rhyming planet, nor i cannot woo in festival terms.
talk not, signior gremio. i say he shall go to prison.
it is apart be taken from the people.
sweet beatrice, wouldst thou come when i called thee?
take heed, signior baptista, lest you be cony-catched in this business. i dare swear this is the right vincentio.
(to sicinius) mark you that?
yea, signior, and depart when you bid me.
(as vincentio) swear, if thou darest.
to brag unto them, thus i did, and thus; show them the unaching scars which i should hide, of their breath only!
oh , stay but till then!
nay, i dare not swear it.
do not stand upon't. we recommend to you, tribunes of the people, our purpose to them: and to our noble consul
"then" is spoken. fare you well now. and yet, ere i go, let me go with that i came, which is, with knowing what hath
lucentio.
to coriolanus come all joy and honour!
only foul words, and thereupon i will kiss thee.
yes, i know thee to be signior lucentio.
you see how he intends to use the people.
foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but foul breath, and foul breath is noisome. therefore i will depart unkissed.
away with the dotard! to the jail with him!
may they perceive's intent! he will require them, as if he did contemn what he requested
forcible is thy wit. but i must tell thee plainly, claudio undergoes my challenge, and either i must shortly hear from him, or i will subscribe him a coward. and i pray thee now tell me, for which of my bad parts didst thou first fall
thus strangers may be haled and abused., o monstrous villain!
come, we'll inform them of our proceedings here: on the marketplace, i know, they do attend us.
for them all together, which maintained so politic a state of evil that they will not admit any good part to intermingle with them. but for which of my good parts did you first suffer love for me?
o! we are spoiled and yonder he is! deny him, forswear him, or else we are all undone.
once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to deny him.
love thee against my will.
pardon, sweet father.
we may, sir, if we will.
in spite of your heart, i think. alas, poor heart, if you spite it for my sake, i will spite it for yours, for i will never love that which my riend hates.
lives my sweet son?
we have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a power that we have no power to do; for if he show us tongues into those wounds and speak for them; so, if he tell us his noble deeds, we must also tell him our noble acceptance of them. ingratitude is monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful, which we being members, should bring ourselves to be monstrous members.
thou and i are too wise to woo peaceably.
pardon, dear father.
and to make us no better thought of, a little help will serve; for once we stood up about the corn, he
it appears not in this confession. there's not one wise man among twenty that will praise himself.
how hast thou offended? where is lucentio?
we have been called so of many; not that our heads are some brown, some black, some auburn, some bald, but that our wits are so diversely coloured: and truly i think if all our wits were to issue out of and their consent of one direct way should be at once to all the points o' the compass.
an old, an old instance, beatrice, that lived in the lime of good neighbors. if a man do not erect in this age his own the bell rings and the widow weeps.
here's lucentio, right son to the right vincentio, that have by marriage made thy daughter mine while counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne.
think you so? which way do you judge my wit would fly?
and how long is that, think you?
here's packing, with a witness, to deceive us all!
will; 'tis strongly wedged up in a block-head, but if it were at liberty, 'twould, sure, southward.
question: why, an hour in clamor and a quarter in rheum. therefore is it most expedient for the wise, if don worm, the trumpet of his own virtues, as i am to myself. so much for praising myself, who, i myself will bear witness, is praiseworthy. an now tell me, how doth your cousin?
where is that damnèd villain, tranio, that faced and braved me in this matter so?
why that way?
very ill.
why, tell me, is not this my cambio?
to lose itself in a fog, where being three parts for conscience sake, to help to get thee a wife.
and how do you?
cambio is changed into lucentio.
you are never without your tricks: you may, you may.
very ill, too.
made me exchange my state with tranio, while he did bear my countenance in the town, and happily i have arrivèd at the last unto the wishèd haven of my bliss. then pardon him, sweet father, for my sake.
are you all resolved to give your voices? but that's no matter, the greater part carries it. i never a worthier man.
serve god, love me, and mend. there will i leave you too, for here comes one in haste.
i'll slit the villain's nose that would have sent me to the jail.
here he comes, and in the gown of humility: mark his behavior. we are not to stay all together, but to come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos, and particulars; wherein every one of us has a single honour, in giving him our own voices with our own tongues: therefore follow me, and i direct you how you shall go by him. content, content.
madam, you must come to your uncle. yonder's old coil at accused, the prince and claudio mightily abused, and don john is the author of all, who is fled and gone. will you come presently?
but do you hear, sir, have you married my daughter without asking my goodwill?
o sir, you are not right: have you not known the worthiest men have done't?
will you go hear this news, signior?
fear not, baptista, we will content you. go to. but i will in to be revenged for this villany.
what must i say? my tongue to such a pace:, 'look, sir, my wounds! i got them in my country's service, when some certain of your brethren roar'd and ran from the noise of our own drums.'
eyes, and moreover, i will go with thee to thy uncle's.
and i, to sound the depth of this knavery.
you must not speak of that: you must desire them to think upon you.
is this the monument of leonato?
look not pale, bianca. thy father will not frown.
think upon me! hang 'em! i would they would forget me, like the virtues
it is, my lord.
my cake is dough, but i'll in among the rest,
you'll mar all: i'll leave you: pray you, speak to 'em, i pray you, in wholesome manner.
(reading an epitaph) done to death by slanderous tongues death, in guerdon of her wrongs, gives her fame which never dies. so the life that died with shame lives in death with glorious fame.
husband, let's follow to see the end of this ado.
bid them wash their faces
praising her when i am dumb. now, music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn. (song) pardon, goddess of the night, those that slew thy virgin knight, for the which with songs of woe round about her tomb they go. midnight, assist our moan. help us to sigh and groan heavily, heavily. graves, yawn and yield your dead, till death be utterèd, heavily, heavily.
first kiss me, kate, and we will.
so, here comes a brace.
now, unto thy bones good night!
what, in the midst of the street?
you know the cause, air, of my standing here.
good morrow, masters. put your torches out. the wolves have preyed, and look, the gentle day, before the wheels of phoebus, round about dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey.
what, art thou ashamed of me?
we do, sir; tell us what hath brought you to't.
good morrow, masters. each his several way.
no, sir, god forbid, but ashamed to kiss.
mine own desert.
come, let us hence, and put on other weeds, and then to leonato's we will go.
why, then let's home again. (to grumio) come, sirrah, let's away.
your own desert!
and hymen now with luckier issue speed 's
nay, i will give thee a kiss. (kisses him) now pray thee, love, stay.
ay, but not mine own desire.
did i not tell you she was innocent?
better once than never, for never too late.
how not your own desire?
so are the prince and claudio, who accused her upon the error that you heard debated. but margaret was in some fault for this, in the true course of all the question.
at last, though long, our jarring notes agree, and time it is when raging war is done to smile at 'scapes and perils overblown. my fair bianca, bid my father welcome, brother petruchio, sister katherina, and thou, hortensio, with thy loving widow, feast with the best, and welcome to my house. my banquet is to close our stomachs up, for now we sit to chat as well as eat.
no, sir,'twas never my desire yet to trouble the poor with begging.
well, i am glad that all things sort so well.
nothing but sit and sit, and eat and eat!
gain by you.
and so am i, being else by faith enforced to call young claudio to a reckoning for it.
padua affords this kindness, son petruchio.
well then, i pray, your price o' the consulship?
withdraw into a chamber by yourselves, and when i send for you, come hither masked. the prince and claudio promised by this hour to visit me., you know your office, brother. and give her to young claudio.
padua affords nothing but what is kind.
the price is to ask it kindly.
which i will do with confirmed countenance.
for both our sakes, i would that word were true.
kindly! sir, i pray, let me ha't: i have wounds to good voice, sir; what say you?
friar, i must entreat your pains, i think.
now, for my life, hortensio fears his widow.
you shall ha' it, worthy sir.
to do what, signior?
then never trust me if i be afeard.
a match, sir. there's in all two worthy voices begged. i have your alms: adieu.
signior leonato, truth it is, good signior, your niece regards me with an eye of favor.
you are very sensible, and yet you miss my sense: i mean, hortensio is afeard of you.
but this is something odd.
that eye my daughter lent her; 'tis most true.
he that is giddy thinks the world turns round.
an 'twere to give again,--but 'tis no matter.
and i do with an eye of love requite her.
roundly replied.
pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your voices that i may be consul, i have here the customary gown.
from claudio and the prince. but what's your will?
mistress, how mean you that?
have not deserved nobly.
your answer, sir, is enigmatical. but for my will, my will is your goodwill may stand with ours, this day to be conjoined in which, good friar, i shall desire your help.
thus i conceive by him.
your enigma?
my heart is with your liking.
conceives by me? how likes hortensio that?
you have been a scourge to her enemies, you have been a rod to her friends; you have not indeed loved
and my help. here comes the prince and claudio.
my widow says, thus she conceives her tale. "that's what i understand him to mean."
you should account me the more virtuous that i have not been common in my love. i will, sir, flatter my sworn brother, the people, to earn a dearer estimation of them; 'tis a condition they account rather to have my hat than my heart, i will practise the insinuating nod and be off to them most counterfeitly; that is, sir, i will counterfeit the bewitchment of some popular man and give it i may be consul.
good morrow to this fair assembly.
very well mended. kiss him for that, good widow.
we hope to find you our friend; and therefore give you our voices heartily.
we here attend you. are you yet determined today to marry with my brother's daughter?
"he that is giddy thinks the world turns round", i pray you, tell me what you meant by that.
you have received many wounds for your country.
i'll hold my mind were she an ethiope.
your husband being troubled with a shrew and now you know my meaning.
will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no further.
call her forth, brother. here's the friar ready.
a very mean meaning.
the gods give you joy, sir, heartily!
that you have such a february face, so full of frost, of storm and cloudiness?
right, i mean you.
most sweet voices! better it is to die, better to starve, why in this woolvish toge should i stand here, to beg of hob and dick, that do appear, their needless vouches? custom calls me to't: what custom wills, in all things should we do't, and mountainous error be too highly heapt for truth to o'er-peer. rather than fool it so, let the high office and the honour go to one that would do thus. i am half through;
i think he thinks upon the savage bull. tush, fear not, man. we'll tip thy horns with gold, as once europa did at lusty jove when he would play the noble beast in love.
and i am mean indeed, respecting you.
here come more voices. your voices: for your voices i have fought; watch'd for your voices; for your voices bear of wounds two dozen odd; battles thrice six done many things, some less, some more your voices: indeed i would be consul.
bull jove, sir, had an amiable low, and some such strange bull leapt your father's cow much like to you, for you have just his bleat.
to her, kate!
he has done nobly, and cannot go without any honest man's voice.
for this i owe you. here comes other reck'nings.
to her, widow!
and make him good friend to the people!
which is the lady i must seize upon?
a hundred marks, my kate does put her down.
amen, amen. god save thee, noble consul!
this same is she, and i do give you her.
that's my office.
worthy voices!
why, then she's mine., sweet, let me see your face.
spoke like an officer! ha' to thee, lad!
you have stood your limitation; and the tribunes that, in the official marks invested, you anon do meet the senate.
no, that you shall not till you take her hand before this friar and swear to marry her.
how likes gremio these quick-witted folks?
is this done?
(to hero) give me your hand before this holy friar. i am your husband, if you like of me.
believe me, sir, they butt together well.
the custom of request you have discharged: to meet anon, upon your approbation.
and when you loved, you were my other husband. (she unmasks)
head and butt! an hasty-witted body would say your head and butt were head and horn.
where? at the senate-house?
another hero!
ay, mistress bride, hath that awakened you?
there, coriolanus.
nothing certainer. one hero died defiled, but i do live,
ay, but not frighted me. therefore i'll sleep again.
may i change these garments?
the former hero! hero that is dead!
have at you for a bitter jest or two!
you may, sir.
she died, my lord, but whiles her slander lived.
am i your bird? i mean to shift my bush, and then pursue me as you draw your bow., you are welcome all.
that i'll straight do; and, knowing myself again, repair to the senate-house.
all this amazement can i qualify when after that the holy rites are ended meantime let wonder seem familiar, and to the chapel let us presently.
this bird you aimed at, though you hit her not., therefore a health to all that shot and missed.
i'll keep you company. will you along?
soft and fair, friar., which is beatrice?
oh, sir, lucentio slipped me like his greyhound, which runs himself and catches for his master.
we stay here for the people.
(unmasking) i answer to that name. what is your will?
a good swift simile, but something currish.
fare you well.
do not you love me?
'tis well, sir, that you hunted for yourself. 'tis thought your deer does hold you at a bay.
he has it now, and by his looks methink 'tis warm at 's heart.
why no, no more than reason.
oh, oh, petruchio! tranio hits you now.
with a proud heart he wore his humble weeds. will you dismiss the people?
why then, your uncle and the prince and claudio have been deceived. they swore you did.
i thank thee for that gird, good tranio.
how now, my masters! have you chose this man?
do not you love me?
confess, confess, hath he not hit you here?
he has our voices, sir.
troth, no, no more than reason.
he has a little galled me, i confess. and, as the jest did glance away from me, 'tis ten to one it maimed you two outright.
we pray the gods he may deserve your loves.
are much deceived, for they did swear you did.
now, in good sadness, son petruchio,
amen, sir: to my poor unworthy notice, he mock'd us when he begg'd our voices.
they swore that you were almost sick for me.
well, i say no. and therefore, for assurance, let's each one send unto his wife; and he whose wife is most obedient to come at first when he doth send for her,
he flouted us downright.
they swore that you were well-nigh dead for me.
content. what's the wager?
no, 'tis his kind of speech: he did not mock us.
'tis no such matter. then you do not love me?
twenty crowns.
not one amongst us, save yourself, but says he used us scornfully: he should have show'd us
no, truly, but in friendly recompense.
twenty crowns? i'll venture so much of my hawk or hound,
why, so he did, i am sure.
come, cousin, i am sure you love the gentleman.
a hundred then.
no, no; no man saw 'em.
and i'll be sworn upon 't that he loves her, for here's a paper written in his hand, a halting sonnet of his own pure brain, (shows a paper)
content.
he said he had wounds, which he could show in private; 'i would be consul,' says he: 'aged custom, but by your voices, will not so permit me; your voices therefore.' when we granted that, here was 'i thank you for your voices: thank you: your voices, i have no further with you.' was not this mockery?
and here's another, writ in my cousin's hand, stol'n from her pocket, containing her affection unto benedick. (shows a paper)
a match! 'tis done.
why either were you ignorant to see't, or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness
i will have thee, but, by this light, i take thee for pity.
who shall begin?
could you not have told him as you were lesson'd, when he had no power, but was a petty servant to the state, he was your enemy, ever spake against i' the body of the weal; and now, arriving a place of potency and sway o' the state, if he should still malignantly remain fast foe to the plebeii, your voices might that as his worthy deeds did claim no less than what he stood for, so his gracious nature would think upon you for your voices and translate his malice towards you into love,
i would not deny you, but, by this good day, i yield upon great persuasion, and partly to save your life, for i was told you were in a consumption.
go, biondello, bid your mistress come to me.
thus to have said, as you were fore-advised, had touch'd his spirit and tried his inclination; from him pluck'd either his gracious promise, which you might, or else it would have gall'd his surly nature, which easily endures not article tying him to aught; so putting him to rage, you should have ta'en the advantage of his choler
peace! i will stop your mouth.
i go.
did you perceive he did solicit you in free contempt when he did need your loves, and do you think that his contempt shall not be bruising to you, no heart among you? or had you tongues to cry against the rectorship of judgment?
how dost thou, benedick, the married man?
son, i'll be your half bianca comes.
have you ere now denied the asker? and now again your sued-for tongues?
i'll tell thee what, prince: a college of wit-crackers cannot flout me out of my humor. dost thou think i care for a satire or an epigram? no. if a man will be beaten with brains, he purpose to marry, i will think nothing to any purpose that the world can say against it, and therefore never flout at me for what i have said against it. for man is a giddy thing, and this is my conclusion., for thy part, claudio, i did think to live unbruised, and love my cousin.
i'll have no halves. i'll bear it all myself.
he's not confirm'd; we may deny him yet.
i had well hoped thou wouldst have denied beatrice, that i might have cudgeled thee out of thy single life, to make thee a double-dealer, which out of question, thou wilt be, if my
how now, what news?
and will deny him: i'll have five hundred voices of that sound.
come, come, we are friends. let's have a dance ere we are married, that we may lighten our own hearts and our wives' heels.
sir, my mistress sends you word that she is busy, and she cannot come.
i twice five hundred and their friends to piece 'em.
we'll have dancing afterward.
how! "she's busy, and she cannot come!" is that an answer?
get you hence instantly, and tell those friends, they have chose a consul that will from them take their liberties; make them of no more voice than dogs that are as often beat for barking
sad. get thee a wife, get thee a wife. there is no staff more reverend than one tipped with horn.
pray god, sir, your wife send you not a worse.
let them assemble, and on a safer judgment all revoke your ignorant election; enforce his pride, and his old hate unto you; besides, forget not how in his suit he scorn'd you; but your loves, thinking upon his services, took from you the apprehension of his present portance, which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion
(to don pedro) my lord, your brother john is ta'en in flight and brought with armed men back to messina.
i hope better.
lay a fault on us, your tribunes; that we laboured, no impediment between, but that you must cast your election on him.
thee brave punishments for him., strike up, pipers.
sirrah biondello, go and entreat my wife to come to me forthwith.
more after our commandment than as guided by your own true affections, and that your minds, preoccupied with what you rather must do than what you should, made you against the grain
nay, then she must needs come.
ay, spare us not. say we read lectures to you. how youngly he began to serve his country, how long continued, and what stock he springs of, the noble house o' the marcians, from whence came who, after great hostilius, here was king; of the same house publius and quintus were, that our beat water brought by conduits hither; and [censorinus,] nobly named so, was his great ancestor.
escalus.
i am afraid, sir, do what you can, yours will not be entreated.
one thus descended, that hath beside well in his person wrought to be set high in place, we did commend scaling his present bearing with his past, that he's your fixed enemy, and revoke your sudden approbation.
my lord.
now, where's my wife?
say, you ne'er had done't, and presently, when you have drawn your number, repair to the capitol. all we will so: almost all
of government the properties to unfold, would seem in me to affect speech and discourse; exceeds, in that, the lists of all advice my strength can give you: then no more remains, but that to your sufficiency as your worth is able, and let them work. the nature of our people, for common justice, you're as pregnant in as art and practise hath enriched any that we remember. there is our commission, from which we would not have you warp. call hither,
she will not come. she bids you come to her.
let them go on; this mutiny were better put in hazard, than stay, past doubt, for greater: if, as his nature is, he fall in rage the vantage of his anger.
what figure of us think you he will bear? for you must know, we have with special soul elected him our absence to supply, lent him our terror, dress'd him with our love, of our own power: what think you of it?
worse and worse. she will not come! o vile, intolerable, not to be endured!, sirrah grumio, go to your mistress,
to the capitol, come: we will be there before the stream o' the people; and this shall seem, as partly 'tis, their own,
if any in vienna be of worth to undergo such ample grace and honour, it is lord angelo.
i know her answer.
tullus aufidius then had made new head?
look where he comes.
what?
he had, my lord; and that it was which caused our swifter composition.
always obedient to your grace's will, i come to know your pleasure.
she will not.
so then the volsces stand but as at first, upon's again.
angelo, there is a kind of character in thy life, fully unfold. thyself and thy belongings are not thine own so proper as to waste thyself upon thy virtues, they on thee. heaven doth with us as we with torches do, did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike as if we had them not. spirits are not finely touch'd but to fine issues, nor nature never lends the smallest scruple of her excellence herself the glory of a creditor, both thanks and use. but i do bend my speech to one that can my part in him advertise; hold therefore, angelo this has several potential meanings. either "stand firm," or angelo could be starting to protest (as he does later on) and duke vincentio could be saying, "stop, don't interrupt me." it could also mean "here, take this,"as the duke hands angelo his commission, or tries to. hold therefore, angelo :, mortality and mercy in vienna live in thy tongue and heart: old escalus, though first in question, is thy secondary. take thy commission.
the fouler fortune mine, and there an end.
they are worn, lord consul, so, that we shall hardly in our ages see their banners wave again.
let there be some more test made of my metal, before so noble and so great a figure be stamp'd upon it.
now, by my holidam, here comes katherina!
saw you aufidius?
no more evasion: proceeded to you; therefore take your honours. our haste from hence is of so quick condition that it prefers itself and leaves unquestion'd matters of needful value. we shall write to you, how it goes with us, and do look to know what doth befall you here. so, fare you well; to the hopeful execution do i leave you of your commissions.
what is your will, sir, that you send for me?
on safe-guard he came to me; and did curse against the volsces, for they had so vilely yielded the town: he is retired to antium.
that we may bring you something on the way.
where is your sister, and hortensio's wife?
spoke he of me?
my haste may not admit it; nor need you, on mine honour, have to do with any scruple; your scope is as mine own as to your soul seems good. give me your hand: i'll privily away. i love the people, but do not like to stage me to their eyes: through it do well, i do not relish well nor do i think the man of safe discretion that does affect it. once more, fare you well.
they sit conferring by the parlor fire.
he did, my lord.
the heavens give safety to your purposes!
go fetch them hither. if they deny to come, swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands. away, i say, and bring them hither straight.
how? what?
lead forth and bring you back in happiness!
here is a wonder, if you talk of a wonder.
how often he had met you, sword to sword; that of all things upon the earth he hated your person most, that he would pawn his fortunes be call'd your vanquisher.
i thank you. fare you well.
and so it is. i wonder what it bodes.
at antium lives he?
i shall desire you, sir, to give me leave to have free speech with you; and it concerns me to look into the bottom of my place: a power i have, but of what strength and nature
marry, peace it bodes, and love, and quiet life, and awful rule, and right supremacy, and, to be short, what not that's sweet and happy?
at antium.
'tis so with me. let us withdraw together, and we may soon our satisfaction have touching that point.
the wager thou hast won, and i will add unto their losses twenty thousand crowns, another dowry to another daughter, for she is changed as she had never been.
i wish i had a cause to seek him there,
i'll wait upon your honour.
and show more sign of her obedience, her new-built virtue and obedience.
behold, these are the tribunes of the people, the tongues o' the common mouth: i do despise them; for they do prank them in authority, against all noble sufferance.
if the duke with the other dukes come not to composition with the king of hungary, why then all the dukes fall upon the king.
see where she comes and brings your froward wives as prisoners to her womanly persuasion., off with that bauble, throw it underfoot.
pass no further.
heaven grant us its peace, but not the king of
lord, let me never have a cause to sigh, till i be brought to such a silly pass!
ha! what is that?
amen.
fie! what a foolish duty call you this?
it will be dangerous to go on: no further.
thou concludest like the sanctimonious pirate, that went to sea with the ten commandments, but scraped one out of the table.
the wisdom of your duty, fair bianca, hath cost me an hundred crowns since suppertime.
what makes this change?
'thou shalt not steal'?
the more fool you for laying on my duty.
the matter?
ay, that he razed.
katherine, i charge thee, tell these headstrong women
hath he not pass'd the noble and the common?
why, 'twas a commandment to command the captain and all the rest from their functions: they put forth to steal. there's not a soldier of us all, that, in well that prays for peace.
come, come, you're mocking. we will have no telling.
cominius, no.
i never heard any soldier dislike it.
come on, i say, and first begin with her.
have i had children's voices?
i believe thee; for i think thou never wast where grace was said.
she shall not.
tribunes, give way; he shall to the market-place.
no? a dozen times at least.
i say she shall., and first begin with her.
the people are incensed against him.
what, in metre?
and dart not scornful glances from those eyes to wound thy lord, thy king, thy governor. it blots thy beauty as frosts do bite the meads, confounds thy fame as whirlwinds shake fair buds, a woman moved is like a fountain troubled, muddy, ill-seeming, thick, bereft of beauty, and while it is so, none so dry or thirsty will deign to sip or touch one drop of it. thy head, thy sovereign, one that cares for thee, and for thy maintenance commits his body to painful labor both by sea and land, to watch the night in storms, the day in cold, and craves no other tribute at thy hands but love, fair looks and true obedience, too little payment for so great a debt. such duty as the subject owes the prince, and when she is froward, peevish, sullen, sour, and not obedient to his honest will, what is she but a foul contending rebel and graceless traitor to her loving lord? to offer war where they should kneel for peace; or seek for rule, supremacy and sway when they are bound to serve, love, and obey. why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth, but that our soft conditions and our hearts should well agree with our external parts? come, come, you froward and unable worms!
or all will fall in broil.
in any proportion or in any language.
my mind hath been as big as one of yours, to bandy word for word and frown for frown. but now i see our lances are but straws, our strength as weak, our weakness past compare, that seeming to be most which we indeed least are. and place your hands below your husband's foot: in token of which duty, if he please, my hand is ready, may it do him ease.
are these your herd? must these have voices, that can yield them now and straight disclaim their tongues? what are you being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth? have you not set them on?
i think, or in any religion.
why, there's a wench! come on and kiss me, kate.
be calm, be calm.
ay, why not? grace is grace, despite of all wicked villain, despite of all grace.
well, go thy ways, old lad, for thou shalt ha 't.
it is a purposed thing, and grows by plot, suffer't, and live with such as cannot rule nor ever will be ruled.
well, there went but a pair of shears between us.
'tis a good hearing when children are toward.
call't not a plot: the people cry you mock'd them, and of late, scandal'd the suppliants for the people, call'd them time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.
i grant; as there may between the lists and the velvet. thou art the list.
but a harsh hearing when women are froward.
why, this was known before.
a three-piled piece, i warrant thee: i had as lief be a list of an english kersey as be piled, as thou art piled, for a french velvet. do i speak feelingly now?
(to lucentio) come, kate, we'll to bed. 'twas i won the wager, though you hit the white, and, being a winner, god give you good night!
not to them all.
feeling of thy speech: i will, out of thine own confession, learn to begin thy health; but, whilst i live, forget to drink after thee.
now, go thy ways, thou hast tamed a curst shrew.
have you inform'd them sithence?
i think i have done myself wrong, have i not?
'tis a wonder, by your leave, she will be tamed so.
how! i inform them!
yes, that thou hast, whether thou art tainted or free.
you are like to do such business.
behold, behold, where madam mitigation comes! i have purchased as many diseases under her roof as come to, 
who's there?
not unlike, each way, to better yours.
to what, i pray?
nay, answer me. stand and unfold yourself.
let me deserve so ill as you, and make me your fellow tribune.
judge.
long live the king!
you show too much of that for which the people stir: if you will pass which you are out of, with a gentler spirit, or never be so noble as a consul, nor yoke with him for tribune.
to three thousand dolours "dolours": a pun, meaning both the french word for "sadnesses" and "dollars." dolours a year.
barnardo?
let's be calm.
ay, and more.
he.
becomes not rome, nor has coriolanus deserved this so dishonour'd rub, laid falsely i' the plain way of his merit.
a french crown a pun. a french crown is both a coin and a reference to a bald head, which often resulted from treatment for syphilis ("the french disease"). a french crown more.
you come most carefully upon your hour.
tell me of corn!
thou art always figuring diseases in me; but thou art full of error; i am sound.
'tis now struck twelve. get thee to bed, francisco.
not now, not now.
things that are hollow: thy bones are hollow; impiety has made a feast of thee.
for this relief much thanks. 'tis bitter cold, and i am sick at heart.
not in this heat, sir, now.
how now! which of your hips has the most profound sciatica?
have you had quiet guard?
now, as i live, i will. my nobler friends, i crave their pardons: regard me as i do not flatter, and therein behold themselves: i say again, in soothing them, we nourish 'gainst our senate the cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition, and scatter'd, by mingling them with us, the honour'd number, who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that which they have given to beggars.
well, well; there's one yonder arrested and carried
not a mouse stirring.
well, no more.
who's that, i pray thee?
well, good night. if you do meet horatio and marcellus,
no more words, we beseech you.
marry, sir, that's claudio, signior claudio.
i think i hear them., stand, ho! who's there?
how! no more! as for my country i have shed my blood, not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs which we disdain should tatter us, yet sought the very way to catch them.
claudio to prison? 'tis not so.
friends to this ground.
you speak o' the people, as if you were a god to punish, not
nay, but i know 'tis so: i saw him arrested, saw three days his head to be chopped off.
and liegemen to the dane.
'twere well we let the people know't.
but, after all this fooling, i would not have it so. art thou sure of this?
give you good night.
what, what? his choler?
i am too sure of it: and it is for getting madam
o, farewell, honest soldier. who hath relieved you?
choler! by jove, 'twould be my mind!
believe me, this may be: he promised to meet me two hours since, and he was ever precise in promise-keeping.
barnardo has my place. give you good night.
it is a mind that shall remain a poison where it is, not poison any further.
besides, you know, it draws something near to the
holla, barnardo.
hear you this triton of the minnows? mark you his absolute 'shall'?
but, most of all, agreeing with the proclamation.
say what, is horatio there?
'twas from the canon.
away! let's go learn the truth of it.
a piece of him.
'shall'! you grave but reckless senators, have you thus given hydra here to choose an officer, that with his peremptory 'shall,' being but the horn and noise o' the monster's, wants not spirit and make your channel his? if he have power then vail your ignorance; if none, awake your dangerous lenity. if you are learn'd, be not as common fools; if you are not, if they be senators: and they are no less, when, both your voices blended, the great'st taste most palates theirs. they choose their magistrate, and such a one as he, who puts his 'shall,' than ever frown in greece. by jove himself! it makes the consuls base: and my soul aches to know, when two authorities are up, neither supreme, how soon confusion the one by the other.
thus, what with the war, what with the sweat "the sweat" could mean the plague of sweating sickness, or it could refer to "the sweating tub," a kind of hot tub treatment for stds. the sweat , what with the gallows and what with poverty, i am
welcome, horatio., welcome, good marcellus.
well, on to the market-place.
how now! what's the news with you?
what, has this thing appeared again tonight?
whoever gave that counsel, to give forth the corn o' the storehouse gratis, as 'twas used
yonder man is carried to prison.
i have seen nothing.
well, well, no more of that.
well; what has he done?
horatio says 'tis but our fantasy and will not let belief take hold of him touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us. therefore i have entreated him along that if again this apparition come he may approve our eyes and speak to it.
though there the people had more absolute power, i say, they nourish'd disobedience, fed the ruin of the state.
a woman.
tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
one that speaks thus their voice?
but what's his offence?
sit down a while and let us once again assail your ears, what we have two nights seen.
i'll give my reasons, more worthier than their voices. they know the corn was not our recompense, resting well assured even when the navel of the state was touch'd, they would not thread the gates. this kind of service did not deserve corn gratis. being i' the war their mutinies and revolts, wherein they show'd which they have often made against the senate, all cause unborn, could never be the motive of our so frank donation. well, what then? how shall this bisson multitude digest what's like to be their words: 'we did request it; we are the greater poll, and in true fear they gave us our demands.' thus we debase the nature of our seats and make the rabble break ope the locks o' the senate and bring in the crows to peck the eagles.
groping for trouts in a peculiar river.
well, sit we down, and let us hear barnardo speak of this.
come, enough.
what, is there a maid with child by him?
last night of all, when yond same star that's westward from the pole where now it burns, marcellus and myself, the bell then beating one, 
enough, with over-measure.
no, but there's a woman with maid by him. you have not heard of the proclamation, have you?
peace, break thee off. look where it comes again!
what may be sworn by, both divine and human, seal what i end withal! this double worship, where one part does disdain with cause, the other insult without all reason, where gentry, title, wisdom, of general ignorance,, it must omit real necessities, and give way the while to unstable slightne purpose so barr'd, it follows, you that will be less fearful than discreet, that love the fundamental part of state more than you doubt the change on't, that prefer a noble life before a long, and wish that's sure of death without it, at once pluck out the multitudinous tongue; let them not lick the sweet which is their poison: your dishonour mangles true judgment and bereaves the state not having the power to do the good it would, for the in which doth control't.
what proclamation, man?
in the same figure like the king that's dead.
has said enough.
all houses in the suburbs of vienna must be plucked down.
(to horatio) thou art a scholar. speak to it, horatio.
has spoken like a traitor, and shall answer
and what shall become of those in the city?
looks it not like the king? mark it, horatio.
thou wretch, despite o'erwhelm thee! what should the people do with these bald tribunes? on whom depending, their obedience fails to the greater bench: in a rebellion, then were they chosen: in a better hour, let what is meet be said it must be meet, and throw their power i' the dust.
they shall stand for seed: they had gone down too, but that a wise burgher put in for them.
most like. it harrows me with fear and wonder.
manifest treason!
pulled down?
it would be spoke to.
this a consul? no.
to the ground, mistress.
question it, horatio.
the aediles, ho!
why, here's a change indeed in the commonwealth! what shall become of me?
what art thou that usurp'st this time of night in which the majesty of buried denmark did sometimes march? by heaven, i charge thee, speak.
let him be apprehended.
clients: though you change your place, you need not change your trade; i'll be your tapster a tapster was a bartender. tapster still. courage! there will be pity taken on you: you that have worn your eyes almost out in the service, you
it is offended.
go, call the people:
what's to do here, thomas tapster? let's withdraw.
see, it stalks away.
in whose name myself a foe to the public weal: obey, i charge thee, and follow to thine answer.
here comes signior claudio, led by the provost to prison; and there's madam juliet.
stay! speak, speak! i charge thee, speak!
hence, old goat!
fellow, why dost thou show me thus to the world?
'tis gone and will not answer.
we'll surety him.
i do it not in evil disposition, but from lord angelo by special charge.
how now, horatio? you tremble and look pale. is not this something more than fantasy? what think you on 't?
aged sir, hands off.
thus can the demigod authority a biblical reference, specifically romans : "therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth." thus can the demigod authority make us pay down for our offence by weight a biblical reference, specifically romans : "therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth." make us pay down for our offence by weight on whom it will not, so a biblical reference, specifically romans : "therefore hath he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardeneth." on whom it will not, so ; yet still 'tis just.
before my god, i might not this believe of mine own eyes.
hence, rotten thing! or i shall shake thy bones out of thy garments.
why, how now, claudio! whence comes this restraint?
is it not like the king?
help, ye citizens!
from too much liberty, my lucio, liberty: as surfeit is the father of much fast, turns to restraint. our natures do pursue, like rats that ravin down their proper bane, a thirsty evil; and when we drink we die.
as thou art to thyself. such was the very armour he had on so frowned he once when, in an angry parle, he smote the sledded polacks on the ice. 'tis strange.
on both sides more respect.
if i could speak so wisely under an arrest, i would the truth, i had as lief have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment. what's thy offence, claudio?
thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour,
here's he that would take from you all your power.
what but to speak of would offend again.
in what particular thought to work i know not, but in the gross and scope of mine opinion this bodes some strange eruption to our state.
seize him, aediles!
what, is't murder?
good now, sit down and tell me, he that knows, so nightly toils the subject of the land, and why such daily cast of brazen cannon and foreign mart for implements of war, why such impress of shipwrights, whose sore task what might be toward, that this sweaty haste doth make the night joint laborer with the day? who is 't that can inform me?
down with him! down with him!
no.
that can i. at least, the whisper goes so: our last king, was, as you know, by fortinbras of norway, thereto pricked on by a most emulate pride, dared to the combat; in which our valiant hamlet (for so this side of our known world esteemed him) well ratified by law and heraldry, did forfeit, with his life, all those his lands which he stood seized of to the conqueror, against the which a moiety competent to the inheritance of fortinbras had he been vanquisher, as, by the same covenant and carriage of the article designed, his fell to hamlet. now, sir, young fortinbras, hath in the skirts of norway here and there sharked up a list of lawless resolutes, for food and diet, to some enterprise that hath a stomach in 't, which is no other, but to recover of us, by strong hand
weapons, weapons, weapons!
lechery?
and terms compulsatory, those foresaid lands so by his father lost. and this, i take it, is the main motive of our preparations, of this posthaste and rummage in the land.
tribunes! patricians! citizens! what, ho! 'peace, peace, peace!' 'stay, hold, peace!'
call it so.
i think it be no other but e'en so. well may it sort that this portentous figure comes armèd through our watch so like the king
what is about to be? i am out of breath; confusion's near; i cannot speak. you, tribunes to the people! coriolanus, patience!
away, sir, you must go.
a mote it is to trouble the mind's eye. in the most high and palmy state of rome, a little ere the mightiest julius fell, the graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead as stars with trains of fire and dews of blood, disasters in the sun, and the moist star upon whose influence neptune's empire stands was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse. as harbingers preceding still the fates and prologue to the omen coming on, have heaven and earth together demonstrated unto our climatures and countrymen.
hear me, people; peace!
one word, good friend. lucio, a word with you.
i'll cross it though it blast me., stay, illusion!
let's hear our tribune: peace! speak, speak, speak.
a hundred, if they'll do you any good. is lechery so look'd after?
if thou hast any sound or use of voice, speak to me.
you are at point to lose your liberties: martius would have all from you; martius,
thus stands it with me: upon a true contract i got possession of julietta's bed: save that we do the denunciation lack of outward order: this we came not to, only for propagation of a dower remaining in the coffer of her friends, till time had made them for us. but it chances the stealth of our most mutual entertainment with character too gross is writ on juliet.
if there be any good thing to be done speak to me. if thou art privy to thy country's fate, which happily foreknowing may avoid, oh, speak! extorted treasure in the womb of earth, for which, they say, you spirits oft walk in death, speak of it. stay and speak!
fie, fie, fie! this is the way to kindle, not to quench.
with child, perhaps?
, stop it, marcellus.
to unbuild the city and to lay all flat.
and the new deputy now for the duke, whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness, or whether that the body public be a horse whereon the governor doth ride, he can command, lets it straight feel the spur; whether the tyranny be in his place, or in his emmence that fills it up, i stagger in:, but this new governor which have, like unscour'd armour, hung by the wall so long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round and none of them been worn; and, for a name, now puts the drowsy and neglected act
shall i strike at it with my partisan?
what is the city but the people?
i warrant it is: and thy head stands so tickle on thy shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it off. send after the duke and appeal to him.
do, if it will not stand.
the people are the city.
i prithee, lucio, do me this kind service: this day my sister should the cloister enter and there receive her approbation: acquaint her with the danger of my state: to the strict deputy; bid herself assay him: i have great hope in that; for in her youth there is a prone and speechless dialect, such as move men; beside, she hath prosperous art and well she can persuade.
'tis here.
by the consent of all, we were establish'd the people's magistrates.
i pray she may; as well for the encouragement of the like, which else would stand under grievous imposition, as for the enjoying of thy life, who i game of tick-tack a board game in which pegs are inserted into holes, so, a game with a sexual connotation. game of tick-tack . i'll to her.
'tis here.
you so remain.
i thank you, good friend lucio.
'tis gone. we do it wrong, being so majestical, to offer it the show of violence, for it is, as the air, invulnerable,
and so are like to do.
within two hours.
it was about to speak when the cock crew.
that is the way to lay the city flat; to bring the roof to the foundation, and bury all, which yet distinctly ranges, in heaps and piles of ruin.
come, officer, away!
and then it started like a guilty thing upon a fearful summons. i have heard the cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, awake the god of day, and, at his warning, whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, th' extravagant and erring spirit hies to his confine, and of the truth herein
this deserves death.
no, holy father; throw away that thought; believe not that the dribbling dart of love can pierce a complete bosom. why i desire thee to give me secret harbour, hath a purpose of burning youth.
it faded on the crowing of the cock. some say that ever 'gainst that season comes wherein our saviour's birth is celebrated, the bird of dawning singeth all night long. the nights are wholesome. then no planets strike, no fairy takes, nor witch hath power to charm, so hallowed and so gracious is that time.
or let us stand to our authority, or let us lose it. we do here pronounce, upon the part o' the people, in whose power we were elected theirs, martius is worthy
may your grace speak of it?
so have i heard and do in part believe it. walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill. break we our watch up, and by my advice, let us impart what we have seen tonight unto young hamlet, for, upon my life, do you consent we shall acquaint him with it, as needful in our loves, fitting our duty?
therefore lay hold of him; bear him to the rock tarpeian, and from thence into destruction cast him.
my holy sir, none better knows than you how i have ever loved the life removed where youth, and cost, and witless bravery keeps. i have deliver'd to lord angelo, a man of stricture and firm abstinence, my absolute power and place here in vienna, for so i have strew'd it in the common ear, and so it is received. now, pious sir, you will demand of me why i do this?
let's do 't, i pray, and i this morning know where we shall find him most conveniently.
aediles, seize him!
gladly, my lord.
though yet of hamlet our dear brother's death the memory be green, and that it us befitted to bear our hearts in grief and our whole kingdom to be contracted in one brow of woe, that we with wisest sorrow think on him together with remembrance of ourselves. therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, th' imperial jointress to this warlike state, with an auspicious and a dropping eye, with mirth in funeral and with dirge in marriage, in equal scale weighing delight and dole, taken to wife. nor have we herein barred with this affair along. for all, our thanks. now follows that you know. young fortinbras, holding a weak supposal of our worth or thinking by our late dear brother's death colleaguèd with the dream of his advantage, he hath not failed to pester us with message importing the surrender of those lands lost by his father, with all bonds of law,
yield, martius, yield!
the needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds, which for this nineteen years we have let slip; even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave, that goes not out to prey. now, as fond fathers, only to stick it in their children's sight for terror, not to use, in time the rod becomes more mock'd than fear'd; so our decrees, dead to infliction, to themselves are dead; the baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart goes all decorum.
now for ourself and for this time of meeting
hear me one word; beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.
it rested in your grace to unloose this tied-up justice when you pleased: than in lord angelo.
thus much the business is: we have here writ to norway, uncle of young fortinbras, who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears his further gait herein, in that the levies, the lists, and full proportions are all made out of his subject; and we here dispatch you, good cornelius, and you, voltemand, giving to you no further personal power to business with the king more than the scope of these dilated articles allow. (gives them a paper) farewell, and let your haste commend your duty.
peace, peace!
i do fear, too dreadful: sith 'twas my fault to give the people scope, 'twould be my tyranny to strike and gall them when evil deeds have their permissive pass and not the punishment. therefore indeed, my father, i have on angelo imposed the office; who may, in the ambush of my name, strike home, to do in slander. and to behold his sway, i will, as 'twere a brother of your order, visit both prince and people: therefore, i prithee, supply me with the habit and instruct me like a true friar. more reasons for this action at our more leisure shall i render you; only, this one: lord angelo is precise; stands at a guard with envy; scarce confesses is more to bread than stone a biblical reference, specifically matthew : "or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone?" is more to bread than stone : hence shall we see, if power change purpose, what our seemers be.
in that and all things will we show our duty.
[to brutus] be that you seem, truly your and temperately proceed to what you would thus violently redress.
and have you nuns no farther privileges?
we doubt it nothing. heartily farewell.
sir, those cold ways, that seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous and bear him to the rock.
are not these large enough?
and now, laertes, what's the news with you? you told us of some suit. what is 't, laertes? you cannot speak of reason to the dane that shall not be my offer, not thy asking? the head is not more native to the heart, the hand more instrumental to the mouth, than is the throne of denmark to thy father.
no, i'll die here.
yes, truly; i speak not as desiring more; but rather wishing a more strict restraint
my dread lord, your leave and favor to return to france, from whence though willingly i came to denmark to show my duty in your coronation, yet now, i must confess, that duty done, and bow them to your gracious leave and pardon.
there's some among you have beheld me fighting: come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.
[within] ho! peace be in this place!
have you your father's leave? what says polonius?
down with that sword! tribunes, withdraw awhile.
who's that which calls?
he hath, my lord, wrung from me my slow leave by laborsome petition, and at last i do beseech you, give him leave to go.
lay hands upon him.
it is a man's voice. gentle isabella, turn you the key, and know his business of him; when you have vow'd, you must not speak with men but in the presence of the priore then, if you speak, you must not show your face, or, if you show your face, you must not speak.
take thy fair hour, laertes. time be thine, and thy best graces spend it at thy will., but now, my cousin hamlet, and my son, 
help martius, help, you that be noble; help him, young and old!
peace and prosperity! who is't that calls
(aside) a little more than kin and less than kind.
down with him, down with him!
hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses proclaim you are no less! can you so stead me as bring me to the sight of isabella, to her unhappy brother claudio?
how is it that the clouds still hang on you?
all will be naught else.
why 'her unhappy brother'? let me ask, the rather for i now must make you know i am that isabella and his sister.
not so, my lord. i am too much i' the sun.
get you gone.
not to be weary with you, he's in prison.
good hamlet, cast thy nighted color off, and let thine eye look like a friend on denmark. seek for thy noble father in the dust. thou know'st 'tis common. all that lives must die, passing through nature to eternity.
stand fast; we have as many friends as enemies.
woe me! for what?
ay, madam, it is common.
sham it be put to that?
for that which, if myself might be his judge, he should receive his punishment in thanks:
if it be,
the gods forbid! i prithee, noble friend, home to thy house; leave us to cure this cause.
sir, make me not your story.
"seems," madam? nay, it is. i know not "seems." 'tis not alone my inky cloak, good mother, nor customary suits of solemn black, nor windy suspiration of forced breath, nor the dejected 'havior of the visage, together with all forms, moods, shapes of grief, that can denote me truly. these indeed "seem," for they are actions that a man might play. these but the trappings and the suits of woe.
for 'tis a sore upon us,
it is true. i would not, though 'tis my familiar sin with maids to seem the lapwing and to jest, i hold you as a thing ensky'd and sainted. by your renouncement an immortal spirit, and to be talk'd with in sincerity, as with a saint.
'tis sweet and commendable in your nature, hamlet, to give these mourning duties to your father. but you must know your father lost a father, in filial obligation for some term to do obsequious sorrow. but to persever in obstinate condolement is a course of impious stubbornness. 'tis unmanly grief. a heart unfortified, a mind impatient, an understanding simple and unschooled. for what we know must be and is as common as any the most vulgar thing to sense, take it to heart? fie! 'tis a fault to heaven, a fault against the dead, a fault to nature, to reason most absurd, whose common theme is death of fathers, and who still hath cried, "this must be so." we pray you, throw to earth this unprevailing woe, and think of us as of a father. for let the world take note, you are the most immediate to our throne,
come, sir, along with us.
you do blaspheme the good in mocking me.
than that which dearest father bears his son do i impart toward you. for your intent in going back to school in wittenberg, it is most retrograde to our desire. here in the cheer and comfort of our eye, our chiefest courtier, cousin, and our son.
i would they were barbarians, as they are, though in rome litter'd, not romans, as they are not, though calved i' the porch o' the capitol, 
do not believe it. fewness and truth, 'tis thus: your brother and his lover have embraced: as those that feed grow full, as blossoming time that from the seedness the bare fallow brings expresseth his full tilth and husbandry.
let not thy mother lose her prayers, hamlet. i pray thee, stay with us. go not to wittenberg.
put not your worthy rage into your tongue; one time will owe another.
some one with child by him? my cousin juliet?
i shall in all my best obey you, madam.
on fair ground i could beat forty of them.
is she your cousin?
why, 'tis a loving and a fair reply. be as ourself in denmark., madam, come. this gentle and unforced accord of hamlet sits smiling to my heart, in grace whereof but the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, and the king's rouse the heavens shall bruit again, respeaking earthly thunder. come away.
take up a brace o' the best of them; yea, the two tribunes: but now 'tis odds beyond arithmetic; and manhood is call'd foolery, when it stands before the tag return? whose rage doth rend like interrupted waters and o'erbear what they are used to bear.
adoptedly; as school-maids change their names
oh, that this too, too sullied flesh would melt, or that the everlasting had not fixed his canon 'gainst self-slaughter! o god, god! how weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable seem to me all the uses of this world! that grows to seed. things rank and gross in nature possess it merely. that it should come to this. but two months dead, nay, not so much, not two. so excellent a king, that was to this
pray you, be gone: with those that have but little: this must be patch'd with cloth of any colour.
she it is.
that he might not beteem the winds of heaven visit her face too roughly., heaven and earth, must i remember? why, she would hang on him as if increase of appetite had grown let me not think on 't. frailty, thy name is woman!, a little month, or ere those shoes were old with which she followed my poor father's body, like niobe, all tears. why she, even she, would have mourned longer!, married with my uncle, my father's brother, but no more like my father than i to hercules. within a month, ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears she married. o most wicked speed, to post with such dexterity to incestuous sheets! it is not nor it cannot come to good, but break, my heart, for i must hold my tongue.
nay, come away.
o, let him marry her.
hail to your lordship.
this man has marr'd his fortune.
this is the point. the duke is very strangely gone from hence; in hand and hope of action: but we do learn by those that know the very nerves of state, his givings-out were of an infinite distance from his true-meant design. upon his place, governs lord angelo; a man whose blood is very snow-broth; one who never feels the wanton stings and motions of the sense, but doth rebate and blunt his natural edge he, to give fear to use and liberty, which have for long run by the hideous law, as mice by lions, hath pick'd out an act, under whose heavy sense your brother's life and follows close the rigour of the statute, to make him an example. all hope is gone, unless you have the grace by your fair prayer to soften angelo: and that's my pith of business
i am glad to see you well., horatio? or i do forget myself?
he would not flatter neptune for his trident, or jove for's power to thunder. his heart's his mouth: what his breast forges, that his tongue must vent; and, being angry, does forget that ever
doth he so seek his life?
the same, my lord, and your poor servant ever.
here's goodly work! second patrician i would they were abed!
has censured him already; and, as i hear, the provost hath a warrant for his execution.
sir, my good friend, i'll change that name with you. and what make you from wittenberg, horatio?, 
i would they were in tiber! what the vengeance!
to do him good?
my good lord.
where is this viper that would depopulate the city and be every man himself?
assay the power you have.
(to marcellus) i am very glad to see you., (to barnardo) good even, sir. (to horatio) , but what, in faith, make you from wittenberg?
you worthy tribunes,, 
my power? alas, i doubt, 
a truant disposition, good my lord.
with rigorous hands: he hath resisted law, and therefore law shall scorn him further trial than the severity of the public power which he so sets at nought.
our doubts are traitors by fearing to attempt. go to lord angelo, and let him learn to know, when maidens sue, men give like gods; but when they weep and kneel, all their petitions are as freely theirs
i would not hear your enemy say so, to make it truster of your own report against yourself. i know you are no truant. but what is your affair in elsinore? we'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
the noble tribunes are the people's mouths, and we their hands.
i'll see what i can do.
my lord, i came to see your father's funeral.
he shall, sure on't.
but speedily.
i pray thee, do not mock me, fellow student. i think it was to see my mother's wedding.
sir, sir,, 
i will about it straight; no longer staying but to give the mother commend me to my brother: soon at night i'll send him certain word of my success.
indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
peace!
i take my leave of you.
thrift, thrift, horatio! the funeral baked meats would i had met my dearest foe in heaven or ever i had seen that day, horatio. my father, methinks i see my father.
do not cry havoc, where you should but hunt with modest warrant.
good sir, adieu.
where, my lord?
sir, how comes't that you have holp to make this rescue?
we must not make a scarecrow of the law, setting it up to fear the birds of prey, and let it keep one shape, till custom make it their perch and not their terror.
in my mind's eye, horatio.
as i do know the consul's worthiness, so can i name his faults,, 
let us be keen, and rather cut a little, than fall, and bruise to death. alas, this gentleman whom i would save had a most noble father! let but your honour know, that, in the working of your own affections, had time cohered with place or place with wishing, or that the resolute acting of your blood could have attain'd the effect of your own purpose, err'd in this point which now you censure him, and pull'd the law upon you.
i saw him once. he was a goodly king.
consul! what consul?
'tis one thing to be tempted, escalus, another thing to fall. i not deny, may in the sworn twelve have a thief or two guiltier than him they try. what's open made to justice, that justice seizes: what know the laws that thieves do pass on thieves? 'tis very pregnant, because we see it; but what we do not see we tread upon, and never think of it. you may not so extenuate his offence for i have had such faults; but rather tell me, let mine own judgment pattern out my death, and nothing come in partial. sir, he must die.
he was a man. take him for all in all. i shall not look upon his like again.
the consul coriolanus.
be it as your wisdom will.
my lord, i think i saw him yesternight.
he consul!
where is the provost?
saw who?
no, no, no, no, no.
here, if it like your honour.
my lord, the king your father.
if, by the tribunes' leave, and yours, good people, i may be heard, i would crave a word or two; the which shall turn you to no further harm
see that claudio be executed by nine to-morrow morning: bring him his confessor, let him be prepared; for that's the utmost of his pilgrimage.
the king my father?!
speak briefly then; for we are peremptory to dispatch this viperous traitor: to eject him hence were but one danger, and to keep him here he dies to-night.
some rise by sin, and some by virtue fall: some run from brakes of ice, and answer none: and some condemned for a fault alone.
season your admiration for a while with an attent ear, till i may deliver, upon the witness of these gentlemen,
now the good gods forbid that our renowned rome, whose gratitude towards her deserved children is enroll'd should now eat up her own!
come, bring them away: if these be good people in common houses, i know no law: bring them away.
for god's love, let me hear.
he's a disease that must be cut away.
how now, sir! what's your name? and what's the matter?
two nights together had these gentlemen, marcellus and barnardo, on their watch, in the dead waste and middle of the night, been thus encountered: a figure like your father, appears before them and with solemn march goes slow and stately by them. thrice he walked by their oppressed and fear-surprisèd eyes within his truncheon's length, whilst they, distilled stand dumb and speak not to him. this to me in dreadful secrecy impart they did, and i with them the third night kept the watch, where, as they had delivered, both in time, the apparition comes. i knew your father. these hands are not more like.
o, he's a limb that has but a disease; mortal, to cut it off; to cure it, easy. killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost, which, i dare vouch, is more than that he hath, by many an ounce, he dropp'd it for his country; and what is left, to lose it by his country, a brand to the end o' the world.
if it please your honour, i am the poor duke's constable, and my name is elbow: i do lean upon honour two notorious benefactors.
but where was this?
this is clean kam.
benefactors? well; what benefactors are they? are they not malefactors?
my lord, upon the platform where we watch.
merely awry: when he did love his country, it honour'd him.
if it please your honour, i know not well what they of; and void of all profanation in the world that good christians ought to have.
did you not speak to it?
being once gangrened, is not then respected for what before it was.
this comes off well; here's a wise officer.
my lord, i did, it lifted up its head and did address itself to motion, like as it would speak. but even then the morning cock crew loud, and at the sound it shrunk in haste away
we'll hear no more. pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence: spread further.
go to: what quality are they of? elbow is your
'tis very strange.
one word more, one word. this tiger-footed rage, when it shall find the harm of unscann'd swiftness, will too late lest parties, as he is beloved, break out, and sack great rome with romans.
he cannot, sir; he's out at elbow.
as i do live, my honored lord, 'tis true. and we did think it writ down in our duty to let you know of it.
if it were so,, 
what are you, sir?
indeed, indeed, sirs, but this troubles me.
what do ye talk? our aediles smote? ourselves resisted? come.
he, sir! a tapster, sir; parcel-bawd; one that serves a bad woman; whose house, sir, was, as they professes a hot-house, which, i think, is a very ill house too.
we do, my lord.
consider this: he has been bred i' the wars since he could draw a sword, and is ill school'd in bolted language; meal and bran together i'll go to him, and undertake to bring him where he shall answer, by a lawful form, in peace, to his utmost peril.
how know you that?
armed, say you?
let them puff all about mine ears, present me death on the wheel or at wild horses' heels, or pile ten hills on the tarpeian rock, that the precipitation might down stretch be thus to them.
my wife, sir, whom i detest before heaven and your honour,, (confusing detest with attest)
armed, my lord.
you do the nobler.
how? thy wife?
from top to toe?
i muse my mother does not approve me further, who was wont to buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads in congregations, to yawn, be still and wonder, when one but of my ordinance stood up to speak of peace or war.
ay, sir; whom, i thank heaven, is an honest woman,, 
my lord, from head to foot.
why did you wish me milder? would you have me false to my nature? rather say i play the man i am.
dost thou detest her therefore?
then saw you not his face?
o, sir, sir, sir, before you had worn it out.
i say, sir, i will detest myself also, as well as she, that this house, if it be not a bawd's house,
oh yes, my lord. he wore his beaver up.
let go.
how dost thou know that, constable?
what, looked he frowningly?
you might have been enough the man you are, with striving less to be so; lesser had been you had not show'd them how ye were disposed ere they lack'd power to cross you.
marry, sir, by my wife; who, if she had been a woman cardinally given, might have been accused in fornication, adultery, and all uncleanliness there.
a countenance more
let them hang.
by the woman's means?
pale or red?
ay, and burn too.
ay, sir, by mistress overdone's means: but as she spit in his face, so she defied him.
nay, very pale.
too rough; you must return and mend it.
sir, if it please your honour, this is not so.
and fixed his eyes upon you?
there's no remedy; unless, by not so doing, our good city
prove it before these varlets here, thou honourable
most constantly.
pray, be counsell'd: i have a heart as little apt as yours, but yet a brain that leads my use of anger to better vantage.
do you hear how he misplaces?
i would i had been there.
before he should thus stoop to the herd, but that the violent fit o' the time craves it as physic for the whole state, i would put mine armour on, which i can scarcely bear.
sir, she came in great with child; and longing, saving your honour's reverence, for stewed prunes; sir, we had but two in the house, which at that very dish of some three-pence; your honours have seen such dishes; they are not china dishes, but very good dishes,, 
it would have much amazed you.
what must i do?
go to, go to: no matter for the dish, sir.
very like. stayed it long?
return to the tribunes.
the right: but to the point. as i say, this mistress elbow, being, as i say, with child, and being great-bellied, and longing, as i said, for prunes; and having but two in the dish, as i said, rest, as i said, and, as i say, paying for them very honestly; for, as you know, master froth, i could not give you three-pence again.
while one with moderate haste might tell a hundred.
well, what then? what then?
no, indeed.
longer, longer.
repent what you have spoke.
cracking the stones of the foresaid prunes,, 
not when i saw 't.
for them! i cannot do it to the gods;
ay, so i did indeed.
his beard was grizzled, no?
you are too absolute; though therein you can never be too noble, but when extremities speak. i have heard you say, honour and policy, like unsever'd friends, in peace what each of them by the other lose, that they combine not there.
why, very well; i telling you then, if you be remembered, that such a one and such a one were past good diet, as i told you,, 
a sable silvered.
tush, tush!
all this is true.
i will watch tonight. perchance 'twill walk again.
a good demand.
why, very well, then,, 
i warrant it will.
the same you are not, which, for your best ends, you adopt your policy, how is it less or worse, that it shall hold companionship in peace with honour, as in war, since that to both
come, you are a tedious fool: to the purpose. what complain of? come me to what was done to her.
if it assume my noble father's person, i'll speak to it, though hell itself should gape if you have hitherto concealed this sight, let it be tenable in your silence still. and whatsoever else shall hap tonight, give it an understanding, but no tongue. upon the platform, 'twixt eleven and twelve, i'll visit you.
why force you this?
sir, your honour cannot come to that yet.
our duty to your honor.
because that now it lies you on to speak to the people; not by your own instruction, nor by the matter which your heart prompts you, your tongue, though but bastards and syllables of no allowance to your bosom's truth. now, this no more dishonours you at all than to take in a town with gentle words, the hazard of much blood. i would dissemble with my nature where my fortunes and my friends at stake required i should do so in honour: i am in this, and you will rather show our general louts how you can frown than spend a fawn upon 'em, for the inheritance of their loves and safeguard of what that want might ruin.
no, sir, nor i mean it not.
your loves, as mine to you. farewell.
come, go with us; speak fair: you may salve so, not what is dangerous present, but the loss of what is past.
sir, but you shall come to it, by your honour's here, sir; a man of four-score pound a year; whose father died at hallowmas: was't not at hallowmas, master froth?
my father's spirit in arms. all is not well. till then sit still, my soul. foul deeds will rise, though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
i prithee now, my son, and thus far having stretch'd it, here be with them, thy knee bussing the stones, for in such business action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant more learned than the ears, waving thy head, now humble as the ripest mulberry that will not hold the handling: or say to them, thou art their soldier, and being bred in broils hast not the soft way which, thou dost confess, in asking their good loves, but thou wilt frame thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far as thou hast power and person.
all-hallond eve.
my necessaries are embarked. farewell. and, sister, as the winds give benefit and convey is assistant, do not sleep, but let me hear from you.
this but done, for they have pardons, being ask'd, as free as words to little purpose.
sitting, as i say, in a lower chair, sir; 'twas in the bunch of grapes, where indeed you have a delight to sit, have you not?
do you doubt that?
prithee now, go, and be ruled: although i know thou hadst rather than flatter him in a bower. here is cominius.
i have so; because it is an open room and good for winter.
hold it a fashion and a toy in blood, a violet in the youth of primy nature, forward, not permanent, sweet, not lasting, the perfume and suppliance of a minute.
i have been i' the market-place; and, sir, 'tis fit you make strong party, or defend yourself by calmness or by absence: all's in anger.
why, very well, then; i hope here be truths.
no more but so?
only fair speech.
this will last out a night in russia, when nights are longest there: i'll take my leave. and leave you to the hearing of the cause; hoping you'll find good cause to whip them all.
think it no more. for nature, crescent, does not grow alone in thews and bulk, but, as this temple waxes, the inward service of the mind and soul grows wide withal. perhaps he loves you now, the virtue of his will, but you must fear. his greatness weighed, his will is not his own, for he himself is subject to his birth. he may not, as unvalued persons do, the safety and health of this whole state. and therefore must his choice be circumscribed unto the voice and yielding of that body whereof he is the head. then if he says he loves you,
i think 'twill serve, if he can thereto frame his spirit.
i think no less. good morrow to your lordship.
as he in his particular act and place may give his saying deed, which is no further than the main voice of denmark goes withal. then weigh what loss your honor may sustain or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open to his unmastered importunity. fear it, ophelia. fear it, my dear sister, and keep you in the rear of your affection, the chariest maid is prodigal enough if she unmask her beauty to the moon. virtue itself 'scapes not calumnious strokes. the canker galls the infants of the spring and in the morn and liquid dew of youth, contagious blastments are most imminent. be wary, then. best safety lies in fear. youth to itself rebels, though none else near.
he must, and will prithee now, say you will, and go about it.
now, sir, come on: what was done to elbow's wife, once more?
as watchman to my heart. but, good my brother, do not, as some ungracious pastors do, show me the steep and thorny way to heaven whiles, like a puffed and reckless libertine, and recks not his own rede.
must i with base tongue give my noble heart a lie that it must bear? well, i will do't: yet, were there but this single plot to lose, this mould of martius, they to dust should grind it you have put me now to such a part which never i shall discharge to the life.
once, sir? there was nothing done to her once.
o, fear me not.
come, come, we'll prompt you.
i beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.
i stay too long. but here my father comes. a double blessing is a double grace. occasion smiles upon a second leave.
i prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said to have my praise for this, perform a part thou hast not done before.
i beseech your honour, ask me.
the wind sits in the shoulder of your sail and you are stayed for. there, my blessing with thee. and these few precepts in thy memory look thou character. give thy thoughts no tongue, be thou familiar but by no means vulgar. those friends thou hast, and their adoption tried, grapple them unto thy soul with hoops of steel, but do not dull thy palm with entertainment of entrance to a quarrel, but being in, bear 't that th' opposèd may beware of thee. give every man thy ear but few thy voice. take each man's censure but reserve thy judgment. but not expressed in fancy, rich, not gaudy, for the apparel oft proclaims the man, and they in france of the best rank and station are of a most select and generous chief in that. for loan oft loses both itself and friend, and borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry. this above all: to thine own self be true, and it must follow, as the night the day, farewell. my blessing season this in thee.
well, i must do't: away, my disposition, and possess me which quired with my drum, into a pipe small as an eunuch, or the virgin voice that babies lulls asleep! the smiles of knaves tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys' tears take up make motion through my lips, and my arm'd knees, who bow'd but in my stirrup, bend like his that hath received an alms! i will not do't, lest i surcease to honour mine own truth a most inherent baseness.
well, sir; what did this gentleman to her?
most humbly do i take my leave, my lord.
at thy choice, then: to beg of thee, it is my more dishonour than thou of them. come all to ruin; let thy dangerous stoutness, for i mock at death with as big heart as thou. do as thou list thy valiantness was mine, thou suck'dst it from me, but owe thy pride thyself.
i beseech you, sir, look in this gentleman's face. good master froth, look upon his honour; 'tis for a good purpose. doth your honour mark his face?
the time invites you. go. your servants tend.
mother, i am going to the market-place; chide me no more. i'll mountebank their loves, cog their hearts from them, and come home beloved of all the trades in rome. look, i am going: or never trust to what my tongue can do i' the way of flattery further.
ay, sir, very well.
farewell, ophelia, and remember well
do your will.
nay; i beseech you, mark it well.
'tis in my memory locked, and you yourself shall keep the key of it.
away! the tribunes do attend you: arm yourself with accusations, as i hear, more strong than are upon you yet.
well, i do so.
farewell.
the word is 'mildly.' pray you, let us go: let them accuse me by invention, i
doth your honour see any harm in his face?
what is 't, ophelia, he hath said to you?
ay, but mildly.
why, no.
so please you, something touching the lord hamlet.
well, mildly be it then. mildly!
i'll be supposed upon a book, his face is the worst worst thing about him, how could master froth do the constable's wife any harm? i would know that of your honour.
'tis told me he hath very oft of late given private time to you, and you yourself have of your audience been most free and bounteous. if it be so as so 'tis put on me, you do not understand yourself so clearly as it behooves my daughter and your honor. what is between you? give me up the truth.
in this point charge him home, that he affects tyrannical power: if he evade us there, enforce him with his envy to the people, and that the spoil got on the antiates
he's in the right. constable, what say you to it?
he hath, my lord, of late made many tenders
what, will he come?
house; next, this is a respected fellow; and his mistress is a respected woman.
affection! pooh, you speak like a green girl, unsifted in such perilous circumstance. do you believe his "tenders," as you call them?
he's coming.
by this hand, sir, his wife is a more respected person than any of us all.
i do not know, my lord, what i should think.
how accompanied?
time has yet to come that she was ever respected with man, woman, or child.
that you have ta'en these tenders for true pay, which are not sterling. tender yourself more dearly, or, not to crack the wind of the poor phrase, running it thus, you'll tender me a fool.
with old menenius, and those senators
sir, she was respected with him before he married with her.
in honorable fashion.
have you a catalogue of all the voices that we have procured set down by the poll?
which is the wiser here? justice or iniquity? is
ay, "fashion" you may call it. go to, go to.
i have; 'tis ready.
o thou caitiff! o thou varlet! o thou wicked hannibal! i respected with her before i was married to her! if ever i was respected with her, or she with me, let not your worship think me the poor i'll have mine action of battery on thee.
and hath given countenance to his speech, my lord, with almost all the holy vows of heaven.
have you collected them by tribes?
if he took you a box o' the ear, you might have your action of slander too.
when the blood burns, how prodigal the soul lends the tongue vows. these blazes, daughter, giving more light than heat, extinct in both even in their promise as it is a-making, be somewhat scanter of your maiden presence. set your entreatments at a higher rate than a command to parley. for lord hamlet, believe so much in him that he is young, than may be given you. in few, ophelia, do not believe his vows, for they are brokers not of that dye which their investments show, but mere implorators of unholy suits, the better to beguile. this is for all: i would not, in plain terms, from this time forth, have you so slander any moment leisure, as to give words or talk with the lord hamlet.
i have.
marry, i thank your good worship for it. what is't
i shall obey, my lord.
assemble presently the people hither; and when they bear me say 'it shall be so i' the right and strength o' the commons,' be it either if i say fine, cry 'fine;' if death, cry 'death.' insisting on the old prerogative and power i' the truth o' the cause.
truly, officer, because he hath some offences in him that thou wouldst discover if thou couldst, let him continue in his courses till thou knowest what they are.
the air bites shrewdly. it is very cold.
i shall inform them.
wicked varlet, now, what's come upon thee: thou art to continue now, thou varlet; thou art to continue.
it is a nipping and an eager air.
let them not cease, but with a din confused enforce the present execution of what we chance to sentence.
where were you born, friend?
what hour now?
very well.
here in vienna, sir.
i think it lacks of twelve.
when we shall hap to give 't them.
are you of fourscore pounds a year?
no, it is struck.
go about it.
yes, an't please you, sir.
indeed? i heard it not. it then draws near the season wherein the spirit held his wont to walk.
put him to choler straight: he hath been used ever to conquer, and to have his worth be rein'd again to temperance; then he speaks what's in his heart; and that is there which looks with us to break his neck.
so. what trade are you of, sir?
what does this mean, my lord?
well, here he comes.
tapster; a poor widow's tapster.
the king doth wake tonight and takes his rouse, and, as he drains his draughts of rhenish down, the kettle-drum and trumpet thus bray out the triumph of his pledge.
calmly, i do beseech you.
your mistress' name?
is it a custom?
ay, as an ostler, that for the poorest piece will bear the knave by the volume. the honour'd gods keep rome in safety, and the chairs of justice supplied with worthy men! plant love among 's! and not our streets with war!
mistress overdone.
but to my mind, though i am native here and to the manner born, it is a custom more honored in the breach than the observance. this heavy-headed revel east and west
amen, amen.
hath she had any more than one husband?
they clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase soil our addition. and indeed it takes from our achievements, though performed at height, the pith and marrow of our attribute. that for some vicious mole of nature in them, as in their birth (wherein they are not guilty, since nature cannot choose his origin), by the o'ergrowth of some complexion, or by some habit that too much o'erleavens the form of plausive manners, that these men, carrying, i say, the stamp of one defect, being nature's livery or fortune's star, as infinite as man may undergo) shall in the general censure take corruption from that particular fault. the dram of evil doth all the noble substance of a doubt
a noble wish.
nine, sir; overdone by the last.
look, my lord, it comes!
draw near, ye people.
nine! come hither to me, master froth. master froth, i would not have you acquainted with will hang them. get you gone, and let me hear no more of you.
angels and ministers of grace defend us! be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned, bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell, thou comest in such a questionable shape that i will speak to thee. i'll call thee "hamlet," "king," "father," "royal dane." o, answer me! let me not burst in ignorance, but tell have burst their cerements; why the sepulcher,
list to your tribunes. audience: peace, i say!
i thank your worship. for mine own part, i never come into any room in a tap-house, but i am drawn
wherein we saw thee quietly interred, hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws to cast thee up again. what may this mean, revisits thus the glimpses of the moon, making night hideous and we fools of nature, so horridly to shake our disposition with thoughts beyond the reaches of our souls?
first, hear me speak.
well, no more of it, master froth: farewell.
it beckons you to go away with it, as if it some impartment did desire to you alone.
well, say. peace, ho!
come you hither to me, master tapster. what's your name, master tapster?
look, with what courteous action it waves you to a more removèd ground.
shall i be charged no further than this present? must all determine here?
pompey.
no, by no means.
if you submit you to the people's voices, allow their officers and are content to suffer lawful censure for such faults as shall be proved upon you?
what else?
it will not speak. then i will follow it.
i am content.
bum, sir.
do not, my lord.
lo, citizens, he says he is content: the warlike service he has done, consider; think upon the wounds his body bears, which show like graves i' the holy churchyard.
troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you; so that in the beastliest sense you are pompey the great. pompey, you are partly a bawd, pompey, not? come, tell me true: it shall be the better for you.
why, what should be the fear? i do not set my life in a pin's fee, and for my soul, what can it do to that, it waves me forth again. i'll follow it.
scars to move laughter only.
truly, sir, i am a poor fellow that would live.
what if it tempt you toward the flood, my lord, or to the dreadful summit of the cliff that beetles o'er his base into the sea,
consider further, that when he speaks not like a citizen, you find him like a soldier: do not take but, as i say, such as become a soldier, rather than envy you.
how would you live, pompey? by being a bawd? what do you think of the trade, pompey? is it a lawful trade?
which might deprive your sovereignty of reason and draw you into madness? think of it. the very place puts toys of desperation, without more motive, into every brain and hears it roar beneath.
well, well, no more.
if the law would allow it, sir.
it waves me still. , go on. i'll follow thee.
what is the matter i am so dishonour'd that the very hour you take it off again?
but the law will not allow it, pompey; nor it shall not be allowed in vienna.
you shall not go, my lord.
answer to us.
does your worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of the city?
hold off your hands.
say, then: 'tis true, i ought so.
no, pompey.
be ruled. you shall not go.
from rome all season'd office and to wind yourself into a power tyrannical; for which you are a traitor to the people.
truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will to't then. if your worship will take order for the drabs and the knaves, you need not to fear the bawds.
my fate cries out and makes each petty artery in this body as hardy as the nemean lion's nerve. still am i called., unhand me, gentlemen. (draws his sword) i say, away!, go on. i'll follow thee.
how! traitor!
there are pretty orders beginning, i can tell you:
he waxes desperate with imagination.
nay, temperately; your promise.
if you head and hang all that offend that way but for ten year together, you'll be glad to give out a commission for more heads: if this law hold in vienna ten year, i'll rent the fairest house in it come to pass, say pompey told you so.
let's follow. 'tis not fit thus to obey him.
the fires i' the lowest hell fold-in the people! call me their traitor! thou injurious tribune! within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths, in thy hand clutch'd as many millions, in 'thou liest' unto thee with a voice as free as i do pray the gods.
thank you, good pompey; and, in requital of your prophecy, hark you: i advise you, let me not find you before me again upon any complaint whatsoever; i shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd caesar to you; in plain dealing, pompey, i shall have you whipt: so, for this time, pompey, fare you well.
have after. to what issue will this come?
mark you this, people?
i thank your worship for your good counsel:
something is rotten in the state of denmark.
to the rock, to the rock with him!
better determine. whip me? no, no; let carman whip his jade: the valiant heart is not whipt out of his trade.
heaven will direct it.
we need not put new matter to his charge: what you have seen him do and heard him speak, beating your officers, cursing yourselves, opposing laws with strokes and here defying so criminal and in such capital kind, deserves the extremest death.
come hither to me, master elbow; come hither, master
nay, let's follow him.
but since he hath served well for rome,, 
seven year and a half, sir.
where wilt thou lead me? speak, i'll go no further.
what do you prate of service?
i thought, by your readiness in the office, you had continued in it some time. you say, seven years together?
mark me.
i talk of that, that know it.
and a half, sir.
i will.
you?
wrong to put you so oft upon 't: are there not men in your ward sufficient to serve it?
my hour is almost come when i to sulfurous and tormenting flames must render up myself.
is this the promise that you made your mother?
faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters: as they are chosen, they are glad to choose me for them; i all.
alas, poor ghost!
know, i pray you,, 
look you bring me in the names of some six or seven, the most sufficient of your parish.
to what i shall unfold.
let them pronounce the steep tarpeian death, vagabond exile, raying, pent to linger but with a grain a day, i would not buy their mercy at the price of one fair word; to have't with saying 'good morrow.'
to your worship's house, sir?
speak. i am bound to hear.
for that he has, as much as in him lies, from time to time envied against the people, seeking means given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence of dreaded justice, but on the ministers that do distribute it; in the name o' the people and in the power of us the tribunes, we, in peril of precipitation from off the rock tarpeian never more to enter our rome gates: i' the people's name, i say it shall be so.
to my house. fare you well.
so art thou to revenge when thou shalt hear.
he's banish'd, and it shall be so.
what's o'clock, think you?
what?
hear me, my masters, and my common friends,, 
eleven, sir.
i am thy father's spirit, and for the day confined to fast in fires, till the foul crimes done in my days of nature are burnt and purged away. but that i am forbid to tell the secrets of my prison house, would harrow up thy soul, freeze thy young blood,
he's sentenced; no more hearing.
i pray you home to dinner with me.
make thy two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres, thy knotted and combinèd locks to part and each particular hair to stand on end, but this eternal blazon must not be to ears of flesh and blood. list, list, o, list! if thou didst ever thy dear father love, 
let me speak: her enemies' marks upon me. i do love my country's good with a respect more tender, more holy and profound, than mine own life, my dear wife's estimate, her womb's increase, speak that,, 
i humbly thank you.
o god!
we know your drift: speak what?
but there's no remedy.
revenge his foul and most unnatural murder.
there's no more to be said, but he is banish'd, as enemy to the people and his country:
lord angelo is severe.
murder?
it shall be so, it shall be so.
it is but needful: mercy is not itself, that oft looks so; but yet,, poor claudio! there is no remedy. come, sir.
murder most foul, as in the best it is. but this most foul, strange and unnatural.
you common cry of curs! whose breath i hate as reek o' the rotten fens, whose loves i prize as the dead carcasses of unburied men and here remain with your uncertainty! let every feeble rumour shake your hearts! your enemies, with nodding of their plumes, fan you into despair! have the power still your ignorance, which finds not till it feels, making not reservation of yourselves, still your own foes, deliver you as most abated captives to some nation for you, the city, thus i turn my back: there is a world elsewhere.
he's hearing of a cause; he will come straight i'll tell him of you.
haste me to know 't, that i, with wings as swift may sweep to my revenge.
the people's enemy is gone, is gone!
pray you, do.
i find thee apt, and duller shouldst thou be than the fat weed that roots itself in ease on lethe wharf, wouldst thou not stir in this. now, hamlet, hear. a serpent stung me. so the whole ear of denmark is by a forgèd process of my death rankly abused. but know, thou noble youth, the serpent that did sting thy father's life
our enemy is banish'd! he is gone! hoo! hoo!
i'll know he hath but as offended in a dream! all sects, all ages smack of this vice; and he to die for't!
o my prophetic soul! my uncle?
as he hath followed you, with all despite; give him deserved vexation. let a guard attend us through the city.
now, what's the matter. provost?
ay, that incestuous, that adulterate beast, with witchcraft of his wit, with traitorous gifts, o wicked wit and gifts, that have the power the will of my most seeming-virtuous queen. o hamlet, what a falling off was there! from me, whose love was of that dignity that it went hand in hand even with the vow upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor to those of mine. but virtue, as it never will be moved, though lewdness court it in a shape of heaven, will sate itself in a celestial bed and prey on garbage. but soft! methinks i scent the morning air. brief let me be. sleeping within my orchard, upon my secure hour thy uncle stole with juice of cursed hebenon in a vial, and in the porches of my ears did pour the leperous distilment, whose effect that swift as quicksilver it courses through the natural gates and alleys of the body and with a sudden vigor doth posset and curd, like eager droppings into milk, and a most instant tetter barked about, most lazar-like, with vile and loathsome crust all my smooth body. thus was i, sleeping, by a brother's hand cut off even in the blossoms of my sin,
come, come; let's see him out at gates; come.
is it your will claudio shall die tomorrow?
unhouseled, disappointed, unaneled. no reckoning made, but sent to my account with all my imperfections on my head. if thou hast nature in thee, bear it not. let not the royal bed of denmark be a couch for luxury and damnèd incest. but howsoever thou pursuest this act, against thy mother aught. leave her to heaven and to those thorns that in her bosom lodge to prick and sting her. fare thee well at once. the glowworm shows the matin to be near, adieu, adieu, adieu. remember me.
come, leave your tears: a brief farewell: the beast where is your ancient courage? you were used to say extremity was the trier of spirits; that common chances common men could bear; show'd mastership in floating; fortune's blows, when most struck home, being gentle wounded, craves a noble cunning: you were used to load me with precepts that would make invincible
did not i tell thee yea? hadst thou not order? why dost thou ask again?
o all you host of heaven! o earth! what else? and shall i couple hell? oh, fie! hold, hold, my heart, and you, my sinews, grow not instant old, ay, thou poor ghost, whiles memory holds a seat in this distracted globe. remember thee! yea, from the table of my memory i'll wipe away all trivial fond records, that youth and observation copied there, and thy commandment all alone shall live within the book and volume of my brain, unmixed with baser matter. yes, by heaven! o villain, villain, smiling, damnèd villain! my tables!, meet it is i set it down that one may smile, and smile, and be a villain. at least i'm sure it may be so in denmark. (writes)
o heavens! o heavens!
lest i might be too rash: under your good correction, i have seen, repented o'er his doom.
it is "adieu, adieu. remember me." i have sworn 't.
nay! prithee, woman,, 
go to; let that be mine: do you your office, or give up your place, and you shall well be spared.
my lord, my lord!
now the red pestilence strike all trades in rome, and occupations perish!
what shall be done, sir, with the groaning juliet? she's very near her hour.
lord hamlet, 
i shall be loved when i am lack'd. nay, mother. resume that spirit, when you were wont to say, if you had been the wife of hercules, six of his labours you'ld have done, and saved droop not; adieu. farewell, my wife, my mother: i'll do well yet. thou old and true menenius, thy tears are salter than a younger man's, and venomous to thine eyes. my sometime general, heart-hardening spectacles; tell these sad women 'tis fond to wail inevitable strokes, as 'tis to laugh at 'em. my mother, you wot well my hazards still have been your solace: and like to a lonely dragon, that his fen makes fear'd and talk'd of more than seen, your son will or exceed the common or be caught with cautelous baits and practise.
dispose of her to some more fitter place, and that with speed.
heaven secure him!
whither wilt thou go? take good cominius with thee awhile: determine on some course, more than a wild exposture to each chance that starts i' the way before thee.
desires access to you.
so be it.
o the gods!
hath he a sister?
illo, ho, ho, my lord!
i'll follow thee a month, devise with thee where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us and we of thee: so if the time thrust forth a cause for thy repeal, we shall not send and lose advantage, which doth ever cool i' the absence of the needer.
ay, my good lord; a very virtuous maid, and to be shortly of a sisterhood,
hillo, ho, ho, boy. come, bird, come.
fare ye well: thou hast years upon thee; and thou art too full that's yet unbruised: bring me but out at gate. come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and my friends of noble touch, when i am forth, bid me farewell, and smile. i pray you, come. hear from me still, and never of me aught but what is like me formerly.
well, let her be admitted.
how is 't, my noble lord?
that's worthily as any ear can hear. come, let's not weep. from these old arms and legs, by the good gods, i'ld with thee every foot.
see you the fornicatress be removed: let have needful, but not lavish, means; there shall be order for't.
what news, my lord?
give me thy hand: come.
god save your honour!
oh, wonderful!
bid them all home; he's gone, and we'll no further. the nobility are vex'd, whom we see have sided in his behalf.
stay a little while.
good my lord, tell it.
now we have shown our power, than when it was a-doing.
you're welcome: what's your will?
no. you'll reveal it.
bid them home: say their great enemy is gone, and they stand in their ancient strength.
i am a woeful suitor to your honour, please but your honour hear me.
not i, my lord, by heaven.
dismiss them home.
well; what's your suit?
nor i, my lord.
here comes his mother.
there is a vice that most i do abhor, and most desire should meet the blow of justice; for which i would not plead, but that i must; for which i must not plead, but that i am
how say you, then? would heart of man once think it?
let's not meet her.
well; the matter?
ay, by heaven, my lord.
why?
i have a brother is condemn'd to die: i do beseech you, let it be his fault, and not my brother.
there's ne'er a villain dwelling in all denmark but he's an arrant knave.
they say she's mad.
[aside] heaven give thee moving graces!
there needs no ghost, my lord, come from the grave to tell us this.
they have ta'en note of us: keep on your way.
condemn the fault and not the actor of it? why, every fault's condemn'd ere it be done: mine were the very cipher of a function, to fine the faults whose fine stands in record,
why, right, you are in the right. i hold it fit that we shake hands and part. you, as your business and desire shall point you, for every man has business and desire, such as it is, and for my own poor part,
o, ye're well met: the hoarded plague o' the gods requite your love!
o just but severe law! i had a brother, then. heaven keep your honour!
these are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
peace, peace; be not so loud.
[aside to isabella] give't not o'er so: to him again, entreat him; you are too cold; if you should need a pin, you could not with more tame a tongue desire it: to him, i say!
i'm sorry they offend you, heartily. yes faith, heartily.
if that i could for weeping, you should hear,, 
must he needs die?
there's no offense, my lord.
will you be gone?
maiden, no remedy.
yes, by saint patrick, but there is, horatio, it is an honest ghost, that let me tell you. for your desire to know what is between us, o'ermaster 't as you may. and now, good friends, as you are friends, scholars and soldiers,
[to sicinius] you shall stay too: i would i had the power to say so to my husband.
yes; i do think that you might pardon him, and neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.
what is 't, my lord? we will.
are you mankind?
i will not do't.
never make known what you have seen tonight.
was not a man my father? hadst thou foxship to banish him that struck more blows for rome than thou hast spoken words?
but can you, if you would?
my lord, we will not.
o blessed heavens!
look, what i will not, that i cannot do.
nay, but swear 't.
and for rome's good. i'll tell thee what; yet go: nay, but thou shalt stay too: i would my son were in arabia, and thy tribe before him, his good sword in his hand.
but might you do't, and do the world no wrong, if so your heart were touch'd with that remorse as mine is to him?
in faith, my lord, not i.
what then?
he's sentenced; 'tis too late.
nor i, my lord, in faith.
what then! he'ld make an end of thy posterity.
[aside to isabella] you are too cold.
upon my sword.
bastards and all. good man, the wounds that he does bear for rome!
too late? why, no; i, that do speak a word. may call it back again. well, believe this, no ceremony that to great ones 'longs, not the king's crown, nor the deputed sword, become them with one half so good a grace as mercy does. if he had been as you and you as he, you would have slipt like him; but he, like you,
we have sworn, my lord, already.
come, come, peace.
pray you, be gone.
indeed, upon my sword, indeed.
i would he had continued to his country as he began, and not unknit himself the noble knot he made.
i would to heaven i had your potency, and you were isabel! should it then be thus? no; i would tell what 'twere to be a judge,
(cries under the stage) swear!
i would he had.
[aside to isabella] ay, touch him; there's the vein.
ha, ha, boy! sayst thou so? art thou there, truepenny? come on, you hear this fellow in the cellarage. consent to swear.
cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth as i can of those mysteries which heaven will not have earth to know.
your brother is a forfeit of the law, and you but waste your words.
propose the oath, my lord.
pray, let us go.
alas, alas! and he that might the vantage best have took found out the remedy. how would you be, if he, which is the top of judgment, should but judge you as you are? o, think on that; like man new made.
never to speak of this that you have seen. swear by my sword.
you have done a brave deed. ere you go, hear this:, as far as doth the capitol exceed the meanest house in rome, so far my son, this lady's husband here, this, do you see, 
be you content, fair maid; it is the law, not i condemn your brother: were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
(beneath) swear.
well, well, we'll leave you.
to-morrow! o, that's sudden! spare him, spare him! he's not prepared for death. even for our kitchens we kill the fowl of season: shall we serve heaven with less respect than we do minister who is it that hath died for this offence? there's many have committed it.
hic et ubique? then we'll shift our ground. come hither, gentlemen, swear by my sword never to speak of this that you have heard.
why stay we to be baited with one that wants her wits?
[aside to isabella] ay, well said.
(beneath) swear by his sword.
take my prayers with you.
the law hath not been dead, though it hath slept: if the first that did the edict infringe had answer'd for his deed: now 'tis awake takes note of what is done; and, like a prophet, looks in a glass, that shows what future evils, and so in progress to be hatch'd and born, are now to have no successive degrees, but, ere they live, to end.
well said, old mole! canst work i' th' earth so fast?
but to confirm my curses! could i meet 'em but once a-day, it would unclog my heart of what lies heavy to't.
yet show some pity.
o day and night, but this is wondrous strange!
you have told them home;
for then i pity those i do not know, which a dismiss'd offence would after gall; and do him right that, answering one foul wrong, lives not to act another. be satisfied;
and therefore as a stranger give it welcome. there are more things in heaven and earth, horatio, than are dreamt of in your philosophy. but come, how strange or odd soe'er i bear myself (as i perchance hereafter shall think meet to put an antic disposition on), that you, at such times seeing me, never shall, or by pronouncing of some doubtful phrase, as "well, well, we know," or "we could an if we would," or "if we list to speak," or "there be an if they might," or such ambiguous giving out, to note so grace and mercy at your most need help you, swear.
anger's my meat; i sup upon myself, and so shall starve with feeding. come, let's go: leave this faint puling and lament as i do, in anger, juno-like. come, come, come.
so you must be the first that gives this sentence, and he, that suffer's. o, it is excellent to have a giant's strength; but it is tyrannous to use it like a giant.
(beneath) swear!
fie, fie, fie!
[aside to isabella] that's well said.
rest, rest, perturbèd spirit!, so, gentlemen, and what so poor a man as hamlet is may do, to express his love and friending to you, god willing, shall not lack. let us go in together, and still your fingers on your lips, i pray. that ever i was born to set it right! nay, come, let's go together.
i know you well, sir, and you know me: your name, i think, is adrian.
could great men thunder as jove himself does, jove would ne'er be quiet, for every pelting, petty officer would use his heaven for thunder; thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt split'st the unwedgeable and gnarled oak than the soft myrtle: but man, proud man, drest in a little brief authority, his glassy essence, like an angry ape, plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven as make the angels weep; who, with our spleens, would all themselves laugh mortal.
give him this money and these notes, reynaldo.
it is so, sir: truly, i have forgot you.
will relent; he's coming; i perceive 't.
i will, my lord.
i am a roman; and my services are,
[aside] pray heaven she win him!
you shall do marvelous wisely, good reynaldo, before you visit him, to make inquire
nicanor? no.
we cannot weigh our brother with ourself: but in the less foul profanation.
my lord, i did intend it.
the same, sir.
thou'rt i' the right, girl; more o, that.
marry, well said, very well said. look you, sir, inquire me first what danskers are in paris, and how, and who, what means, and where they keep what company at what expense; and finding that they do know my son, come you more nearer than your particular demands will touch it. take you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him, as thus: "i know his father and his friends,
you had more beard when i last saw you; but your favour is well approved by your tongue. what's the to find you out there: you have well saved me a day's journey.
that in the captain's but a choleric word, which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.
ay, very well, my lord.
there hath been in rome strange insurrections; the people against the senators, patricians, and nobles.
[aside to isabella] art avised o' that? more on 't.
"and in part him, but," you may say, "not well. but, if 't be he i mean, he's very wild. addicted so and so., " and there put on him as may dishonor him. take heed of that. but, sir, such wanton, wild, and usual slips
so: they are in a most warlike preparation, and hope to come upon them in the heat of their division.
why do you put these sayings upon me?
as are companions noted and most known to youth and liberty.
the main blaze of it is past, but a small thing would make it flame again: for the nobles receive coriolanus, that they are in a ripe aptness to take all power from the people and to pluck from them their tribunes for ever. this lies glowing, i can tell you, and is almost mature for the violent
because authority, though it err like others, hath yet a kind of medicine in itself, that skins the vice o' the top. go to your bosom; that's like my brother's fault: if it confess a natural guiltiness such as is his, let it not sound a thought upon your tongue against my brother's life.
as gaming, my lord?
coriolanus banished!
such sense, that my sense breeds with it. fare you well.
quarreling, drabbing, you may go so far.
banished, sir.
gentle my lord, turn back.
my lord, that would dishonor him!
you will be welcome with this intelligence, nicanor.
i will bethink me: come again tomorrow.
'faith, no, as you may season it in the charge. you must not put another scandal on him that's not my meaning. but breathe his faults so quaintly that they may seem the taints of liberty, the flash and outbreak of a fiery mind, a savageness in unreclaimèd blood,
the day serves well for them now. i have heard it when she's fallen out with her husband. your noble tullus aufidius will appear well in these wars, his great opposer, coriolanus, being now in no request of his country.
hark how i'll bribe you: good my lord, turn back.
but, my good lord, 
accidentally to encounter you: you have ended my business, and i will merrily accompany you home.
how! bribe me?
wherefore should you do this?
i shall, between this and supper, tell you most strange things from rome; all tending to the good of
ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.
ay, my lord. i would know that.
a most royal one; the centurions and their charges, distinctly billeted, already in the entertainment, and to be on foot at an hour's warning.
[aside to isabella] you had marr'd all else.
marry, sir, here's my drift: (and i believe it is a fetch of wit) as 'twere a thing a little soiled i' th' working, mark you, your party in converse, him you would sound, having ever seen in the prenominate crimes the youth you breathe of guilty, be assured "good sir" or so, or "friend," or "gentleman," according to the phrase or the addition of man and country.
i am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am the so, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of your company.
not with fond shekels of the tested gold, or stones whose rates are either rich or poor that shall be up at heaven and enter there ere sun-rise, prayers from preserved souls, from fasting maids whose minds are dedicate to nothing temporal.
very good, my lord.
you take my part from me, sir; i have the most cause to be glad of yours.
well; come to me to-morrow.
and then, sir, does he this, he does, what was i about to say? by the mass, i was about to say something. where did i leave?
well, let us go together.
[aside to isabella] go to; 'tis well; away!
at "closes in the consequence," at "'friend,' or so" and "'gentleman.'"
a goodly city is this antium. city, 'tis i that made thy widows: many an heir of these fair edifices 'fore my wars have i heard groan and drop: then know me not, in puny battle slay me.
heaven keep your honour safe!
at "closes in the consequence." ay, marry. i saw him yesterday", or "t' other day," or then, or then, with such or such, "and, as you say, there was he gaming, there o'ertook in's rouse, there falling out at tennis," or, perchance, videlicet a brothel, or so forth. see you now, your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth. and thus do we of wisdom and of reach, with windlasses and with assays of bias, so by my former lecture and advice shall you my son. you have me, have you not?
save you, sir.
[aside] amen: for i am that way going to temptation,
my lord, i have.
and you.
at what hour to-morrow shall i attend your lordship?
god be wi' you. fare you well.
direct me, if it be your will,
at any time 'fore noon.
good my lord.
he is, and feasts the nobles of the state at his house this night.
'save your honour!
observe his inclination in yourself.
which is his house, beseech you?
what's this, what's this? is this her fault or mine? the tempter or the tempted, who sins most? ha! not she: nor doth she tempt: but it is i do as the carrion does, not as the flower, corrupt with virtuous season. can it be that modesty may more betray our sense than woman's lightness? having waste ground enough, and pitch our evils there? o, fie, fie, fie! what dost thou, or what art thou, angelo? dost thou desire her foully for those things that make her good? o, let her brother live! when judges steal themselves. what, do i love her, that i desire to hear her speak again, and feast upon her eyes? what is't i dream on? o cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint, is that temptation that doth goad us on to sin in loving virtue: never could the strumpet, with all her double vigour, art and nature, once stir my temper; but this virtuous maid when men were fond, i smiled and wonder'd how.
i shall, my lord.
this, here before you.
hail to you, provost! so i think you are.
and let him ply his music.
thank you, sir: farewell.
i am the provost. what's your will, good friar?
well, my lord.
o world, thy slippery turns! friends now fast sworn, whose double bosoms seem to wear one heart, whose house, whose bed, whose meal, and exercise, are still together, who twin, as 'twere, in love on a dissension of a doit, break out to bitterest enmity: so, fellest foes, whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep, to take the one the other, by some chance, and interjoin their issues. so with me: my birth-place hate i, and my love's upon this enemy town. i'll enter: if he slay me, he does fair justice; if he give me way,
bound by my charity and my blest order, i come to visit the afflicted spirits to let me see them and to make me know the nature of their crimes, that i may minister to them accordingly.
farewell.
wine, wine, wine! what service is here! i think our fellows are asleep.
i would do more than that, if more were needful.
how now, ophelia? what's the matter?
where's cotus? my master calls for him. cotus!
who, falling in the flaws of her own youth, hath blister'd her report: she is with child; and he that got it, sentenced; a young man more fit to do another such offence
o my lord, my lord, i have been so affrighted!
appear not like a guest.
when must he die?
with what, i' th' name of god?
what would you have, friend? whence are you? here's no place for you: pray, go to the door.
as i do think, to-morrow.
my lord, as i was sewing in my closet, lord hamlet, with his doublet all unbraced; no hat upon his head; his stockings fouled, pale as his shirt; his knees knocking each other; and with a look so piteous in purport as if he had been loosèd out of hell to speak of horrors, he comes before me.
i have deserved no better entertainment,
i have provided for you: stay awhile, and you shall be conducted.
mad for thy love?
whence are you, sir? has the porter his eyes in his head; that he gives entrance to such companions? pray, get you out.
repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?
my lord, i do not know. but truly, i do fear it.
away!
i do; and bear the shame most patiently.
what said he?
away! get you away.
i'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience, and try your penitence, if it be sound, or hollowly put on.
he took me by the wrist and held me hard. then goes he to the length of all his arm, and, with his other hand thus o'er his brow, as he would draw it. long stayed he so.
now thou'rt troublesome.
i'll gladly learn.
at last, a little shaking of mine arm and thrice his head thus waving up and down, he raised a sigh so piteous and profound and end his being. that done, he lets me go, and, with his head over his shoulder turned, he seemed to find his way without his eyes, for out o' doors he went without their helps,
are you so brave? i'll have you talked with anon.
love you the man that wrong'd you?
come, go with me. i will go seek the king. this is the very ecstasy of love, whose violent property fordoes itself and leads the will to desperate undertakings that does afflict our natures. i am sorry. what, have you given him any hard words of late?
what fellow's this?
yes, as i love the woman that wrong'd him.
no, my good lord. but as you did command i did repel his fetters and denied
a strange one as ever i looked on: i cannot get him
so then it seems your most offenceful act was mutually committed?
that hath made him mad. i am sorry that with better heed and judgment i had not quoted him. i feared he did but trifle and meant to wreck thee. but beshrew my jealousy! by heaven, it is as proper to our age as it is common for the younger sort to lack discretion. come, go we to the king. this must be known, which, being kept close, might move more grief to hide than hate to utter love.
what have you to do here, fellow? pray you, avoid the house.
mutually.
welcome, dear rosencrantz and guildenstern. moreover that we much did long to see you, the need we have to use you did provoke our hasty sending. something have you heard since nor th' exterior nor the inward man resembles that it was. what it should be, more than his father's death, that thus hath put him so much from th' understanding of himself, that, being of so young days brought up with him and since so neighbored to his youth and 'havior, that you vouchsafe your rest here in our court some little time so by your companies so much as from occasion you may glean, whether aught, to us unknown, afflicts him thus that, opened, lies within our remedy.
let me but stand; i will not hurt your hearth.
then was your sin of heavier kind than his.
good gentlemen, he hath much talked of you. to whom he more adheres. if it will please you to show us so much gentry and good will as to expend your time with us awhile for the supply and profit of our hope, as fits a king's remembrance.
what are you?
i do confess it, and repent it, father.
both your majesties might, by the sovereign power you have of us, put your dread pleasures more into command than to entreaty.
a gentleman.
'tis meet so, daughter: but lest you do repent, as that the sin hath brought you to this shame, showing we would not spare heaven as we love it, but as we stand in fear,, 
but we both obey to lay our service freely at your feet to be commanded.
a marvellous poor one.
i do repent me, as it is an evil, and take the shame with joy.
thanks, rosencrantz and gentle guildenstern.
true, so i am.
your partner, as i hear, must die to-morrow, and i am going with instruction to him. grace go with you, benedicite!
thanks, guildenstern and gentle rosencrantz. my too much changèd son. go, some of you, and bring these gentlemen where hamlet is.
pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other station; here's no place for you; pray you, avoid: come.
must die to-morrow! o injurious love, is still a dying horror!
heavens make our presence and our practices pleasant and helpful to him!
follow your function, go, and batten on cold bits.
'tis pity of him.
ay, amen!
what, you will not? prithee, tell my master what a strange guest he has here.
when i would pray and think, i think and pray to several subjects. heaven hath my empty words; whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue, anchors on isabel: heaven in my mouth, and in my heart the strong and swelling evil of my conception. the state, whereon i studied is like a good thing, being often read, grown fear'd and tedious; yea, my gravity, could i with boot change for an idle plume, which the air beats for vain. o place, o form, how often dost thou with thy case, thy habit, wrench awe from fools and tie the wiser souls let's write good angel on the devil's horn: 'tis not the devil's crest.
are joyfully returned.
and i shall.
how now! who's there?
thou still hast been the father of good news.
where dwellest thou?
one isabel, a sister, desires access to you.
have i, my lord? i assure my good liege, i hold my duty as i hold my soul,
under the canopy.
teach her the way.
and i do think, or else this brain of mine hunts not the trail of policy so sure as it hath used to do, that i have found the very cause of hamlet's lunacy.
under the canopy!
o heavens! why does my blood thus muster to my heart, making both it unable for itself, and dispossessing all my other parts so play the foolish throngs with one that swoons; come all to help him, and so stop the air by which he should revive: and even so the general, subject to a well-wish'd king, crowd to his presence, where their untaught love must needs appear offence.
oh, speak of that. that do i long to hear.
ay.
how now, fair maid?
give first admittance to th' ambassadors. my news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
where's that?
i am come to know your pleasure.
thyself do grace to them, and bring them in.
i' the city of kites and crows.
than to demand what 'tis. your brother cannot live.
he tells me, my dear gertrude, he hath found
then thou dwellest with daws too?
even so. heaven keep your honour!
i doubt it is no other but the main: his father's death and our o'erhasty marriage.
no, i serve not thy master.
yet may he live awhile; and, it may be, as long as you or i:
well, we shall sift him., welcome, my good friends! say, voltemand, what from our brother norway?
how, sir! do you meddle with my master?
under your sentence?
upon our first, he sent out to suppress his nephew's levies, which to him appeared to be a preparation 'gainst the polack, but, better looked into, he truly found that so his sickness, age, and impotence was falsely borne in hand, sends out arrests on fortinbras, which he, in brief, obeys, receives rebuke from norway, and in fine to give th' assay of arms against your majesty. whereon old norway, overcome with joy,
ay; 'tis an honester service than to meddle with thy trencher, hence!
yea.
gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee so levied as before, against the polack, with an entreaty, herein further shown, that it might please you to give quiet pass through your dominions for this enterprise, as therein are set down. (gives claudius a document
where is this fellow?
when, i beseech you? that in his reprieve, longer or shorter, he may be so fitted
it likes us well, and at our more considered time we'll read, answer, and think upon this business. meantime we thank you for your well-took labor. most welcome home!
here, sir: i'ld have beaten him like a dog, but for disturbing the lords within.
ha! fie, these filthy vices! it were as good to pardon him that hath from nature stolen a man already made, as to remit their saucy sweetness that do coin heaven's image falsely to take away a life true made as to put metal in restrained means to make a false one.
this business is well ended. my liege and madam, to expostulate what majesty should be, what duty is, were nothing but to waste night, day, and time. therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit and tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes, i will be brief: your noble son is mad. what is 't but to be nothing else but mad? but let that go.
why speak'st not? speak, man: what's thy name?
'tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.
more matter, with less art.
if, tullus,
which had you rather, that the most just law now took your brother's life; or, to redeem him, give up your body to such sweet uncleanness as she that he hath stain'd?
madam, i swear i use no art at all. and pity 'tis 'tis true, a foolish figure, but farewell it, for i will use no art. mad let us grant him then. and now remains
o martius, martius! a root of ancient envy. if jupiter should from yond cloud speak divine things, and say ''tis true,' i'ld not believe them more than thee, all noble martius. let me twine my grained ash an hundred times hath broke and scarr'd the moon with splinters: here i clip the anvil of my sword, and do contest as hotly and as nobly with thy love contend against thy valour. know thou first, i loved the maid i married; never man sigh'd truer breath; but that i see thee here, thou noble thing! more dances my rapt heart bestride my threshold. why, thou mars! i tell thee, we have a power on foot; and i had purpose once more to hew thy target from thy brawn, or lose mine arm fort: thou hast beat me out dreamt of encounters 'twixt thyself and me; we have been down together in my sleep, unbuckling helms, fisting each other's throat, and waked half dead with nothing. worthy martius, thou art thence banish'd, we would muster all from twelve to seventy, and pouring war into the bowels of ungrateful rome, like a bold flood o'er-bear. o, come, go in, who now are here, taking their leaves of me, who am prepared against your territories, though not for rome itself.
i had rather give my body than my soul.
that we find out the cause of this effect, for this effect defective comes by cause. thus it remains, and the remainder thus. perpend. i have a daughter, have while she is mine, who in her duty and obedience, mark, (reads a letter) "to the celestial and my soul's idol, the most beautified ophelia", that's an ill phrase, a vile phrase. "beautified" is a vile phrase. but you shall hear. thus: (reads the letter)"in her excellent white bosom, these," etc., 
you bless me, gods!
i talk not of your soul: our compell'd sins stand more for number than for accompt.
came this from hamlet to her?
the leading of thine own revenges, take the one half of my commission; and set down, as best thou art experienced, since thou know'st thy country's strength and weakness,, thine own ways; or rudely visit them in parts remote, to fright them, ere destroy. but come in: let me commend thee first to those that shall say yea to thy desires. a thousand welcomes! yet, martius, that was much. your hand: most welcome!
how say you?
good madam, stay a while. i will be faithful. (reads the letter) "doubt thou the stars are fire, doubt that the sun doth move, doubt truth to be a liar, but never doubt i love. o dear ophelia, i am ill at these numbers. i have not art to reckon my groans, but that i love thee best, oh, most best, believe it. adieu. thine evermore, most dear lady, whilst this machine is to him, hamlet." and more above, hath his solicitings, as they fell out by time, by means, and place, all given to mine ear.
here's a strange alteration!
against the thing i say. answer to this: i, now the voice of the recorded law, pronounce a sentence on your brother's life: might there not be a charity in sin
but how hath she received his love?
by my hand, i had thought to have strucken him with a cudgel; and yet my mind gave me his clothes made a
please you to do't, i'll take it as a peril to my soul, it is no sin at all, but charity.
what do you think of me?
what an arm he has! he turned me about with his finger and his thumb, as one would set up a top.
pleased you to do't at peril of your soul,
as of a man faithful and honorable.
nay, i knew by his face that there was something in him: he had, sir, a kind of face, methought,, i
that i do beg his life, if it be sin, heaven let me bear it! you granting of my suit, if that be sin, i'll make it my morn prayer to have it added to the faults of mine,
i would fain prove so. but what might you think, when i had seen this hot love on the wing, as i perceived it, i must tell you that, or my dear majesty your queen here, think, if i had played the desk or table-book, or given my heart a winking, mute and dumb, or looked upon this love with idle sight? and my young mistress thus i did bespeak: "lord hamlet is a prince out of thy star. this must not be." and then i prescripts gave her, that she should lock herself from his resort, which done, she took the fruits of my advice; and he, repelled, a short tale to make, fell into a sadness, then into a fast, thence to a watch, thence into a weakness, into the madness wherein now he raves and all we mourn for.
he had so; looking as it were, would i were hanged, but i thought there was more in him than i could think.
nay, but hear me. your sense pursues not mine: either you are ignorant, or seem so craftily; and that's not good.
(to gertrude ) do you think 'tis this?
so did i, i'll be sworn: he is simply the rarest man i' the world.
let me be ignorant, and in nothing good,
it may be, very like.
i think he is: but a greater soldier than he you wot on.
thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright when it doth tax itself; as these black masks proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder than beauty could, display'd. but mark me; your brother is to die.
hath there been such a time, i would fain know that, when it proved otherwise?
who, my master?
so.
not that i know.
nay, it's no matter for that.
and his offence is so, as it appears, accountant to the law upon that pain.
(points to his head and shoulders) take this from this if this be otherwise. if circumstances lead me, i will find within the center.
worth six on him.
true.
how may we try it further?
nay, not so neither: but i take him to be the
admit no other way to save his life,, as i subscribe not that, nor any other, but in the loss of question,, that you, his sister, finding yourself desired of such a person, could fetch your brother from the manacles of the all-building law; and that there were no earthly mean to save him, but that either you must lay down the treasures of your body what would you do?
you know sometimes he walks four hours together here in the lobby.
faith, look you, one cannot tell how to say that: for the defence of a town, our general is excellent.
as much for my poor brother as myself: that is, were i under the terms of death, the impression of keen whips i'ld wear as rubies, that longing have been sick for, ere i'ld yield my body up to shame.
so he does indeed.
ay, and for an assault too.
then must your brother die.
at such a time i'll loose my daughter to him. mark the encounter. if he love her not and be not from his reason fall'n thereon, let me be no assistant for a state but keep a farm and carters.
o slaves, i can tell you news,, news, you rascals!
and 'twere the cheaper way: than that a sister, by redeeming him, should die for ever.
we will try it.
what, what, what? let's partake.
were not you then as cruel as the sentence that you have slander'd so?
but look where sadly the poor wretch comes reading.
i would not be a roman, of all nations; i had as lieve be a condemned man.
are of two houses: lawful mercy is nothing kin to foul redemption.
away, i do beseech you, both away. i'll board him presently. o, give me leave.
wherefore? wherefore?
you seem'd of late to make the law a tyrant; and rather proved the sliding of your brother
how does my good lord hamlet?
why, here's he that was wont to thwack our general,
o, pardon me, my lord; it oft falls out, to have what we would have, we speak not what we mean: i something do excuse the thing i hate, for his advantage that i dearly love.
well, god-'a'-mercy.
why do you say 'thwack our general'?
we are all frail.
do you know me, my lord?
i do not say 'thwack our general;' but he was always good enough for him.
else let my brother die, if not a feodary, but only he owe and succeed thy weakness.
excellent well. you are a fishmonger.
come, we are fellows and friends: he was ever too
nay, women are frail too.
not i, my lord.
he was too hard for him directly, to say the troth on't: before corioli he scotched him and notched him like a carbon ado.
which are as easy broke as they make forms. women! help heaven! men their creation mar in profiting by them. nay, call us ten times frail; for we are soft as our complexions are,
then i would you were so honest a man.
an he had been cannibally given, he might have
i think it well: and from this testimony of your own sex,, since i suppose we are made to be no stronger than faults may shake our frames,, let me be bold; that is, a woman; if you be more, you're none; if you be one, as you are well express'd by all external warrants, show it now, by putting on the destined livery.
honest, my lord?
but, more of thy news?
let me entreat you speak the former language.
ay, sir. to be honest, as this world goes, is to be one man picked out of ten thousand.
why, he is so made on here within, as if he were son and heir to mars; set at upper end o' the table; no question asked him by any of the senators, but they mistress of him: sanctifies himself with's hand and turns up the white o' the eye to his discourse. but the bottom of the news is that our general is cut i' the middle and but one half of what he was and grant of the whole table. he'll go, he says, and sowl the porter of rome gates by the ears: he will mow all down before him, and leave his passage polled.
plainly conceive, i love you.
that's very true, my lord.
and he's as like to do't as any man i can imagine.
my brother did love juliet, and you tell me that he shall die for it.
for if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog, being a good kissing carrion, have you a daughter?
many friends as enemies; which friends, sir, as it were, durst not, look you, sir, show themselves, as we term it, his friends whilst he's in directitude.
he shall not, isabel, if you give me love.
i have, my lord.
directitude! what's that?
i know your virtue hath a licence in't, which seems a little fouler than it is, to pluck on others.
let her not walk i' th' sun. conception is a blessing, but, as your daughter may conceive, friend, look to 't.
and the man in blood, they will out of their burrows, like conies after rain, and revel all with him.
believe me, on mine honour,
(aside) how say you by that? still harping on my daughter. yet he knew me not at first. he said i was a fishmonger. he is far gone, far gone. and truly in my youth i suffered much extremity for love, very near this. i'll speak to him again., (to hamlet) what do you read, my lord?
but when goes this forward?
ha! little honour to be much believed, and most pernicious purpose! seeming, seeming! i will proclaim thee, angelo; look for't: sign me a present pardon for my brother, what man thou art.
words, words, words.
drum struck up this afternoon: 'tis, as it were, a parcel of their feast, and to be executed ere they wipe their lips.
who will believe thee, isabel? my unsoil'd name, the austereness of my life, my vouch against you, and my place i' the state, that you shall stifle in your own report and smell of calumny. i have begun, and now i give my sensual race the rein: fit thy consent to my sharp appetite; that banish what they sue for; redeem thy brother by yielding up thy body to my will; or else he must not only die the death, but thy unkindness shall his death draw out or, by the affection that now guides me most, i'll prove a tyrant to him. as for you, say what you can, my false o'erweighs your true.
what is the matter, my lord?
why, then we shall have a stirring world again. tailors, and breed ballad-makers.
to whom should i complain? did i tell this, that bear in them one and the self-same tongue, either of condemnation or approof; bidding the law make court'sy to their will: hooking both right and wrong to the appetite, though he hath fallen by prompture of the blood, yet hath he in him such a mind of honour. that, had he twenty heads to tender down on twenty bloody blocks, he'ld yield them up, to such abhorr'd pollution. then, isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die: more than our brother is our chastity. i'll tell him yet of angelo's request,
between who?
let me have war, say i; it exceeds peace as far as day does night; it's spritely, waking, audible, and full of vent. peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy; bastard children than war's a destroyer of men.
so then you hope of pardon from lord angelo?
i mean, the matter that you read, my lord.
'tis so: and as war, in some sort, may be said to be a ravisher, so it cannot be denied but peace is a great maker of cuckolds.
the miserable have no other medicine but only hope: i've hope to live, and am prepared to die.
slanders, sir. for the satirical rogue says here that old men have gray beards, that their faces are wrinkled, their eyes purging thick amber and plum-tree gum, and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak hams, all which, sir, though i most powerfully and potently believe, yet i hold it not honesty to have it thus set down; for yourself, sir, should be old as i am, if like a crab you could go backward.
ay, and it makes men hate one another.
shall thereby be the sweeter. reason thus with life: if i do lose thee, i do lose a thing that none but fools would keep: a breath thou art, servile to all the skyey influences, hourly afflict: merely, thou art death's fool; for him thou labour'st by thy flight to shun and yet runn'st toward him still. thou art not noble; for all the accommodations that thou bear'st for thou dost fear the soft and tender fork of a poor worm. thy best of rest is sleep, and that thou oft provokest; yet grossly fear'st thy death, which is no more. thou art not thyself; that issue out of dust. happy thou art not; for what thou hast not, still thou strivest to get, and what thou hast, forget'st. thou art not certain; for thy complexion shifts to strange effects, for, like an ass whose back with ingots bows, thou bear's thy heavy riches but a journey, and death unloads thee. friend hast thou none; for thine own bowels, which do call thee sire, do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum, for ending thee no sooner. thou hast nor youth nor age, but, as it were, an after-dinner's sleep, dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich, thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty, to make thy riches pleasant. what's yet in this that bears the name of life? yet in this life that makes these odds all even.
(aside) though this be madness, yet there is method in 't., (to hamlet) will you walk out of the air, my lord?
reason; because they then less need one another. the wars for my money. i hope to see romans as cheap as volscians. they are rising, they are rising. all
i humbly thank you. to sue to live, i find i seek to die; and, seeking death, find life: let it come on.
into my grave.
we hear not of him, neither need we fear him; his remedies are tame i' the present peace and quietness of the people, which before were in wild hurry. here do we make his friends though they themselves did suffer by't, behold dissentious numbers pestering streets than see our tradesmen with in their shops and going about their functions friendly.
[within] what, ho! peace here; grace and good company!
indeed, that is out of the air. (aside) how pregnant sometimes his replies are. a happiness that often madness hits on, which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. i will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of meeting between him and my daughter., (to hamlet) my honorable lord, i will most humbly take my leave of you.
we stood to't in good time.
who's there? come in: the wish deserves a welcome.
you cannot, sir, take from me any thing that i will more willingly part withal, except my life, except my life, except my life.
is this menenius?
dear sir, ere long i'll visit you again.
fare you well, my lord.
'tis he, 'tis he: o, he is grown most kind of late.
most holy sir, i thank you.
(aside) these tedious old fools!
hail sir!
my business is a word or two with claudio.
you go to seek the lord hamlet. there he is.
hail to you both!
and very welcome. look, signior, here's your sister.
god save you, sir!
is not much miss'd, but with his friends: the commonwealth doth stand, and so would do, were he more angry at it.
provost, a word with you.
my honored lord!
all's well; and might have been much better, if
as many as you please.
my most dear lord!
where is he, hear you?
bring me to hear them speak, where i may be concealed.
my excellent good friends! how dost thou, guildenstern?
nay, i hear nothing: his mother and his wife hear nothing from him.
now, sister, what's the comfort?
as the indifferent children of the earth.
the gods preserve you both!
as all comforts are; most good, most good indeed. lord angelo, having affairs to heaven, intends you for his swift ambassador, where you shall be an everlasting leiger: to-morrow you set on.
happy, in that we are not overhappy. on fortune's cap we are not the very button.
god-den, our neighbours.
is there no remedy?
nor the soles of her shoes?
god-den to you all, god-den to you all.
none, but such remedy as, to save a head, to cleave a heart in twain.
neither, my lord.
ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees, are bound to pray for you both.
but is there any?
then you live about her waist, or in the middle of her favors?
live, and thrive!
yes, brother, you may live: there is a devilish mercy in the judge, if you'll implore it, that will free your life, but fetter you till death.
faith, her privates we.
had loved you as we did.
perpetual durance?
in the secret parts of fortune? oh, most true. she is a strumpet. what news?
now the gods keep you!
ay, just; perpetual durance, a restraint, though all the world's vastidity you had, to a determined scope.
none, my lord, but that the world's grown honest.
farewell, farewell.
but in what nature?
then is doomsday near. but your news is not true. let me question more in particular. what have you, my good friends, deserved at the hands of fortune that she sends you to prison hither?
this is a happier and more comely time crying confusion.
would bark your honour from that trunk you bear, and leave you naked.
prison, my lord?
caius martius was a worthy officer i' the war; but insolent, o'ercome with pride, ambitious past all thinking,
let me know the point.
denmark's a prison.
and affecting one sole throne, without assistance.
o, i do fear thee, claudio; and i quake, and six or seven winters more respect than a perpetual honour. darest thou die? the sense of death is most in apprehension; and the poor beetle, that we tread upon, as when a giant dies.
then is the world one.
i think not so.
why give you me this shame? think you i can a resolution fetch from flowery tenderness? if i must die, and hug it in mine arms.
a goodly one, in which there are many confines, wards, and dungeons, denmark being one o' th' worst.
we should by this, to all our lamentation,
there spake my brother; there my father's grave did utter forth a voice. yes, thou must die: thou art too noble to conserve a life whose settled visage and deliberate word nips youth i' the head and follies doth emmew as falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil his filth within being cast, he would appear
we think not so, my lord.
the gods have well prevented it, and rome sits safe and still without him.
the prenzie angelo!
why, then, 'tis none to you, for there is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so. to me it is a prison.
worthy tribunes, there is a slave, whom we have put in prison, are enter'd in the roman territories, and with the deepest malice of the war destroy what lies before 'em.
o, 'tis the cunning livery of hell, the damned'st body to invest and cover in prenzie guards! dost thou think, claudio? thou mightst be freed.
why then, your ambition makes it one. 'tis too narrow for your mind.
'tis aufidius, thrusts forth his horns again into the world; which were inshell'd when martius stood for rome, and durst not once peep out.
o heavens! it cannot be.
o god, i could be bounded in a nutshell and count myself a king of infinite space, were it not that i have bad dreams.
come, what talk you
yes, he would give't thee, from this rank offence, so to offend him still. this night's the time or else thou diest to-morrow.
which dreams indeed are ambition, for the very substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream.
go see this rumourer whipp'd. it cannot be the volsces dare break with us.
thou shalt not do't.
a dream itself is but a shadow.
cannot be! we have record that very well it can, within my age. but reason with the fellow, before you punish him, where he heard this, lest you shall chance to whip your information and beat the messenger who bids beware
o, were it but my life, i'ld throw it down for your deliverance
truly, and i hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.
tell not me: i know this cannot be.
thanks, dear isabel.
then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and outstretched heroes the beggars' shadows. shall we to th' court? for by my fay, i cannot reason.
not possible.
be ready, claudio, for your death tomorrow.
we'll wait upon you.
the nobles in great earnestness are going that turns their countenances.
yes. has he affections in him, that thus can make him bite the law by the nose, or of the deadly seven, it is the least.
no such matter. i will not sort you with the rest of my servants, for, to speak to you like an honest man, i am most dreadfully attended. but in the beaten way of friendship, what make you at elsinore?
'tis this slave;, go whip him, 'fore the people's eyes:, his raising; nothing but his report.
which is the least?
to visit you, my lord, no other occasion.
the slave's report is seconded; and more, more fearful, is deliver'd.
if it were damnable, he being so wise, why would he for the momentary trick
beggar that i am, i am even poor in thanks; but i thank you, and sure, dear friends, my thanks are too dear a halfpenny. were you not sent for? is it your own inclining? is it a free visitation? come, come, deal justly with me. come, come. nay, speak.
what more fearful?
what says my brother?
what should we say, my lord?
it is spoke freely out of many mouths, join'd with aufidius, leads a power 'gainst rome, and vows revenge as spacious as between the young'st and oldest thing.
death is a fearful thing.
why, any thing, but to th' purpose. you were sent for, and there is a kind of confession in your looks which your modesties have not craft enough to color. i know the good king and queen have sent for you.
this is most likely!
and shamed life a hateful.
to what end, my lord?
good martius home again.
ay, but to die, and go we know not where; this sensible warm motion to become a kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit to bathe in fiery floods, or to reside in thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice; and blown with restless violence round about the pendent world; or to be worse than worst of those that lawless and incertain thought imagine howling: 'tis too horrible! that age, ache, penury and imprisonment can lay on nature is a paradise to what we fear of death.
that you must teach me. but let me conjure you, by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a better proposer could charge you withal: be even and direct with me whether you were sent for or no.
the very trick on't.
alas, alas!
(to guildenstern) what say you?
this is unlikely: he and aufidius can no more atone
what sin you do to save a brother's life, nature dispenses with the deed so far that it becomes a virtue.
(aside) nay, then, i have an eye of you, if you love me, hold not off.
you are sent for to the senate: a fearful army, led by caius martius associated with aufidius, rages upon our territories; and have already what lay before them.
o you beast! wilt thou be made a man out of my vice? is't not a kind of incest, to take life from thine own sister's shame? what should i think? heaven shield my mother play'd my father fair! ne'er issued from his blood. take my defiance! die, perish! might but my bending down reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed: i'll pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
my lord, we were sent for.
o, you have made good work!
nay, hear me, isabel.
i will tell you why. so shall my anticipation prevent your discovery, and your secrecy to the king and queen moult no feather. i have of late, but wherefore i know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all custom of exercises, and indeed it goes so heavily with my disposition that this goodly frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile promontory; this most excellent canopy, the air, look you, this brave o'erhanging firmament, this majestical roof fretted with golden fire, why, it appears no other thing to me than a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors. what a piece of work is a man! how noble in reason, how infinite in faculty! in form and moving how express and admirable! in action how like an angel, in apprehension how like a god! the beauty of the world. the paragon of animals. and yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? man delights not me. no, nor woman neither, though by your smiling you seem to say so.
what news? what news?
o, fie, fie, fie! thy sin's not accidental, but a trade. mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd:
my lord, there was no such stuff in my thoughts.
you have holp to ravish your own daughters and to see your wives dishonour'd to your noses,, 
o hear me, isabella!
why did you laugh then, when i said "man delights not me"?
what's the news? what's the news?
vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.
to think, my lord, if you delight not in man, what lenten entertainment the players shall receive from you. we coted them on the way, and hither are they coming to offer you service.
your temples burned in their cement, and your franchises, whereon you stood, confined
what is your will?
he that plays the king shall be welcome. his majesty shall have tribute of me. the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in peace, the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickle o' th' sear, and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for 't. what players are they?
pray now, your news? you have made fair work, i fear me., pray, your news?, if martius should be join'd with volscians,, 
might you dispense with your leisure, i would by and would require is likewise your own benefit.
even those you were wont to take delight in, the tragedians of the city.
if! made by some other deity than nature, that shapes man better; and they follow him, against us brats, with no less confidence than boys pursuing summer butterflies,
i have no superfluous leisure; my stay must be stolen out of other affairs; but i will attend you awhile.
how chances it they travel? their residence, both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.
you have made good work, you and your apron-men; you that stood so up much on the voice of occupation and the breath of garlic-eaters!
son, i have overheard what hath passed between you corrupt her; only he hath made an essay of her virtue to practise his judgment with the disposition of natures: she, having the truth of honour in her, hath made him that gracious denial which he is most know this to be true; therefore prepare yourself to death: do not satisfy your resolution with hopes that are fallible: tomorrow you must die; go to your knees and make ready.
i think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation.
your rome about your ears.
with life that i will sue to be rid of it.
do they hold the same estimation they did when i was in the city? are they so followed?
as hercules did shake down mellow fruit. you have made fair work!
hold you there: farewell.
no, indeed are they not.
but is this true, sir?
provost, a word with you!
how comes it? do they grow rusty?
ay; and you'll look pale before you find it other. all the regions do smilingly revolt; and who resist are mock'd for valiant ignorance, your enemies and his find something in him.
what's your will, father[?]
nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted pace. but there is, sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are most tyrannically clapped for 't. these are now the fashion, and so berattle the common stages, so they call them, that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.
we are all undone, unless the noble man have mercy.
awhile with the maid: my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch her by my company.
what, are they children? who maintains 'em? how are they escoted? will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing? will they not say afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common players (as it is most like if their means are no better), their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim against their own succession?
who shall ask it? deserve such pity of him as the wolf does of the shepherds: for his best friends, if they should say 'be good to rome,' they charged him even as those should do that had deserved his hate,
in good time.
faith, there has been much to do on both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar them to controversy. there was, for a while, no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player went to cuffs in the question.
'tis true: if he were putting to my house the brand that should consume it, i have not the face to say 'beseech you, cease.' you have made fair hands,
the hand that hath made you fair hath made you good: brief in goodness; but grace, being the soul of your complexion, shall keep the body of it ever fair. the assault that angelo hath made to you, fortune hath conveyed to my understanding; and, but wonder at angelo. how will you do to content this substitute, and to save your brother?
is 't possible?
you have brought a trembling upon rome, such as was never so incapable of help.
i am now going to resolve him: i had rather my brother die by the law than my son should be deceived in angelo! if ever he return and i can speak to him, i will open my lips in vain, or discover his government.
oh, there has been much throwing about of brains.
say not we brought it.
that shall not be much ami yet, as the matter trial of you only. therefore fasten your ear on my advisings: to the love i have in doing good a remedy presents itself. i do make myself believe that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged the angry law; do no stain to your own gracious person; and much please the absent duke, if peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of this business.
do the boys carry it away?
and cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters, who did hoot him out o' the city.
anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.
ay, that they do, my lord. hercules and his load too.
but i fear they'll roar him in again. tullus aufidius, as if he were his officer: desperation is all the policy, strength and defence, that rome can make against them.
virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. have you not heard speak of mariana, the sister of frederick the great soldier who miscarried at sea?
it is not very strange. for my uncle is king of denmark, and those that would make mouths at him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty, a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little. 'sblood, there is something in this more than natural, if philosophy could find it out.
here come the clusters. that made the air unwholesome, when you cast your stinking greasy caps in hooting at coriolanus' exile. now he's coming; and not a hair upon a soldier's head as you threw caps up will he tumble down, and pay you for your voices. 'tis no matter; if he could burn us all into one coal, we have deserved it.
i have heard of the lady, and good words went with her name.
there are the players.
faith, we hear fearful news.
she should this angelo have married; was affianced to her by oath, and the nuptial appointed: between which time of the contract and limit of the solemnity, her brother frederick was wrecked at sea, sister. but mark how heavily this befell to the poor gentlewoman: there she lost a noble and renowned brother, in his love toward her ever most kind and natural; with him, the portion and sinew of combinate husband, this well-seeming angelo.
gentlemen, you are welcome to elsinore. your hands, come then. th' appurtenance of welcome is fashion and ceremony. let me comply with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players, which, i tell you, must show fairly outwards, should more appear like entertainment than yours. you are welcome. but my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived.
for mine own part, when i said, banish him, i said 'twas pity.
can this be so? did angelo so leave her?
in what, my dear lord?
and so did i.
left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his comfort; swallowed his vows whole, bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she yet wears for his sake; and he, a marble to her tears, is washed with them, but relents not.
i am but mad north-north-west. when the wind is southerly, i know a hawk from a handsaw.
and so did i; and, to say the truth, so did very though we willingly consented to his banishment, yet it was against our will.
what a merit were it in death to take this poor maid it will let this man live! but how out of this can she avail?
well be with you, gentlemen.
ye are goodly things, you voices!
it is a rupture that you may easily heal: and the cure of it not only saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonour in doing it.
hark you, guildenstern, and you too, at each ear a hearer. (indicates polonius )that great baby you see there is not yet out of his swaddling-clouts
you have made
show me how, good father.
happily he's the second time come to them, for they say an old man is twice a child.
o, ay, what else?
this forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance of her first affection: his unjust unkindness, that in all reason should have quenched her love, hath, like an impediment in the current, made it more requiring with a plausible obedience; agree with his demands to the point; only refer yourself to this advantage, first, that your stay with him may not be long; that the time may have all shadow and this being granted in course,, and now follows all,, we shall advise this wronged maid to stead up your appointment, go in your place; if the encounter acknowledge itself hereafter, it may compel him to saved, your honour untainted, the poor mariana advantaged, and the corrupt deputy scaled. the maid will i frame and make fit for his attempt. if you think well to carry this as you may, the doubleness what think you of it?
(aside to rosencrantz and guildenstern ) i will prophesy he comes to tell me of the players. mark it. (to polonius), you say right, sir. o' monday morning, 'twas so indeed.
go, masters, get you home; be not dismay'd: these are a side that would be glad to have this true which they so seem to fear. go home,
the image of it gives me content already; and i trust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection.
my lord, i have news to tell you.
the gods be good to us! come, masters, let's home. i ever said we were i' the wrong when we banished him.
it lies much in your holding up. haste you speedily bed, give him promise of satisfaction. i will presently to saint luke's: there, at the moated grange, resides this dejected mariana. at that place call upon me; and dispatch with angelo, that
my lord, i have news to tell you. when roscius was an actor in rome, 
so did we all. but, come, let's home.
i thank you for this comfort. fare you well, good father.
the actors are come hither, my lord.
i do not like this news.
nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will needs buy and sell men and women like beasts, we shall have all the world drink brown and white bastard a pun referring both to types of sweet spanish wines and to illegitimate children brown and white bastard .
buzz, buzz.
nor i.
o heavens! what stuff is here
upon my honor, 
let's to the capitol. would half my wealth would buy this for a lie!
merriest was put down, and the worser allowed by order of law a furred gown to keep him warm; and furred with fox and lamb-skins too, to signify, that craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the facing.
then came each actor on his ass, 
pray, let us go.
come your way, sir. 'bless you, good father friar.
the best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral, scene individable, or poem unlimited. seneca cannot be too heavy, nor plautus too light. for the law of writ and the liberty, these are the only men.
do they still fly to the roman?
and you, good brother father. what offence hath this man made you, sir?
o jephthah, judge of israel, what a treasure hadst thou!
i do not know what witchcraft's in him, but your soldiers use him as the grace 'fore meat, their talk at table, and their thanks at end; even by your own.
marry, sir, he hath offended the law: and, sir, we take him to be a thief too, sir; for we have found sent to the deputy.
what a treasure had he, my lord?
i cannot help it now, unless, by using means, i lame the foot of our design. he bears himself more proudlier, when first i did embrace him: yet his nature in that's no changeling; and i must excuse what cannot be amended.
fie, sirrah! a bawd, a wicked bawd! the evil that thou causest to be done, that is thy means to live. do thou but think from such a filthy vice: say to thyself, from their abominable and beastly touches i drink, i eat, array myself, and live. canst thou believe thy living is a life,
why, one fair daughter and no more, the which he lovèd passing well.
yet i wish, sir,, join'd in commission with him; but either had borne the action of yourself, or else to him had left it solely.
indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet, sir, i would prove, 
(aside) still on my daughter.
i understand thee well; and be thou sure, what i can urge against him. although it seems, and so he thinks, and is no less apparent to the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly. and shows good husbandry for the volscian state, as draw his sword; yet he hath left undone that which shall break his neck or hazard mine, whene'er we come to our account.
nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin, thou wilt prove his. take him to prison, officer: ere this rude beast will profit.
am i not i' th' right, old jephthah?
sir, i beseech you, think you he'll carry rome?
he must before the deputy, sir; he has given him warning: the deputy cannot abide a whoremaster: if he be a whoremonger, and comes before him, he were
if you call me jephthah, my lord, i have a daughter that i love passing well.
and the nobility of rome are his: the senators and patricians love him too: the tribunes are no soldiers; and their people will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty as is the osprey to the fish, who takes it by sovereignty of nature. first he was a noble servant to them; but he could not carry his honours even: whether 'twas pride, the happy man; whether defect of judgment, to fail in the disposing of those chances which he was lord of; or whether nature, not to be other than one thing, not moving even with the same austerity and garb as he controll'd the war; but one of these, as he hath spices of them all, not all, for i dare so far free him, made him fear'd, to choke it in the utterance. so our virtues lie in the interpretation of the time: and power, unto itself most commendable, hath not a tomb so evident as a chair one fire drives out one fire; one nail, one nail; rights by rights falter, strengths by strengths do fail. come, let's away. when, caius, rome is thine, thou art poor'st of all; then shortly art thou mine.
that we were all, as some would seem to be, from our faults, as faults from seeming, free!
nay, that follows not.
no, i'll not go: you hear what he hath said which was sometime his general; who loved him in a most dear particular. he call'd me father: but what o' that? go, you that banish'd him; the way into his mercy: nay, if he coy'd to hear cominius speak, i'll keep at home.
his neck will come to your waist', a cord, sir.
what follows, then, my lord?
he would not seem to know me.
i spy comfort; i cry bail. here's a gentleman and a
why,
do you hear?
how now, noble pompey! what, at the wheels of caesar? art thou led in triumph? what, is there none of pygmalion's images, newly made woman, to be had now, for putting the hand in the pocket and sayest thou to this tune, matter and method? is't not drowned i' the last rain, ha? what sayest thou, trot? is the world as it was, man? which is the way? is it sad, and few words? or how? the
as by lot, god wot, and then, you know, it came to pass, as most like it was, the first row of the pious chanson will show you more, for look where my abridgement comes.
i urged our old acquaintance, and the drops that we have bled together. coriolanus he would not answer to: forbad all names; he was a kind of nothing, titleless, of burning rome.
still thus, and thus; still worse!
you are welcome, masters, welcome, all!, i am glad to see thee well., welcome, good friends., o old friend? why, thy face is valenced since i saw thee last. comest thou to beard me in denmark?, what, my young lady and mistress! by 'r lady, your ladyship is nearer to heaven than when i saw you last, by the altitude of a chopine. pray god, your voice, like a piece of uncurrent gold, be not cracked within the ring., masters, you are all welcome. we'll e'en to 't like french falconers, fly at any thing we see. we'll have a speech straight. come, give us a taste of your quality. come, a passionate speech.
why, so: you have made good work! a pair of tribunes that have rack'd for rome, to make coals cheap,, a noble memory!
how doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? procures she still, ha?
what speech, my good lord?
when it was less expected: he replied, it was a bare petition of a state to one whom they had punish'd.
troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is herself in the tub "beef" can mean actual meat or prostitutes; "tub" can mean a pickling tub for curing meat, or a sweat-tub to treat venereal disease. she hath eaten up all her beef, and she is herself in the tub .
i heard thee speak me a speech once, but it was never acted. or, if it was, not above once, for the play, i remember, pleased not the million. 'twas caviary to the general. but it was, as i received it, and others, whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine, an excellent play, well digested in the scenes, set down with as much modesty as cunning.
very well:
so: ever your fresh whore and your powdered bawd: an unshunned consequence; it must be so. art going to prison, pompey?
the rugged pyrrhus, like th' hyrcanian beast, the rugged pyrrhus, he whose sable arms, black as his purpose, did the night resemble when he lay couchèd in the ominous horse, hath now this dread and black complexion smeared now is he total gules, horridly tricked with blood of fathers, mothers, daughters, sons, baked and impasted with the parching streets, that lend a tyrannous and damnèd light and thus o'ersizèd with coagulate gore, with eyes like carbuncles, the hellish pyrrhus old grandsire priam seeks. so, proceed you.
i offer'd to awaken his regard for's private friends: his answer to me was, he could not stay to pick them in a pile of noisome musty chaff: he said 'twas folly, and still to nose the offence.
yes, faith, sir.
'fore god, my lord, well spoken, with good accent and good discretion.
for one poor grain or two! i am one of those; his mother, wife, his child, and this brave fellow too, we are the grains: above the moon: we must be burnt for you.
sent thee thither. for debt, pompey? or how?
anon he finds him striking too short at greeks. his antique sword, rebellious to his arm, lies where it falls, repugnant to command. unequal matched, but with the whiff and wind of his fell sword the unnerved father falls. then senseless ilium, seeming to feel this blow, with flaming top stoops to his base, and with a hideous crash which was declining on the milky head of reverend priam, seemed i' th' air to stick. so as a painted tyrant pyrrhus stood,
nay, pray, be patient: if you refuse your aid in this so never-needed help, yet do not upbraid's with our distress. but, sure, if you more than the instant army we can make, might stop our countryman.
for being a bawd, for being a bawd.
and, like a neutral to his will and matter, but as we often see against some storm a silence in the heavens, the rack stand still, the bold winds speechless, and the orb below as hush as death, anon the dreadful thunder arousèd vengeance sets him new a-work. and never did the cyclops' hammers fall on mars's armor forged for proof eterne with less remorse than pyrrhus' bleeding sword out, out, thou strumpet fortune! all you gods in general synod take away her power, break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel, and bowl the round nave down the hill of heaven,
no, i'll not meddle.
well, then, imprison him: if imprisonment be the due of a bawd, why, 'tis his right: bawd is he farewell, good pompey. commend me to the prison, pompey: you will turn good husband now, pompey; you will keep the house.
this is too long.
pray you, go to him.
i hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.
it shall to the barber's, with your beard., prithee, say on. he's for a jig or a tale of bawdry, or he sleeps. say on. come to hecuba.
what should i do?
i will pray, pompey, to increase your bondage: if you take it not patiently, why, your mettle is the more. adieu, trusty pompey. 'bless you, friar.
but who, ah woe, who had seen the moblèd queen, 
only make trial what your love can do for rome, towards martius.
and you.
"the moblèd queen"?
well, and say that martius return me, as cominius is return'd, but as a discontented friend, grief-shot with his unkindness? say't be so?
does bridget paint still, pompey, ha?
that's good. "moblèd queen" is good.
yet your good will must have that thanks from rome, after the measure
come your ways, sir; come.
run barefoot up and down, threatening the flames with bisson rheum, a clout upon that head about her lank and all o'erteemèd loins, a blanket, in the alarm of fear caught up, who this had seen, with tongue in venom steeped, 'gainst fortune's state would treason have pronounced. when she saw pyrrhus make malicious sport in mincing with his sword her husband's limbs, the instant burst of clamor that she made, (unless things mortal move them not at all) and passion in the gods.
i'll undertake 't: i think he'll hear me. yet, to bite his lip and hum at good cominius, much unhearts me. he was not taken well; he had not dined: we pout upon the morning, are unapt to give or to forgive; but when we have stuff'd these and these conveyances of our blood with wine and feeding, we have suppler souls till he be dieted to my request, and then i'll set upon him.
you will not bail me, then, sir?
look whe'e he has not turned his color and has tears in 's eyes., prithee, no more.
you know the very road into his kindness, and cannot lose your way.
then, pompey, nor now. what news abroad, friar? what news?
(to first player) 'tis well. i'll have thee speak out the rest soon. (to polonius) good my lord, will you see the players well bestowed? do you hear, let them be well used, for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the time. after your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.
speed how it will. i shall ere long have knowledge of my success.
come your ways, sir; come.
my lord, i will use them according to their desert.
he'll never hear him.
go to kennel, pompey; go.
god's bodykins, man, much better. use every man after his desert, and who should 'scape whipping? use them after your own honor and dignity. the less they deserve, the more merit is in your bounty. take them in.
not?
what news, friar, of the duke?
come, sirs.
red as 'twould burn rome; and his injury the gaoler to his pity. i kneel'd before him; 'twas very faintly he said 'rise;' dismiss'd me thus, with his speechless hand: what he would do, bound with an oath to yield to his conditions: so that all hope is vain. unless his noble mother, and his wife; who, as i hear, mean to solicit him and with our fair entreaties haste them on.
i know none. can you tell me of any?
follow him, friends. we'll hear a play tomorrow. (to first player), dost thou hear me, old friend? can you play the murder of gonzago?
stay: whence are you?
some say he is with the emperor of russia; other
ay, my lord.
stand, and go back.
i know not where; but wheresoever, i wish him well.
we'll ha 't tomorrow night. you could, for a need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which i would set down and insert in 't, could you not?
you guard like men; 'tis well: but, by your leave, i am an officer of state, and come
it was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from the state, and usurp the beggary he was never born to. lord angelo dukes it well in his absence; he
ay, my lord.
from whence?
he does well in 't.
very well. follow that lord, and look you mock him not.
from rome.
a little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in him: something too crabbed that way, friar.
my good friends, i'll leave you till night. you are welcome to elsinore.
you may not pass, you must return: our general will no more hear from thence.
it is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.
good my lord.
you'll speak with coriolanus.
it is well allied: but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar, till eating and drinking be put down. they say this angelo was not made by man and woman after this downright way of creation: is it
ay, so. good-bye to you.
good my friends, if you have heard your general talk of rome, and of his friends there, it is lots to blanks,
how should he be made, then?
now i am alone. oh, what a rogue and peasant slave am i! but in a fiction, in a dream of passion, could force his soul so to his own conceit that from her working all his visage wanned, tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect, with forms to his conceit? and all for nothing, for hecuba! what's hecuba to him or he to hecuba that he should weep for her? what would he do that i have? he would drown the stage with tears and cleave the general ear with horrid speech, make mad the guilty and appall the free,
be it so; go back: the virtue of your name is not here passable.
some report a sea-maid spawned him; some, that he was begot between two stock-fishes. but it is certain that when he makes water his urine is motion generative; that's infallible.
confound the ignorant, and amaze indeed a dull and muddy-mettled rascal, peak like john-a-dreams, unpregnant of my cause, and can say nothing, no, not for a king, upon whose property and most dear life who calls me "villain"? breaks my pate across? plucks off my beard and blows it in my face? tweaks me by the nose? gives me the lie i' th' throat as deep as to the lungs? who does me this? 'swounds, i should take it, for it cannot be but i am pigeon-livered and lack gall to make oppression bitter, or ere this i should have fatted all the region kites remorseless, treacherous, lecherous, kindless villain! o vengeance! why, what an ass am i! this is most brave, prompted to my revenge by heaven and hell, must, like a whore, unpack my heart with words and fall a-cursing like a very drab, a scullion! fie upon 't, foh! that guilty creatures sitting at a play have, by the very cunning of the scene, been struck so to the soul that presently they have proclaimed their malefactions. with most miraculous organ. i'll have these players play something like the murder of my father before mine uncle. i'll observe his looks. i'll tent him to the quick. if he do blench,
i tell thee, fellow, the general is my lover: i have been his name unparallel'd, haply amplified; for i have ever verified my friends, of whom he's chief, with all the size that verity would without lapsing suffer: nay, sometimes, i have tumbled past the throw; and in his praise have almost stamp'd the leasing: therefore, fellow, i must have leave to pass.
you are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.
may be the devil, and the devil hath power t' assume a pleasing shape. yea, and perhaps out of my weakness and my melancholy, as he is very potent with such spirits, more relative than this. the play's the thing wherein i'll catch the conscience of the king.
faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his should not pass here; no, though it were as virtuous to lie as to live chastely. therefore, go back.
why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the rebellion of a codpiece to take away the life of a ere he would have hanged a man for the getting a hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing a thousand: he had some feeling of the sport: he knew the service, and that instructed him to mercy.
and can you by no drift of conference get from him why he puts on this confusion, grating so harshly all his days of quiet with turbulent and dangerous lunacy?
prithee, fellow, remember my name is menenius, always factionary on the party of your general.
women; he was not inclined that way.
but from what cause he will by no means speak.
have, i am one that, telling true under him, must say, you cannot pass. therefore, go back.
o, sir, you are deceived.
nor do we find him forward to be sounded. but with a crafty madness keeps aloof when we would bring him on to some confession
has he dined, canst thou tell? for i would not speak with him till after dinner.
'tis not possible.
did he receive you well?
you are a roman, are you?
who, not the duke? yes, your beggar of fifty; and duke had crotchets in him. he would be drunk too; that let me inform you.
most like a gentleman.
i am, as thy general is.
you do him wrong, surely.
but with much forcing of his disposition.
then you should hate rome, as he does. can you, when you have pushed out your gates the very defender of them, and, in a violent popular front his revenges with the easy groans of old women, the virginal palms of your daughters, or with the palsied intercession of such a decayed dotant as you seem to be? can you think to blow out the such weak breath as this? no, you are deceived; therefore, back to rome, and prepare for your execution: you are condemned, our general has sworn you out of reprieve and pardon.
sir, i was an inward of his. a shy fellow was the withdrawing.
niggard of question, but of our demands most free in his reply.
use me with estimation.
what, i prithee, might be the cause?
did you assay him?
come, my captain knows you not.
no, pardon; 'tis a secret must be locked within the teeth and the lips: but this i can let you duke to be wise.
madam, it so fell out, that certain players we o'erraught on the way. of these we told him, and there did seem in him a kind of joy
i mean, thy general.
wise! why, no question but he was.
to hear of it. they are about the court, this night to play before him.
my general cares not for you. back, i say, go; lest the utmost of your having: back.
a very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.
'tis most true, and he beseeched me to entreat your majesties to hear and see the matter.
nay, but, fellow, fellow,, 
either this is the envy in you, folly, or mistaking: helmed must upon a warranted need give him a better proclamation. let him be but testimonied in his own bringings-forth, and he shall appear to the envious a scholar, a statesman and a soldier. knowledge be more it is much darkened in your malice.
with all my heart, and it doth much content me good gentlemen, give him a further edge, and drive his purpose on to these delights.
what's the matter?
sir, i know him, and i love him.
we shall, my lord.
now, you companion, i'll say an errand for you: perceive that a jack guardant cannot office me from my son coriolanus: guess, but by my entertainment with him, if thou standest not i' the state of hanging, or of some death more long in presently, and swoon for what's to come upon thee.
love talks with better knowledge, and knowledge with dearer love.
sweet gertrude, leave us too, that he, as 'twere by accident, may here affront ophelia. her father and myself (lawful espials) will so bestow ourselves that, seeing unseen, and gather by him, as he is behaved, if 't be the affliction of his love or no that thus he suffers for.
the glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy particular prosperity, and love thee no worse than thy old father menenius does! o my son, my son! water to quench it. i was hardly moved to come to thee; but being assured none but myself could move thee, i have been blown out of your gates with sighs; and conjure thee to pardon rome, and thy wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet here,, this, who, like a block, hath denied my access to thee.
come, sir, i know what i know.
i shall obey you. and for your part, ophelia, i do wish of hamlet's wildness. so shall i hope your virtues will bring him to his wonted way again, to both your honors.
away!
i can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak. but, if ever the duke return, as our prayers are he may, let me desire you to make your answer before him. if it be honest you have spoke, upon you; and, i pray you, your name?
madam, i wish it may.
how! away!
sir, my name is lucio; well known to the duke.
ophelia, walk you here. (to claudius) gracious, so please you, that show of such an exercise may color your loneliness., we are oft to blame in this, 'tis too much proved, that with devotion's visage and pious action we do sugar o'er
wife, mother, child, i know not. my affairs are servanted to others: though i owe my revenge properly, my remission lies in volscian breasts. that we have been familiar, than pity note how much. therefore, be gone. mine ears against your suits are stronger than your gates against my force. yet, for i loved thee, take this along; i writ it for thy sake
he shall know you better, sir, if i may live to report you.
(aside) oh, 'tis too true! how smart a lash that speech doth give my conscience! the harlot's cheek, beautied with plastering art, is not more ugly to the thing that helps it than is my deed to my most painted word.
i will not hear thee speak. this man, aufidius, was my beloved in rome: yet thou behold'st!
i fear you not.
i hear him coming. let's withdraw, my lord.
you keep a constant temper.
o, you hope the duke will return no more; or you imagine me too unhurtful an opposite. but indeed i can do you little harm; you'll forswear this again.
to be, or not to be? that is the question, whether 'tis nobler in the mind to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, and, by opposing, end them? to die, to sleep, no more, and by a sleep to say we end the heartache and the thousand natural shocks that flesh is heir to, 'tis a consummation to sleep, perchance to dream, ay, there's the rub, for in that sleep of death what dreams may come when we have shuffled off this mortal coil, must give us pause. there's the respect
now, sir, is your name menenius?
i'll be hanged first: thou art deceived in me, claudio die to-morrow or no?
for who would bear the whips and scorns of time, th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely, the pangs of despised love, the law's delay, the insolence of office, and the spurns when he himself might his quietus make with a bare bodkin? who would fardels bear, to grunt and sweat under a weary life, but that the dread of something after death, no traveler returns, puzzles the will and makes us rather bear those ills we have than fly to others that we know not of? thus conscience does make cowards of us all, is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought, and enterprises of great pith and moment with this regard their currents turn awry, and lose the name of action., soft you now, be all my sins remembered.
way home again.
why should he die, sir?
good my lord, how does your honor for this many a day?
do you hear how we are shent for keeping your greatness back?
why? for filling a bottle with a tundish. i would the duke we talk of were returned again: the continency; sparrows must not build in his house-eaves, because they are lecherous. the duke yet would have dark deeds darkly answered; he would never bring them to light: would he were returned! farewell, good friar: i prithee, pray for me. the duke, i say to thee again, would eat mutton on fridays. he's not past it yet, and i say to thee, he would mouth with a beggar, though she smelt brown
i humbly thank you. well, well, well.
what cause, do you think, i have to swoon?
no might nor greatness in mortality can censure 'scape; back-wounding calumny the whitest virtue strikes. what king so strong can tie the gall up in the slanderous tongue?
that i have longèd long to redeliver. i pray you now receive them.
such things as you, i can scarce think there's any, ye're so slight. he that hath a will to die by himself fears it not from another: let your general do his worst. for you, be that you are, long; and as i was said to, away!
go; away with her to prison!
no, not i. i never gave you aught.
a noble fellow, i warrant him.
good my lord, be good to me; your honour is accounted a merciful man; good my lord.
my honored lord, you know right well you did, as made the things more rich. their perfume lost,
the worthy fellow is our general: he's the rock, the oak not to be wind-shaken.
double and treble admonition, and still forfeit in the tyrant.
take these again, for to the noble mind rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind. there, my lord.
we will before the walls of rome tomorrow set down our host. my partner in this action, you must report to the volscian lords, how plainly i have borne this business.
a bawd of eleven years' continuance, may it please your honour.
ha, ha, are you honest?
you have respected; stopp'd your ears against the general suit of rome; never admitted a private whisper, no, not with such friends that thought them sure of you.
my lord, this is one lucio's information against me. duke's time; he promised her marriage: his child is a year and a quarter old, come philip and jacob: i have kept it myself; and see how he goes about to abuse me!
my lord?
whom with a crack'd heart i have sent to rome, loved me above the measure of a father; nay, godded me, indeed. their latest refuge was to send him; for whose old love i have, the first conditions, which they did refuse and cannot now accept; to grace him only that thought he could do more, a very little i have yielded to: fresh embassies and suits, will i lend ear to. ha! what shout is this?
that fellow is a fellow of much licence: let him be no more words.
are you fair?
shall i be tempted to infringe my vow in the same time 'tis made? i will not.
provost, my brother angelo will not be altered; claudio must die to-morrow: let him be furnished with divines, and have all charitable preparation. so with him.
what means your lordship?
my wife comes foremost; then the honour'd mould the grandchild to her blood. but, out, affection! all bond and privilege of nature, break! let it be virtuous to be obstinate. what is that curt'sy worth? or those doves' eyes, of stronger earth than others. my mother bows; as if olympus to a molehill should in supplication nod: and my young boy hath an aspect of intercession, which plough rome and harrow italy: i'll never be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand, as if a man were author of himself and knew no other kin.
so please you, this friar hath been with him, and advised him for the entertainment of death.
that if you be honest and fair, your honesty should admit no discourse to your beauty.
my lord and husband!
good even, good father.
could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with honesty?
these eyes are not the same i wore in rome.
bliss and goodness on you!
ay, truly, for the power of beauty will sooner transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can translate beauty into his likeness. this was sometime a paradox, but now the time gives it proof. i did love you once.
the sorrow that delivers us thus changed makes you think so.
of whence are you?
indeed, my lord, you made me believe so.
like a dull actor now, even to a full disgrace. best of my flesh, forgive my tyranny; but do not say for that 'forgive our romans.' o, a kiss long as my exile, sweet as my revenge! i carried from thee, dear; and my true lip hath virgin'd it e'er since. you gods! i prate, and the most noble mother of the world leave unsaluted: sink, my knee, i' the earth;
not of this country, though my chance is now to use it for my time: i am a brother of gracious order, late come from the see
you should not have believed me, for virtue cannot so inoculate our old stock but we shall relish of it. i loved you not.
than that of common sons.
what news abroad i' the world?
i was the more deceived.
o, stand up blest! whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint, i kneel before thee; and unproperly between the child and parent.
none, but that there is so great a fever on goodness, that the dissolution of it must cure it: novelty is only in request; and it is as dangerous to be inconstant in any undertaking. there is scarce truth enough alive to make societies secure; but security enough to make fellowships accurst: much upon this riddle runs the wisdom of the world. this pray you, sir, of what disposition was the duke?
get thee to a nunnery. why wouldst thou be a breeder of sinners? i am myself indifferent honest, but yet i could accuse me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me.
what is this? your knees to me? to your corrected son? then let the pebbles on the hungry beach strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun; murdering impossibility, to make what cannot be, slight work.
one that, above all other strifes, contended especially to know himself.
i am very proud, revengeful, ambitious, with more offences at my beck than i have thoughts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in. what should such fellows as i do crawling between earth and heaven? we are arrant knaves, all. believe none of us. go thy ways to a nunnery. where's your father?
thou art my warrior;
what pleasure was he given to?
at home, my lord.
the noble sister of publicola, the moon of rome, chaste as the icicle that's curdied by the frost from purest snow and hangs on dian's temple: dear valeria!
any thing which professed to make him rejoice: a gentleman of all temperance. but leave we him to his events, with a prayer they may prove prosperous; and let me desire to know how you find claudio lent him visitation.
let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool no where but in 's own house. farewell.
which by the interpretation of full time may show like all yourself.
he professes to have received no sinister measure from his judge, but most willingly humbles himself to the determination of justice: yet had he framed deceiving promises of life; which i by my good leisure have discredited to him, and now is he resolved to die.
o, help him, you sweet heavens!
the god of soldiers, with the consent of supreme jove, inform to shame unvulnerable, and stick i' the wars like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw, and saving those that eye thee!
you have paid the heavens your function, and the laboured for the poor gentleman to the extremest shore of my modesty: but my brother justice have i found so severe, that he hath forced me to tell him he is indeed justice.
if thou dost marry, i'll give thee this plague for thy dowry. be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, thou shalt not escape calumny. get thee to a nunnery, go. farewell. or, if thou wilt needs marry, marry a fool, for wise men know well enough what monsters you make of them. to a nunnery, go, and quickly too. farewell.
your knee, sirrah.
proceeding, it shall become him well; wherein if he chance to fail, he hath sentenced himself.
heavenly powers, restore him!
that's my brave boy!
i am going to visit the prisoner. fare you well.
i have heard of your paintings too, well enough. god has given you one face and you make yourselves another. you jig and amble, and you lisp, you nickname god's creatures and make your wantonness your ignorance. go to, i'll no more on 't. it hath made me mad. i say, we will have no more marriages. those that are married already, all but one, shall live. the rest shall keep as they are. to a nunnery, go.
even he, your wife, this lady, and myself, are suitors to you.
peace be with you!
the courtier's, soldier's, scholar's, eye, tongue, sword, th' expectancy and rose of the fair state, the glass of fashion and the mould of form, th' observed of all observers, quite, quite down! that sucked the honey of his music vows, now see that noble and most sovereign reason like sweet bells jangled, out of tune and harsh; that unmatched form and feature of blown youth t' have seen what i have seen, see what i see!
i beseech you, peace: or, if you'ld ask, remember this before: be held by you denials. do not bid me dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate again with rome's mechanics: tell me not wherein i seem unnatural: desire not your colder reasons.
should be as holy as severe; pattern in himself to know, grace to stand, and virtue go; more nor less to others paying shame to him whose cruel striking kills for faults of his own liking! twice treble shame on angelo, to weed my vice and let his grow! though angel on the outward side! how may likeness made in crimes, making practise on the times, to draw with idle spiders' strings craft against vice i must apply: with angelo to-night shall lie his old betrothed but despised; so disguise shall, by the disguised, and perform an old contracting.
love? his affections do not that way tend. nor what he spake, though it lacked form a little, was not like madness. there's something in his soul and i do doubt the hatch and the disclose will be some danger, which for to prevent, i have in quick determination thus set it down: he shall with speed to england haply the seas and countries different with variable objects shall expel this something-settled matter in his heart, whereon his brains still beating puts him thus
o, no more, no more! you have said you will not grant us any thing; for we have nothing else to ask, but that that, if you fail in our request, the blame may hang upon your hardne therefore hear us.
(sings) take, o, take those lips away, that so sweetly were forsworn; and those eyes, the break of day, lights that do mislead the morn: seals of love, but sealed in vain, sealed in vain.
it shall do well. but yet do i believe the origin and commencement of his grief sprung from neglected love., how now, ophelia? you need not tell us what lord hamlet said.
aufidius, and you volsces, mark; for we'll hear nought from rome in private. your request?
break off thy song, and haste thee quick away: here comes a man of comfort, whose advice hath often still'd my brawling discontent.
but, if you hold it fit, after the play let his queen mother all alone entreat him to show his grief. let her be round with him, and i'll be placed, so please you, in the ear to england send him or confine him where your wisdom best shall think.
and state of bodies would bewray what life we have led since thy exile. think with thyself how more unfortunate than all living women are we come hither: since that thy sight, make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance with comforts, constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow; making the mother, wife and child to see his country's bowels out. and to poor we thine enmity's most capital: thou barr'st us our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort that all but we enjoy; for how can we, whereto we are bound, together with thy victory, whereto we are bound? alack, or we must lose the country, our dear nurse, or else thy person, our comfort in the country. we must find our wish, which side should win: for either thou must, as a foreign recreant, be led with manacles thorough our streets, or else triumphantly tread on thy country's ruin, thy wife and children's blood. for myself, son, i purpose not to wait on fortune till these wars determine: if i cannot persuade thee rather to show a noble grace to both parts march to assault thy country than to tread, trust to't, thou shalt not, on thy mother's womb, that brought thee to this world.
you had not found me here so musical: let me excuse me, and believe me so, my mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.
it shall be so. madness in great ones must not unwatched go.
ay, and mine, living to time.
'tis good; though music oft hath such a charm i pray, you, tell me, hath any body inquired for me here to-day? much upon this time have i promised here to meet.
speak the speech, i pray you, as i pronounced it to you, trippingly on the tongue. but if you mouth it, as many of your players do, i had as lief the town crier spoke my lines. nor do not saw the air too much with your hand thus, but use all gently, for in the very torrent, tempest, and (as i may say) whirlwind of passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. oh, it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the ears of the groundlings, who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb-shows and noise. i would have such a fellow whipped for o'erdoing termagant. it out-herods herod. pray you, avoid it.
a' shall not tread on me; i'll run away till i am bigger, but then i'll fight.
you have not been inquired after:
i warrant your honor.
not of a woman's tenderness to be, i have sat too long.
i do constantly believe you. the time is come even now. i shall crave your forbearance a little: may be i will call upon you anon, for some advantage to yourself.
be not too tame neither, but let your own discretion be your tutor. suit the action to the word, the word to the action, with this special observance that you o'erstep not the modesty of nature. for anything so overdone is from the purpose of playing, whose end, both at the first and now, was and is to hold, as 'twere, the mirror up to nature, to show virtue her own feature, scorn her own image, and the very age and body of the time his form and pressure. now this overdone or come tardy off, though it make the unskillful laugh, cannot but make the judicious grieve, the censure of the which one must in your allowance o'erweigh a whole theatre of others.
nay, go not from us thus. if it were so that our request did tend to save the romans, thereby to destroy as poisonous of your honour: no; our suit is that you reconcile them: while the volsces may say 'this mercy we have show'd;' the romans, 'this we received;' and each in either side for making up this peace!' thou know'st, great son, the end of war's uncertain, but this certain, that, if thou conquer rome, the benefit which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name, whose chronicle thus writ: 'the man was noble, but with his last attempt he wiped it out; destroy'd his country, and his name remains to the ensuing age abhorr'd.' speak to me, son: to imitate the graces of the gods; to tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' the air, and yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt that should but rive an oak. why dost not speak? still to remember wrongs? daughter, speak you: he cares not for your weeping. speak thou, boy: perhaps thy childishness will move him more than can our reasons. there's no man in the world like one i' the stocks. thou hast never in thy life show'd thy dear mother any courtesy, when she, poor hen, fond of no second brood, has cluck'd thee to the wars and safely home, and spurn me back: but if it be not so, thou art not honest; and the gods will plague thee, that thou restrain'st from me the duty which to a mother's part belongs. he turns away: to his surname coriolanus 'longs more pride than pity to our prayers. down: an end; this is the last: so we will home to rome, and die among our neighbours. nay, behold 's: but kneels and holds up bands for fellowship, does reason our petition with more strength than thou hast to deny 't. come, let us go: this fellow had a volscian to his mother; like him by chance. yet give us our dispatch: i am hush'd until our city be a-fire, and then i'll speak a little.
i am always bound to you.
oh, there be players that i have seen play and heard others praise (and that highly), not to speak it profanely, that, neither having th' accent of christians nor the gait of christian, pagan, nor man, have so strutted and bellowed that i have thought some of nature's journeymen had made men and not made them well, they imitated humanity so abominably.
o mother, mother! the gods look down, and this unnatural scene they laugh at. o my mother, mother! o! you have won a happy victory to rome; but, for your son,, believe it, o, believe it, if not most mortal to him. but, let it come. aufidius, though i cannot make true wars, i'll frame convenient peace. now, good aufidius, were you in my stead, would you have heard
what is the news from this good deputy?
i hope we have reformed that indifferently with us, sir.
i was moved withal.
he hath a garden circummured with brick, whose western side is with a vineyard back'd; and to that vineyard is a planched gate, this other doth command a little door which from the vineyard to the garden leads; there have i made my promise upon the heavy middle of the night
o, reform it altogether! and let those that play your clowns speak no more than is set down for them, for there be of them that will themselves laugh to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too, though in the meantime some necessary question of the play be then to be considered. that's villainous, and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it. go, make you ready.
i dare be sworn you were: and, sir, it is no little thing to make mine eyes to sweat compassion. but, good sir, i'll not to rome, i'll back with you; and pray you, stand to me in this cause. o mother! wife!
but shall you on your knowledge find this way?
how now, my lord! will the king hear this piece of work?
[aside] i am glad thou hast set thy mercy and thy honour myself a former fortune.
i have ta'en a due and wary note upon't: with whispering and most guilty diligence, in action all of precept, he did show me
and the queen too, and that presently.
ay, by and by;
are there no other tokens between you 'greed concerning her observance?
bid the players make haste.
but we will drink together; and you shall bear a better witness back than words, which we, come, enter with us. ladies, you deserve to have a temple built you: all the swords in italy, and her confederate arms, could not have made this peace.
no, none, but only a repair i' the dark; and that i have possess'd him my most stay i have a servant comes with me along, that stays upon me, whose persuasion is i come about my brother.
will you two help to hasten them?
see you yond coign o' the capitol, yond corner-stone?
'tis well borne up. a word of this. what, ho! within! come forth!
ay, my lord.
why, what of that?
i pray you, be acquainted with this maid; she comes to do you good.
what ho, horatio!
if it be possible for you to displace it with your rome, especially his mother, may prevail with him. but i say there is no hope in't: our throats are sentenced and stay upon execution.
i do desire the like.
here, sweet lord, at your service.
is't possible that so short a time can alter the
do you persuade yourself that i respect you?
horatio, thou art e'en as just a man as e'er my conversation coped withal.
there is differency between a grub and a butterfly; yet your butterfly was a grub. this martius is grown from man to dragon: he has wings; he's more than a creeping thing.
good friar, i know you do, and have found it.
o my dear lord, 
he loved his mother dearly.
take, then, this your companion by the hand, who hath a story ready for your ear. i shall attend your leisure: but make haste;
nay, do not think i flatter. that no revenue hast but thy good spirits, to feed and clothe thee? why should the poor be flattered? no, let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp, and crook the pregnant hinges of the knee since my dear soul was mistress of her choice and could of men distinguish, her election hath sealed thee for herself, for thou hast been, as one in suffering all that suffers nothing, hast ta'en with equal thanks. and blessed are those whose blood and judgment are so well commingled, that they are not a pipe for fortune's finger to sound what stop she please. give me that man in my heart's core, ay, in my heart of heart, as i do thee., something too much of this., there is a play tonight before the king. one scene of it comes near the circumstance i prithee, when thou seest that act afoot, even with the very comment of thy soul observe mine uncle. if his occulted guilt do not itself unkennel in one speech, and my imaginations are as foul
so did he me: and he no more remembers his mother now than an eight-year-old horse. the tartness of his face sours ripe grapes: when he walks, he moves like an engine, and the ground shrinks before his eye; talks like a knell, and his hum is a battery. he sits in his state, as a thing made for alexander. what he bids be done is finished with his bidding. he wants nothing of a god but eternity
will't please you walk aside?
as vulcan's stithy. give him heedful note. for i mine eyes will rivet to his face, and after we will both our judgments join
yes, mercy, if you report him truly.
o place and greatness! millions of false eyes are stuck upon thee: volumes of report run with these false and most contrarious quests make thee the father of their idle dreams and rack thee in their fancies.
well, my lord. if he steal aught the whilst this play is playing, and 'scape detecting, i will pay the theft.
i paint him in the character. mark what mercy his mother shall bring from him: there is no more mercy in him than there is milk in a male tiger; that you.
welcome, how agreed?
they are coming to the play. i must be idle. get you a place.
the gods be good unto us!
she'll take the enterprise upon her, father,
how fares our cousin hamlet?
no, in such a case the gods will not be good unto us. when we banished him, we respected not them;
it is not my consent, but my entreaty too.
excellent, i' faith, of the chameleon's dish. i eat the air, promise-crammed. you cannot feed capons so.
sir, if you'ld save your life, fly to your house: the plebeians have got your fellow-tribune and hale him up and down, all swearing, if the roman ladies bring not comfort home,
little have you to say when you depart from him, but, soft and low,
i have nothing with this answer, hamlet. these words are not mine.
what's the news?
fear me not.
no, nor mine now. (to polonius) my lord, you played once i' th' university, you say?
good news, good news; the ladies have prevail'd, the volscians are dislodged, and martius gone: a merrier day did never yet greet rome,
nor, gentle daughter, fear you not at all. he is your husband on a pre-contract: to bring you thus together, 'tis no sin, doth flourish the deceit. come, let us go: our corn's to reap, for yet our tithe's to sow.
that did i, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.
friend, art thou certain this is true? is it most certain?
come hither, sirrah. can you cut off a man's head?
what did you enact?
as certain as i know the sun is fire: where have you lurk'd, that you make doubt of it? as the recomforted through the gates. why, hark you!
if the man be a bachelor, sir, i can; but if he be a married man, he's his wife's head a pun, referring both to the biblical idea of the husband as the head of the wife (ephesians : ) and the husband owning his wife's maidenhead (virginity) wife's head , and i can never cut off a woman's head.
i did enact julius caesar. i was killed i' th' capitol. brutus killed me.
the trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fifes, tabours and cymbals and the shouting romans, make the sun dance. hark you!
direct answer. to-morrow morning are to die claudio and barnardine. here is in our prison a common executioner, who in his office lacks a helper: if you will take it on you to assist him, it shall your full time of imprisonment and your deliverance with an unpitied whipping, for you have been a notorious bawd.
it was a brute part of him to kill so capital a calf there., be the players ready?
i will go meet the ladies. this volumnia is worth of consuls, senators, patricians, a city full; of tribunes, such as you, a sea and land full. you have pray'd well to-day: i'd not have given a doit. hark, how they joy!
sir, i have been an unlawful bawd time out of mind; would be glad to receive some instruction from my fellow partner.
ay, my lord. they stay upon your patience.
first, the gods bless you for your tidings; next, accept my thankfulness.
what, ho! abhorson! where's abhorson, there?
come hither, my dear hamlet, sit by me.
sir, we have all
do you call, sir?
no, good mother. here's metal more attractive. (sits next to ophelia )
they are near the city?
your execution. if you think it meet, compound with him by the year, and let him abide here with you; if not, use him for the present and dismiss him. he cannot plead his estimation with you; he hath been a bawd.
(to claudius) oh, ho, do you mark that?
almost at point to enter.
a bawd, sir? fie upon him! he will discredit our mystery.
lady, shall i lie in your lap?
we will meet them, and help the joy.
go to, sir; you weigh equally; a feather will turn the scale.
no, my lord.
behold our patroness, the life of rome! call all your tribes together, praise the gods, and make triumphant fires; strew flowers before them: unshout the noise that banish'd martius, cry 'welcome, ladies, welcome!'
pray, sir, by your good favour,, for surely, sir, a good favour you have, but that you have a hanging
i mean, my head upon your lap?
welcome, ladies, welcome!
ay, sir; a mystery
ay, my lord.
go tell the lords o' the city i am here: deliver them this paper: having read it, bid them repair to the market-place; where i, even in theirs and in the commons' ears, the city ports by this hath enter'd and intends to appear before the people, hoping to purge herself with words: dispatch.
painting, sir, i have heard say, is a mystery; and your whores, sir, being members of my occupation, using painting, do prove my occupation a mystery: should be hanged, i cannot imagine.
do you think i meant country matters?
most welcome!
sir, it is a mystery.
i think nothing, my lord.
how is it with our general?
proof?
that's a fair thought to lie between maids' legs.
even so as with a man by his own alms empoison'd, and with his charity slain.
every true man's apparel fits your thief: if it be big enough; if it be too big for your thief, your thief thinks it little enough: so every true man's apparel fits your thief.
what is, my lord?
most noble sir, you wish'd us parties, we'll deliver you of your great danger.
are you agreed?
nothing.
sir, i cannot tell: we must proceed as we do find the people.
a more penitent trade than your bawd; he doth oftener ask forgiveness.
you are merry, my lord.
'twixt you there's difference; but the fall of either makes the survivor heir of all.
you, sirrah, provide your block and your axe to-morrow four o'clock.
who, i?
i know it; and my pretext to strike at him admits mine honour for his truth: who being so heighten'd, he water'd his new plants with dews of flattery, seducing so my friends; and, to this end, he bow'd his nature, never known before
come on, bawd; i will instruct thee in my trade; follow.
ay, my lord.
sir, his stoutness when he did stand for consul, which he lost by lack of stooping,, 
i do desire to learn, sir: and i hope, if you have occasion to use me for your own turn, you shall find me yare; for truly, sir, for your kindness i owe you a good turn.
o god, your only jig-maker. what should a man do but be merry? for, look you, how cheerfully my mother looks, and my father died within these two hours.
that i would have spoke of: presented to my knife his throat: i took him; made him joint-servant with me; gave him way in all his own desires; nay, let him choose out of my files, his projects to accomplish, in mine own person; holp to reap the fame which he did end all his; and took some pride to do myself this wrong: till, at the last, i seem'd his follower, not partner, and i had been mercenary.
the one has my pity; not a jot the other, being a murderer, though he were my brother.
nay, 'tis twice two months, my lord.
so he did, my lord: the army marvell'd at it, and, in the last, when he had carried rome and that we look'd
look, here's the warrant, claudio, for thy death: 'tis now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow
so long? nay then, let the devil wear black, for i'll have a suit of sables. o heavens! die two months ago and not forgotten yet? then there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half a year. but, by 'r lady, he must build churches then, or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is "for, oh, for, oh, the hobby-horse is forgot."
there was it: for which my sinews shall be stretch'd upon him. at a few drops of women's rheum, which are as cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour and i'll renew me in his fall. but, hark!
as fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour when it lies starkly in the traveller's bones: he will not wake.
enter a king and a queen very lovingly, the queen embracing him and he her. she kneels and makes show of protestation unto him. he takes her up and declines his head upon her neck, lays him down upon a bank of flowers. she, seeing him asleep, leaves him. anon comes in a fellow, takes off his crown, kisses it, pours poison in the king's ears, and exits. the queen returns, finds the king dead, and makes passionate action. the poisoner, with some two or three mutes, comes in again, seeming to lament with her. the dead body is carried away. the poisoner woos the queen with gifts. she seems loath and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts his love
your native town you enter'd like a post, and had no welcomes home: but he returns, splitting the air with noise.
who can do good on him?
what means this, my lord?
whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear with giving him glory.
but, hark, what noise? heaven give your spirits comfort!
marry, this is miching malhecho. it means mischief.
therefore, at your vantage, ere he express himself, or move the people which we will second. when he lies along, after your way his tale pronounced shall bury his reasons with his body.
by and by. i hope it is some pardon or reprieve
belike this show imports the argument of the play.
say no more:
welcome father.
we shall know by this fellow. the players cannot keep counsel. they'll tell all.
you are most welcome home.
the best and wholesomest spirts of the night envelope you, good provost! who call'd here of late?
will he tell us what this show meant?
i have not deserved it. but, worthy lords, have you with heed perused what i have written to you?
none, since the curfew rung.
ay, or any show that you will show him. be not you ashamed to show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.
we have.
not isabel?
you are naught, you are naught. i'll mark the play.
and grieve to hear't. what faults he made before the last, i think might have found easy fines: but there to end where he was to begin and give away with our own charge, making a treaty where there was a yielding,, this admits no excuse.
no.
for us and for our tragedy, here stooping to your clemency, we beg your hearing patiently.
he approaches: you shall hear him.
they will, then, ere't be long.
is this a prologue or the posy of a ring?
hail, lords! i am return'd your soldier, than when i parted hence, but still subsisting under your great command. you are to know that prosperously i have attempted and with bloody passage led your wars even to do more than counterpoise a full third part the charges of the action. we have made peace with no less honour to the antiates than shame to the romans: and we here deliver, together with the seal o' the senate, what we have compounded on.
what comfort is for claudio?
'tis brief, my lord.
read it not, noble lords; but tell the traitor, in the high'st degree
there's some in hope.
as woman's love.
traitor! how now!
it is a bitter deputy.
full thirty times hath phoebus' cart gone round neptune's salt wash and tellus' orbèd ground, and thirty dozen moons with borrowed sheen since love our hearts and hymen did our hands unite commutual in most sacred bands.
ay, traitor, martius!
not so, not so; his life is parallel'd even with the stroke and line of his great justice: he doth with holy abstinence subdue that in himself which he spurs on his power which he corrects, then were he tyrannous; but this being so, he's just.
so many journeys may the sun and moon make us again count o'er ere love be done. so far from cheer and from your former state, that i distrust you. yet though i distrust, discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must. for women fear too much, even as they love, in neither aught, or in extremity. now what my love is, proof hath made you know, and as my love is sized, my fear is so: where love is great, the littlest doubts are fear.
martius!
now are they come.
faith, i must leave thee, love, and shortly too. my operant powers their functions leave to do. and thou shalt live in this fair world behind, honored, beloved, and haply one as kind
ay, martius, caius martius: dost thou think coriolanus in corioli? you lords and heads o' the state, perfidiously he has betray'd your business, and given up, for certain drops of salt, your city rome, breaking his oath and resolution like a twist of rotten silk, never admitting counsel o' the war, but at his nurse's tears he whined and roar'd away your victory, look'd wondering each at other.
this is a gentle provost: seldom when
oh, confound the rest! such love must needs be treason in my breast. in second husband let me be accursed! none wed the second but who killed the first.
hear'st thou, mars?
how now! what noise? that spirit's possessed with haste that wounds the unsisting postern with these strokes.
(aside)wormwood, wormwood.
name not the god, thou boy of tears!
there he must stay until the officer arise to let him in: he is call'd up.
are base respects of thrift, but none of love. a second time i kill my husband dead when second husband kisses me in bed.
ha!
but he must die to-morrow?
i do believe you think what now you speak, purpose is but the slave to memory, of violent birth, but poor validity, which now, like fruit unripe, sticks on the tree, but fall, unshaken, when they mellow be. to pay ourselves what to ourselves is debt. what to ourselves in passion we propose, the passion ending, doth the purpose lose. the violence of either grief or joy where joy most revels, grief doth most lament. grief joys, joy grieves on slender accident. this world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange that even our loves should with our fortunes change. whether love lead fortune, or else fortune love. the great man down, you mark his favorite flies. the poor advanced makes friends of enemies. and hitherto doth love on fortune tend, and who in want a hollow friend doth try, directly seasons him his enemy. but, orderly to end where i begun, our wills and fates do so contrary run our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our own. so think thou wilt no second husband wed, but die thy thoughts when thy first lord is dead.
no more.
none, sir, none.
nor earth to me give food, nor heaven light. to desperation turn my trust and hope. an anchor's cheer in prison be my scope. each opposite that blanks the face of joy meet what i would have well and it destroy. if, once a widow, ever i be wife!
measureless liar, thou hast made my heart too great for what contains it. boy! o slave! pardon me, lords, 'tis the first time that ever i was forced to scold. your judgments, my grave lords, who wears my stripes impress'd upon him; that must bear my beating to his grave, shall join to thrust the lie unto him.
as near the dawning, provost, as it is, you shall hear more ere morning.
if she should break it now!
peace, both, and hear me speak.
you something know; yet i believe there comes no countermand; no such example have we: besides, upon the very siege of justice lord angelo hath to the public ear
'tis deeply sworn. sweet, leave me here awhile. my spirits grow dull, and fain i would beguile
stain all your edges on me. boy! false hound! if you have writ your annals true, 'tis there, that, like an eagle in a dove-cote, i flutter'd your volscians in corioli:
this is his lordship's man.
sleep rock thy brain, and never come mischance between us twain.
why, noble lords, will you be put in mind of his blind fortune, which was your shame, by this unholy braggart, 'fore your own eyes and ears?
and here comes claudio's pardon.
madam, how like you this play?
let him die for't.
(giving a paper) my lord hath sent you this note; and by me this smallest article of it, neither in time, matter, or other circumstance. good morrow; for, as i take it, it is almost day.
the lady protests too much, methinks.
'tear him to pieces.' 'do it presently.' 'he kill'd my son.' 'my daughter.' 'he killed my cousin marcus.' 'he killed my father.'
i shall obey him.
oh, but she'll keep her word.
peace, ho! no outrage: peace! this orb o' the earth. his last offences to us shall have judicious hearing. stand, aufidius, and trouble not the peace.
for which the pardoner himself is in. hence hath offence his quick celerity, when it is born in high authority: when vice makes mercy, mercy's so extended, now, sir, what news?
have you heard the argument? is there no offense in 't?
o that i had him, to use my lawful sword!
i told you. lord angelo, belike thinking me remiss in mine office, awakens me with this unwonted putting-on; methinks strangely, for he hath not used it before.
no, no, they do but jest. poison in jest. no offense i' th' world.
insolent villain!
pray you, let's hear.
what do you call the play?
kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!
(reads) 'whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let claudio be executed by four of the clock; and in the afternoon barnardine: for my better satisfaction, this be duly performed; with a thought that more depends on it than we must yet deliver. thus fail not to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.' what say you to this, sir?
the mousetrap. marry, how? tropically. this play is the image of a murder done in vienna. gonzago is the duke's name, his wife baptista. you shall see anon. 'tis a knavish piece of work, but what o' that? your majesty and we that have free souls, it touches us not. let the galled jade wince, our withers are unwrung.
hold, hold, hold, hold!
afternoon?
this is one lucianus, nephew to the king.
my noble masters, hear me speak.
a bohemian born, but here nursed un and bred; one that is a prisoner nine years old.
you are as good as a chorus, my lord.
o tullus,, 
how came it that the absent duke had not either have heard it was ever his manner to do so.
i could interpret between you and your love, if i could see the puppets dallying.
thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep.
his friends still wrought reprieves for him: and, indeed, his fact, till now in the government of lord angelo, came not to an undoubtful proof.
you are keen, my lord, you are keen.
tread not upon him. masters all, be quiet; put up your swords.
it is now apparent?
it would cost you a groaning to take off mine edge.
provoked by him, you cannot, the great danger which this man's life did owe you, you'll rejoice that he is thus cut off. please it your honours to call me to your senate, i'll deliver your heaviest censure.
most manifest, and not denied by himself.
still better and worse.
bear from hence his body; and mourn you for him: let him be regarded as the most noble corse that ever herald
hath he born himself penitently in prison? how seems he to be touched?
so you must take your husbands., begin, murderer. pox, leave thy damnable faces, and begin. come, "the croaking raven doth bellow for revenge, "
his own impatience takes from aufidius a great part of blame. let's make the best of it.
a man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but of what's past, present, or to come; insensible of mortality, and desperately mortal.
thoughts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing, thou mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected, with hecate's ban thrice blasted, thrice infected, thy natural magic and dire property on wholesome life usurp immediately.
my rage is gone; help, three o' the chiefest soldiers; i'll be one. beat thou the drum, that it speak mournfully: trail your steel pikes. though in this city he hath widow'd and unchilded many a one, yet he shall have a noble memory. assist.
he wants advice.
he poisons him i' th' garden for 's estate. his name's gonzago. the story is extant, and writ in choice italian. you shall see anon how the murderer gets the love of gonzago's wife.
he will hear none: he hath evermore had the liberty would not: drunk many times a day, if not many days entirely drunk. we have very oft awaked him, as if to carry him to execution, and showed him a seeming warrant for it: it hath not moved him at all.
the king rises.
proceed, solinus, to procure my fall, and by the doom of death end woes and all.
provost, honesty and constancy: if i read it not truly, my ancient skill beguiles me; but, in the boldness of my cunning, i will lay myself in hazard. claudio, whom here you have warrant to execute, is sentenced him. to make you understand this in a manifested effect, i crave but four days' respite; for the which you are to do me both a present and a dangerous courtesy.
what, frighted with false fire?
merchant of syracuse, plead no more. i am not partial to infringe our laws. sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke to merchants, our well-dealing countrymen, who, wanting guilders to redeem their lives, have seal'd his rigorous statutes with their bloods, for, since the mortal and intestine jars 'twixt thy seditious countrymen and us, it hath in solemn synods been decreed both by the syracusians and ourselves, nay, more, if any born at ephesus be seen at any syracusian marts and fairs; again, if any syracusian born come to the bay of ephesus, he dies, unless a thousand marks be levièd to quit the penalty and to ransom him. thy substance, valued at the highest rate, cannot amount unto a hundred marks;
pray, sir, in what?
how fares my lord?
yet this my comfort: when your words are done, my woes end likewise with the evening sun.
in the delaying death.
give o'er the play.
well, syracusian, say in brief the cause why thou dep-artedst from thy native home
a lack, how may i do it, having the hour limited, and an express command, under penalty, to deliver his head in the view of angelo? i may make my case
give me some light, away!
a heavier task could not have been imposed than i to speak my griefs unspeakable; yet, that the world may witness that my end was wrought by nature, not by vile offense, in syracusa was i born, and wed unto a woman happy but for me, and by me, had not our hap been bad. with her i lived in joy. our wealth increased to epidamnum, till my factor's death and the great care of goods at random left drew me from kind embracements of my spouse; from whom my absence was not six months old the pleasing punishment that women bear, had made provision for her following me and soon and safe arrivèd where i was. there had she not been long but she became and, which was strange, the one so like the other as could not be distinguished but by names. that very hour, and in the selfsame inn, a meaner woman was deliverèd those, for their parents were exceeding poor, i bought and brought up to attend my sons. my wife, not meanly proud of two such boys, made daily motions for our home return. we came aboard.
by the vow of mine order i warrant you, if my instructions may be your guide. let this barnardine be this morning executed, and his head born to angelo.
lights, lights, lights!
a league from epidamnum had we sailed before the always-wind-obeying deep gave any tragic instance of our harm; for what obscured light the heavens did grant did but convey unto our fearful minds a doubtful warrant of immediate death, which though myself would gladly have embraced, weeping before for what she saw must come, and piteous plainings of the pretty babes, that mourned for fashion, ignorant what to fear, forced me to seek delays for them and me. the sailors sought for safety by our boat and left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us. my wife, more careful for the latter-born, had fastened him unto a small spare mast, to him one of the other twins was bound, whilst i had been like heedful of the other. the children thus disposed, my wife and i, fixing our eyes on whom our care was fixed, and, floating straight, obedient to the stream, was carried towards corinth, as we thought. at length the sun, gazing upon the earth, dispersed those vapors that offended us, the seas waxed calm, and we discoverèd two ships from far, making amain to us, of corinth that, of epidaurus this. but ere they came,, o, let me say no more!
angelo hath seen them both, and will discover the favour.
why, let the stricken deer go weep, the hart ungallèd play. for some must watch while some must sleep. so runs the world away. would not this, sir, and a forest of feathers, if the rest of my fortunes turn turk with me, with two provincial roses on my razed shoes, get me a fellowship in a cry of players?
nay, forward, old man. do not break off so, for we may pity though not pardon thee.
shave the head, and tie the beard; and say it was the desire of the penitent to be so bared before his death: you know the course is common. if any thing fall to you upon this, more than thanks and good against it with my life.
half a share.
o, had the gods done so, i had not now worthily termed them merciless to us. we were encounterd by a mighty rock, which being violently borne upon, our helpful ship was splitted in the midst; so that, in this unjust divorce of us, what to delight in, what to sorrow for. her part, poor soul, seeming as burdenèd with lesser weight, but not with lesser woe, was carried with more speed before the wind, by fishermen of corinth, as we thought. at length, another ship had seized on us and, knowing whom it was their hap to save, gave healthful welcome to their shipwracked guests, had not their bark been very slow of sail; and therefore homeward did they bend their course. thus have you heard me severed from my bliss; that by misfortunes was my life prolonged
pardon me, good father; it is against my oath.
a whole one, i. for thou dost know, o damon dear, this realm dismantled was of jove himself. and now reigns here a very, very, pajock.
and for the sake of them thou sorrowest for, do me the favour to dilate at full what hath befall'n of them and thee till now.
were you sworn to the duke, or to the deputy?
you might have rhymed.
my youngest boy, and yet my eldest care, after his brother, and importuned me that his attendant, so his case was like,
to him, and to his substitutes.
o good horatio, i'll take the ghost's word for a thousand pound. didst perceive?
reft of his brother, but retained his name, might bear him company in the quest of him, i hazarded the loss of whom i loved. five summers have i spent in farthest greece, roaming clean through the bounds of asia, and, coasting homeward, came to ephesus, or that or any place that harbors men. but here must end the story of my life; and happy were i in my timely death could all my travels warrant me they live.
avouch the justice of your dealing?
very well, my lord.
to bear the extremity of dire mishap, now, trust me, were it not against our laws, against my crown, my oath, my dignity, which princes, would they, may not disannul, but though thou art adjudgèd to the death, and passèd sentence may not be recalled but to our honour's great disparagement, yet will i favor thee in what i can. to seek thy life by beneficial help. try all the friends thou hast in ephesus; beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum, and live. if no, then thou art doom'd to die., 
but what likelihood is in that?
upon the talk of the poisoning?
i will, my lord.
not a resemblance, but a certainty. yet since i see you fearful, that neither my coat, integrity, nor further than i meant, to pluck all fears out of you. look you, sir, here is the hand and seal of the duke: you know the character, i doubt not; and the signet is not strange to you.
i did very well note him.
hopeless and helpless doth egeon wend, but to procrastinate his lifeless end.
i know them both.
for if the king like not the comedy, why then, belike, he likes it not, perdy. come, some music!
therefore give out you are of epidamnum, lest that your goods too soon be confiscate. this very day a syracusian merchant is apprehended for arrival here according to the statute of the town dies ere the weary sun set in the west. there is your money that i had to keep.
the contents of this is the return of the duke: you shall anon over-read it at your pleasure; where you shall find, within these two days he will be here. this is a thing that angelo knows not; for he this perchance of the duke's death; perchance entering into some monastery; but, by chance, nothing of what is writ. look, the unfolding star calls up the shepherd. put not yourself into amazement how these when they are known. call your executioner, and off with barnardine's head: i will give him a present shrift and advise him for a better place. yet you are amazed; but this shall absolutely resolve you.
good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.
go bear it to the centaur, where we host, within this hour it will be dinnertime. till that, i'll view the manners of the town, peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings, and then return and sleep within mine inn, get thee away.
i am as well acquainted here as i was in our house of profession: one would think it were mistress overdone's own house, for here be many of her old customers. first, here's young master rash; he's in ninescore and seventeen pounds; of which he made five marks, ready money: marry, then ginger was not much in request, for the old women were all dead. then is there here one master caper, at the suit of peach-coloured satin, which now peaches him a beggar. then have we here young dizzy, and young master deep-vow, and master copperspur, and master starve-lackey the rapier and dagger man, and young forthlight the tilter, and brave master shooty the great traveller, and wild half-can that stabbed pots, and, i think, forty more; all great doers in our trade, and are now 'for the lord's sake.'
sir, a whole history.
many a man would take you at your word and go indeed, having so good a mean.
sirrah, bring barnardine hither.
the king, sir, 
a trusty villain, sir, that very oft, lightens my humor with his merry jests. what, will you walk with me about the town and then go to my inn and dine with me?
master barnardine! you must rise and be hanged. master barnardine!
ay, sir, what of him?
i am invited, sir, to certain merchants,
what, ho, barnardine!
is in his retirement marvelous distempered.
i crave your pardon. soon at five o'clock, please you, i'll meet with you upon the mart and afterward consort you till bedtime. my present business calls me from you now.
(within) a pox o' your throats! who makes that
with drink, sir?
and wander up and down to view the city.
your friends, sir; the hangman. you must be so good, sir, to rise and be put to death.
no, my lord, with choler.
sir, i commend you to your own content.
(within) away, you rogue, away! i am sleepy.
your wisdom should show itself more richer to signify this to the doctor. for, for me to put him to his purgation would perhaps plunge him into far more choler.
he that commends me to mine own content commends me to the thing i cannot get. that in the ocean seeks another drop, who, falling there to find his fellow forth, unseen, inquisitive, confounds himself. so i, to find a mother and a brother,
tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.
good my lord, put your discourse into some frame and start not so wildly from my affair.
here comes the almanac of my true date., what now? how chance thou art returned so soon?
executed, and sleep afterwards.
i am tame, sir. pronounce.
returned so soon? rather approach'd too late! the capon burns; the pig falls from the spit; my mistress made it one upon my cheek. she is so hot because the meat is cold; the meat is cold because you come not home; you come not home because you have no stomach; but we that know what 'tis to fast and pray are penitent for your default today.
go in to him, and fetch him out.
the queen your mother, in most great affliction of spirit, hath sent me to you.
stop in your wind, sir. tell me this, i pray: where have you left the money that i gave you?
he is coming, sir, he is coming; i hear his straw rustle.
you are welcome.
to pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper? the saddler had it, sir; i kept it not.
is the axe upon the block, sirrah?
nay, good my lord, this courtesy is not of the right breed. if it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer, i will do your mother's commandment. if not, your pardon and my return shall be the end of my business.
i am not in a sportive humor now. tell me, and dally not: where is the money? so great a charge from thine own custody?
very ready, sir.
sir, i cannot.
i pray you, jest, sir, as you sit at dinner. i from my mistress come to you in post; if i return, i shall be post indeed, methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock, and strike you home without a messenger.
how now, abhorson? what's the news with you?
what, my lord?
come, dromio, come, these jests are out of season. reserve them till a merrier hour than this.
truly, sir, i would desire you to clap into your prayers; for, look you, the warrant's come.
make you a wholesome answer. my wit's diseased. but, sir, such answer as i can make, you shall command. or, rather, as you say, my mother. therefore no more but to the matter. my mother, you say, 
to me, sir? why, you gave no gold to me!
you rogue, i have been drinking all night; i am not
then thus she says: your behavior hath struck her into amazement and admiration.
come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness, and tell me how thou hast disposed thy charge.
o, the better, sir; for he that drinks all night, and is hanged betimes in the morning, may sleep the sounder all the next day.
o wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother! but is there no sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration? impart.
my charge was but to fetch you from the mart my mistress and her sister stays for you.
look you, sir; here comes your ghostly father: do
she desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.
now, as i am a christian, answer me in what safe place you have bestowed my money, or i shall break that merry sconce of yours where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me?
sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how hastily you are to depart, i am come to advise you, comfort you and pray with you.
we shall obey, were she ten times our mother. have you any further trade with us?
i have some marks of yours upon my pate, some of my mistress' marks upon my shoulders, but not a thousand marks between you both. perchance you will not bear them patiently.
friar, not i: i have been drinking hard all night, shall beat out my brains with billets: i will not consent to die this day, that's certain.
my lord, you once did love me.
thy mistress' marks? what mistress, slave, hast thou?
o, sir, you must: and therefore i beseech you look forward on the journey you shall go.
and do still, by these pickers and stealers.
your worship's wife, my mistress at the phoenix, she that doth fast till you come home to dinner
persuasion.
good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? you do surely bar the door upon your own liberty if you deny your griefs to your friend.
what, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face, being forbid? there, take you that, sir knave. (beats dromio of ephesus)
but hear you.
sir, i lack advancement.
what mean you, sir? for god's sake, hold your hands. nay, an you will not, sir, i'll take my heels.
not a word: if you have any thing to say to me, come to my ward; for thence will not i to-day.
how can that be, when you have the voice of the king himself for your succession in denmark?
the villain is o'erraught of all my money. they say this town is full of cozenage, as nimble jugglers that deceive the eye, dark-working sorcerers that change the mind, disguised cheaters, prating mountebanks, and many suchlike liberties of sin. if it prove so, i will be gone the sooner. i'll to the centaur to go seek this slave.
after him, fellows; bring him to the block.
ay, sir, but "while the grass grows, " the proverb is something musty, oh, the recorders! let me see one. (takes a recorder) (aside to rosencrantz and guildenstern ) to withdraw with you, why do you go about to recover the wind of me as if you would drive me into a toil?
neither my husband nor the slave returned that in such haste i sent to seek his master? sure, luciana, it is two o'clock.
now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
o my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
perhaps some merchant hath invited him, good sister, let us dine and never fret. a man is master of his liberty; time is their master, and when they see time they'll go or come. if so, be patient, sister.
a creature unprepared, unmeet for death; and to transport him in the mind he is
i do not well understand that. will you play upon this pipe?
why should their liberty than ours be more?
here in the prison, father, there died this morning of a cruel fever one ragozine, a most notorious pirate, a man of claudio's years; his beard and head this reprobate till he were well inclined; and satisfy the deputy with the visage of ragozine, more like to claudio?
my lord, i cannot.
because their business still lies out o' door.
o, 'tis an accident that heaven provides! prefix'd by angelo: see this be done, and sent according to command; whiles i persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.
i pray you.
look when i serve him so, he takes it ill.
this shall be done, good father, presently. and how shall we continue claudio, to save me from the danger that might come if he were known alive?
believe me, i cannot.
o, know he is the bridle of your will.
let this be done. ere twice the sun hath made his journal greeting to the under generation, you shall find your safety manifested.
i do beseech you.
there's none but asses will be bridled so.
i am your free dependant.
i know no touch of it, my lord.
there's nothing situate under heaven's eye but hath his bound, in earth, in sea, in sky. the beasts, the fishes, and the wingèd fowls are their males' subjects and at their controls.
quick, dispatch, and send the head to angelo.
it is as easy as lying. govern these ventages with your fingers and thumb, give it breath with your mouth, and it will discourse most eloquent music. look you, these are the stops.
lord of the wide world and wild wat'ry seas, endued with intellectual sense and souls, of more preeminence than fish and fowls, are masters to their females, and their lords.
now will i write letters to angelo,, the provost, he shall bear them, whose contents shall witness to him i am near at home, and that, by great injunctions, i am bound to meet me at the consecrated fount a league below the city; and from thence, by cold gradation and well-balanced form, we shall proceed with angelo.
but these cannot i command to any utterance of harmony. i have not the skill.
this servitude makes you to keep unwed.
here is the head; i'll carry it myself.
why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! you would play upon me. you would seem to know my stops. you would pluck out the heart of my mystery. you would sound me from my lowest note to the top of my compass. and there is much music, excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it speak? 'sblood, do you think i am easier to be played on than a pipe? call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me, yet you cannot play upon me.
not this, but troubles of the marriage bed.
convenient is it. make a swift return; for i would commune with you of such things that want no ear but yours.
god bless you, sir.
but, were you wedded, you would bear some sway.
i'll make all speed.
my lord, the queen would speak with you, and presently.
ere i learn love, i'll practice to obey.
(within) peace, ho, be here!
do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?
how if your husband start some otherwhere?
the tongue of isabel. she's come to know if yet her brother's pardon be come hither: but i will keep her ignorant of her good, to make her heavenly comforts of despair,
by th' mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
till he come home again, i would forbear.
ho, by your leave!
methinks it is like a weasel.
patience unmoved! no marvel though she pause; they can be meek that have no other cause. a wretched soul, bruised with adversity but were we burdened with like weight of pain, as much or more we should ourselves complain. so thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee, with urging helpless patience would relieve me; this fool-begged patience in thee will be left.
good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.
it is backed like a weasel.
well, i will marry one day, but to try. here comes your man. now is your husband nigh.
the better, given me by so holy a man. hath yet the deputy sent my brother's pardon?
or like a whale.
say, is your tardy master now at hand?
his head is off and sent to angelo.
very like a whale.
nay, he's at two hands with me, and that my two ears can witness.
nay, but it is not so.
then i will come to my mother by and by. (aside) they fool me to the top of my bent., i will come by and by.
say, didst thou speak with him? know'st thou his mind?
it is no other: show your wisdom, daughter, in your close patience.
i will say so.
ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear. beshrew his hand, i scarce could understand it.
o, i will to him and pluck out his eyes!
"by and by" is easily said.
spake he so doubtfully thou couldst not feel his meaning?
you shall not be admitted to his sight.
leave me, friends.
nay, he struck so plainly i could too well feel his blows, and withal so doubtfully that i could scarce understand them.
unhappy claudio! wretched isabel! injurious world! most damned angelo!
when churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes out contagion to this world. now could i drink hot blood and do such bitter business as the bitter day would quake to look on. soft, now to my mother., the soul of nero enter this firm bosom. let me be cruel, not unnatural.
but say, i prithee, is he coming home? it seems he hath great care to please his wife.
this nor hurts him nor profits you a jot; mark what i say, which you shall find by every syllable a faithful verity: the duke comes home to-morrow; nay, dry your eyes; one of our convent, and his confessor, notice to escalus and angelo, who do prepare to meet him at the gates, there to give up their power. if you can, pace your wisdom in that good path that i would wish it go, grace of the duke, revenges to your heart, and general honour.
i will speak daggers to her but use none. my tongue and soul in this be hypocrites. to give them seals never, my soul, consent!
why, mistress, sure my master is horn mad.
i am directed by you.
i like him not, nor stands it safe with us to let his madness range. therefore prepare you. i your commission will forthwith dispatch, and he to england shall along with you. hazard so dangerous as doth hourly grow out of his lunacies.
horn mad, thou villain!
this letter, then, to friar peter give; say, by this token, i desire his company at mariana's house to-night. her cause and yours i'll perfect him withal, and he shall bring you before the duke, and to the head of angelo i am combined by a sacred vow and shall be absent. wend you with this letter: command these fretting waters from your eyes with a light heart; trust not my holy order,
we will ourselves provide. most holy and religious fear it is to keep those many, many bodies safe
i mean not cuckold mad, but sure he is stark mad. when i desired him to come home to dinner, he asked me for a thousand marks in gold.
good even. friar, where's the provost?
the single and peculiar life is bound with all the strength and armor of the mind to keep itself from noyance, but much more that spirit upon whose weal depend and rest dies not alone, but, like a gulf, doth draw what's near it with it. it is a massy wheel fixed on the summit of the highest mount, to whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things each small annexment, petty consequence, attends the boisterous ruin. never alone did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
"your meat doth burn," quoth i. "my gold," quoth he. "will you come?" quoth i. "my gold," quoth he. "where is the thousand marks i gave thee, villain?" "the pig," quoth i, "is burned." "my gold," quoth he. i know not thy mistress. out on thy mistress!"
not within, sir.
arm you, i pray you, to this speedy voyage. which now goes too free-footed.
quoth who?
o pretty isabella, i am pale at mine heart to see thine eyes so red: thou must be patient. i am fain my head fill my belly; one fruitful meal would set me to 't. but they say the duke will be here to-morrow. by my troth, isabel, i loved thy brother: if the old fantastical duke of dark corners had been
we will haste us.
quoth my master. "i know," quoth he, "no house, no wife, no mistress." i thank him, i bare home upon my shoulders, for, in conclusion, he did beat me there.
sir, the duke is marvellous little beholding to your reports; but the best is, he lives not in them.
my lord, he's going to his mother's closet. behind the arras i'll convey myself and, as you said (and wisely was it said) 'tis meet that some more audience than a mother, since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear the speech, of vantage. fare you well, my liege. and tell you what i know.
go back again, thou slave, and fetch him home.
friar, thou knowest not the duke so well as i do: he's a better woodman than thou takest him for.
thanks, dear my lord.
go back again and be new beaten home?
well, you'll answer this one day. fare ye well.
oh, my offence is rank. it smells to heaven. it hath the primal eldest curse upon 't, a brother's murder. pray can i not. my stronger guilt defeats my strong intent, and, like a man to double business bound, i stand in pause where i shall first begin, and both neglect. what if this cursèd hand is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens to wash it white as snow? whereto serves mercy but to confront the visage of offence? and what's in prayer but this twofold force, or pardoned being down? then i'll look up. my fault is past. but oh, what form of prayer can serve my turn, "forgive me my foul murder"?
back, slave, or i will break thy pate across.
nay, tarry; i'll go along with thee i can tell thee pretty tales of the duke.
that cannot be, since i am still possessed my crown, mine own ambition, and my queen. may one be pardoned and retain th' offense? in the corrupted currents of this world offense's gilded hand may shove by justice, buys out the law. but 'tis not so above. there is no shuffling. there the action lies in his true nature, and we ourselves compelled, even to the teeth and forehead of our faults, try what repentance can. what can it not? yet what can it when one can not repent? o wretched state! o bosom black as death! o limèd soul that, struggling to be free, bow, stubborn knees, and, heart with strings of steel, be soft as sinews of the newborn babe. all may be well. (kneels)
and he will bless that cross with other beating. between you, i shall have a holy head.
you have told me too many of him already, sir, if they be true; if not true, none were enough.
now might i do it pat. now he is a-praying. and so am i revenged., that would be scanned. a villain kills my father, and, for that, i, his sole son, do this same villain send to heaven. he took my father grossly, full of bread, with all his crimes broad blown, as flush as may. and how his audit stands who knows save heaven? but in our circumstance and course of thought
hence, prating peasant! fetch thy master home.
i was once before him for getting a wench with child.
to take him in the purging of his soul when he is fit and seasoned for his passage? no. up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent. or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed, at game a-swearing, or about some act that has no relish of salvation in 't, then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven, as hell, whereto it goes. my mother stays this physic but prolongs thy sickly days.
that like a football you do spurn me thus? you spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither. if i last in this service, you must case me in leather.
did you such a thing?
(rises) my words fly up, my thoughts remain below. words without thoughts never to heaven go.
fie, how impatience loureth in your face.
yes, marry, did i but i was fain to forswear it; they would else have married me to the rotten medlar.
he will come straight. look you lay home to him. tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with, and that your grace hath screened and stood between much heat and him. i'll silence me even here.
whilst i at home starve for a merry look. hath homely age th' alluring beauty took from my poor cheek? then he hath wasted it. are my discourses dull? barren my wit? unkindness blunts it more than marble hard. do their gay vestments his affections bait? that's not my fault; he's master of my state. what ruins are in me that can be found of my defeatures. my decayèd fair a sunny look of his would soon repair. but, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale and feeds from home. poor i am but his stale.
sir, your company is fairer than honest. rest you well.
(within) mother, mother, mother!
self-harming jealousy, fie, beat it hence.
if bawdy talk offend you, we'll have very little of it. nay, friar, i am a kind of burr; i shall stick.
i'll warrant you. fear me not. withdraw, i hear him coming.
unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense. i know his eye doth homage otherwhere, or else what lets it but he would be here? sister, you know he promised me a chain. so he would keep fair quarter with his bed. i see the jewel best enamelèd will lose his beauty. yet the gold bides still that others touch, and often touching will by falsehood and corruption doth it shame. since that my beauty cannot please his eye, i'll weep what's left away, and weeping die.
every letter he hath writ hath disvouched other.
now mother, what's the matter?
how many fond fools serve mad jealousy!
in most uneven and distracted manner. his actions show much like to madne pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted! and why meet him at the gates, and
hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
the gold i gave to dromio is laid up safe at the centaur, and the heedful slave is wandered forth, in care to seek me out. by computation and mine host's report, i sent him from the mart. see, here he comes.
i guess not.
mother, you have my father much offended.
how now, sir? is your merry humor altered? as you love strokes, so jest with me again. you know no centaur? you received no gold? my house was at the phoenix? wast thou mad, that thus so madly thou didst answer me?
and why should we proclaim it in an hour before his entering, that if any crave redress of injustice, they should exhibit their petitions in the street?
come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
what answer, sir? when spake i such a word?
complaints, and to deliver us from devices hereafter, which shall then have no power to stand against us.
go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
even now, even here, not half an hour since.
well, i beseech you, let it be proclaimed betimes notice to such men of sort and suit as are to meet him.
why, how now, hamlet?
home to the centaur with the gold you gave me.
i shall, sir. fare you well.
what's the matter now?
villain, thou didst deny the gold's receipt and told'st me of a mistress and a dinner, for which, i hope, thou felt'st i was displeased.
good night.
have you forgot me?
what means this jest? i pray you, master, tell me?
and dull to all proceedings. a deflower'd maid! and by an eminent body that enforced the law against it! but that her tender shame will not proclaim against her maiden loss, for my authority bears of a credent bulk, that no particular scandal once can touch but it confounds the breather. he should have lived, save that riotous youth, with dangerous sense, by so receiving a dishonour'd life with ransom of such shame. would yet he had lived! a lack, when once our grace we have forgot, nothing goes right: we would, and we would not a reference to romans : we would, and we would not .
no, by the rood, not so. and, would it were not so!, you are my mother.
yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth? think'st thou i jest? hold, take thou that and that. (beats dromio of syracuse)
these letters at fit time deliver me[.]
nay, then i'll set those to you that can speak.
hold, sir, for god's sake! now your jest is earnest.
the provost knows our purpose and our plot. the matter being afoot, keep your instruction, and hold you ever to our special drift; as cause doth minister. go call at flavius' house, and tell him where i stay: give the like notice to valentinus, rowland, and to crassus, and bid them bring the trumpets to the gate;
come, come, and sit you down. you shall not budge. you go not till i set you up a glass
because that i familiarly sometimes do use you for my fool and chat with you, your sauciness will jest upon my love and make a common of my serious hours. but creep in crannies when he hides his beams. if you will jest with me, know my aspect, and fashion your demeanor to my looks, or i will beat this method in your sconce.
it shall be speeded well.
what wilt thou do? thou wilt not murder me? help, help, ho!
"sconce" call you it? so you would leave battering, i had rather have it a "head." an you use these blows long, i must get a sconce for my head and ensconce it too, or else i shall seek my wit in my shoulders. but i pray, sir, why am i beaten?
i thank thee, varrius; thou hast made good haste: come, we will walk. there's other of our friends will greet us here anon, my gentle varrius.
(from behind the arras) what, ho? help, help, help!
dost thou not know?
to speak so indirectly i am loath: i would say the truth; but to accuse him so, that is your part: yet i am advised to do it; he says, to veil full purpose.
how now, a rat? dead for a ducat, dead!
nothing, sir, but that i am beaten.
be ruled by him.
(from behind the arras) oh, i am slain.
shall i tell you why?
besides, he tells me that, if peradventure he speak against me on the adverse side, i should not think it strange; for 'tis a physic that's bitter to sweet end.
o me, what hast thou done?
ay, sir, and wherefore, for they say every why hath a wherefore.
i would friar peter, 
nay, i know not. is it the king?
"why" first: for flouting me; and then "wherefore": for urging it the second time to me.
o, peace! the friar is come.
oh, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
was there ever any man thus beaten out of season, when in the "why" and the "wherefore" is neither rhyme nor reason? well, sir, i thank you.
come, i have found you out a stand most fit, where you may have such vantage on the duke, he shall not pass you. twice have the trumpets sounded; have hent the gates, and very near upon the duke is entering: therefore, hence, away!
a bloody deed? almost as bad, good mother,
thank me, sir, for what?
my very worthy cousin, fairly met! our old and faithful friend, we are glad to see you.
as kill a king?
marry, sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.
happy return be to your royal grace!
ay, lady, 'twas my word.
i'll make you amends next, to give you nothing for something. but say, sir, is it dinnertime?
many and hearty thankings to you both. such goodness of your justice, that our soul cannot but yield you forth to public thanks, forerunning more requital.
thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell. i took thee for thy better. take thy fortune. thou find'st to be too busy is some danger. and let me wring your heart. for so i shall if it be made of penetrable stuff, if damnèd custom have not brassed it so that it is proof and bulwark against sense.
no, sir, i think the meat wants that i have.
you make my bonds still greater.
in noise so rude against me?
in good time, sir, what's that?
to lock it in the wards of covert bosom, when it deserves, with characters of brass, a forted residence 'gainst the tooth of time and razure of oblivion. give me your hand, that outward courtesies would fain proclaim favours that keep within. come, escalus, you must walk by us on our other hand; and good supporters are you.
such an act that blurs the grace and blush of modesty, calls virtue hypocrite, takes off the rose from the fair forehead of an innocent love as false as dicers' oaths, oh, such a deed as from the body of contraction plucks the very soul, and sweet religion makes a rhapsody of words. heaven's face doth glow with tristful visage, as against the doom, is thought-sick at the act.
basting.
now is your time: speak loud and kneel before him.
ay me, what act that roars so loud and thunders in the index?
well, sir, then 'twill be dry.
justice, o royal duke! vail your regard upon a wrong'd, i would fain have said, a maid! o worthy prince, dishonour not your eye by throwing it on any other object and given me justice, justice, justice, justice!
look here upon this picture and on this, see, what a grace was seated on this brow? hyperion's curls, the front of jove himself, an eye like mars to threaten and command, a station like the herald mercury a combination and a form indeed where every god did seem to set his seal
if it be, sir, i pray you, eat none of it.
relate your wrongs; in what? by whom? be brief. here is lord angelo shall give you justice: reveal yourself to him.
to give the world assurance of a man. this was your husband. look you now, what follows. blasting his wholesome brother. have you eyes? could you on this fair mountain leave to feed and batten on this moor? ha, have you eyes? you cannot call it love, for at your age and waits upon the judgment. and what judgment would step from this to this? sense sure you have, else could you not have motion. but sure that sense is apoplexed, for madness would not err, but it reserved some quantity of choice to serve in such a difference. what devil was 't that thus hath cozened you at hoodman-blind? eyes without feeling, feeling without sight, or but a sickly part of one true sense could not so mope. o shame, where is thy blush? rebellious hell, if thou canst mutine in a matron's bones, and melt in her own fire. proclaim no shame when the compulsive ardor gives the charge, since frost itself as actively doth burn, and reason panders will.
your reason?
you bid me seek redemption of the devil: hear me yourself; for that which i must speak must either punish me, not being believed, or wring redress from you. hear me, o hear me, here!
o hamlet, speak no more! and there i see such black and grainèd spots as will not leave their tinct.
lest it make you choleric and purchase me another dry basting.
she hath been a suitor to me for her brother cut off by course of justice,, 
nay, but to live in the rank sweat of an enseamèd bed, stewed in corruption, honeying and making love
well, sir, learn to jest in good time. there's a time for all things.
by course of justice!
o, speak to me no more! these words like daggers enter in my ears. no more, sweet hamlet.
i durst have denied that before you were so choleric.
and she will speak most bitterly and strange.
a murderer and a villain, a slave that is not twentieth part the tithe of your precedent lord, a vice of kings, that from a shelf the precious diadem stole, and put it in his pocket, 
by what rule, sir?
that angelo's forsworn; is it not strange? that angelo's a murderer; is 't not strange? that angelo is an adulterous thief, an hypocrite, a virgin-violator;
no more!
marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald pate of father time himself.
nay, it is ten times strange.
a king of shreds and patches, 
let's hear it.
it is not truer he is angelo than this is all as true as it is strange: nay, it is ten times true; for truth is truth
you heavenly guards!, what would your gracious figure?
there's no time for a man to recover his hair that grows bald by nature.
away with her! poor soul, she speaks this in the infirmity of sense.
alas, he's mad!
may he not do it by fine and recovery?
o prince, i conjure thee, as thou believest there is another comfort than this world, that i am touch'd with madness! make not impossible that which but seems unlike: 'tis not impossible but one, the wicked'st caitiff on the ground, may seem as shy, as grave, as just, as absolute in all his dressings, characts, titles, forms, be an arch-villain; believe it, royal prince: if he be less, he's nothing; but he's more, had i more name for badness.
do you not come your tardy son to chide, that, lapsed in time and passion, lets go by o, say!
yes, to pay a fine for a periwig, and recover the lost hair of another man.
if she be mad,, as i believe no other,, her madness hath the oddest frame of sense, such a dependency of thing on thing, as e'er i heard in madness.
do not forget. this visitation is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose. but look, amazement on thy mother sits. o, step between her and her fighting soul. speak to her, hamlet.
why is time such a niggard of hair, being, as it is, so plentiful an excrement?
harp not on that, nor do not banish reason for inequality; but let your reason serve to make the truth appear where it seems hid, and hide the false seems true.
how is it with you, lady?
because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts, and what he hath scanted men in hair, he hath given them in wit.
have, sure, more lack of reason. what would you say?
alas, how is 't with you, that you do bend your eye on vacancy and with th' incorporal air do hold discourse? and, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm, your bedded hair, like life in excrements, starts up and stands on end. o gentle son, upon the heat and flame of thy distemper
why, but there's many a man hath more hair than wit.
i am the sister of one claudio, condemn'd upon the act of fornication to lose his head; condemn'd by angelo: was sent to by my brother; one lucio as then the messenger,, 
on him, on him! look you, how pale he glares! his form and cause conjoined, preaching to stones, would make them capable. (to ghost) do not look upon me, my stern effects. then what i have to do will want true color, tears perchance for blood.
not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair.
that's i, an't like your grace: i came to her from claudio, and desired her for her poor brother's pardon.
to whom do you speak this?
why, thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit.
that's he indeed.
do you see nothing there?
the plainer dealer, the sooner lost. yet he loseth it in a kind of jollity.
you were not bid to speak.
nothing at all, yet all that is i see.
for what reason?
no, my good lord;
nor did you nothing hear?
for two, and sound ones too.
i wish you now, then; pray you, take note of it: and when you have a business for yourself, pray heaven you then be perfect.
no, nothing but ourselves.
nay, not sound, i pray you.
i warrant your honour.
why, look you there! look how it steals away, my father, in his habit as he lived, look where he goes, even now, out at the portal!
sure ones, then.
the warrants for yourself; take heed to't.
this the very coinage of your brain. is very cunning in.
nay, not sure, in a thing falsing.
this gentleman told somewhat of my tale,, 
ecstasy? my pulse as yours doth temperately keep time and makes as healthful music. it is not madness that i have uttered. bring me to the test, would gambol from. mother, for love of grace, lay not that flattering unction to your soul that not your trespass but my madness speaks. it will but skin and film the ulcerous place infects unseen. confess yourself to heaven. repent what's past. avoid what is to come. and do not spread the compost on the weeds to make them ranker. forgive me this my virtue, virtue itself of vice must pardon beg, yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
certain ones, then.
right.
o hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
name them.
it may be right; but you are i' the wrong
oh, throw away the worser part of it, good night, but go not to mine uncle's bed. assume a virtue if you have it not. that monster, custom, who all sense doth eat, of habits devil, is angel yet in this: he likewise gives a frock or livery that aptly is put on. refrain tonight, and that shall lend a kind of easiness to the next abstinence, the next more easy.
the one, to save the money that he spends in tiring; the other, that at dinner they should not drop in his porridge.
i went to this pernicious caitiff deputy,, 
and either rein the devil or throw him out with wondrous potency. once more, good night, and when you are desirous to be blessed, i'll blessing beg of you. (points to polonius) i do repent. but heaven hath pleased it so, to punish me with this and this with me, that i must be their scourge and minister. i will bestow him and will answer well i must be cruel only to be kind. thus bad begins and worse remains behind. one word more, good lady, 
you would all this time have proved there is no time for all things.
that's somewhat madly spoken.
what shall i do?
marry, and did, sir: namely, e'en no time to recover hair lost by nature.
pardon it;
let the bloat king tempt you again to bed, pinch wanton on your cheek, call you his mouse, and let him, for a pair of reechy kisses or paddling in your neck with his damned fingers, that i essentially am not in madness but mad in craft. 'twere good you let him know, for who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise, would from a paddock, from a bat, a gib, no, in despite of sense and secrecy, unpeg the basket on the house's top. let the birds fly, and like the famous ape, to try conclusions, in the basket creep
but your reason was not substantial why there is no time to recover.
mended again. the matter; proceed.
be thou assured, if words be made of breath and breath of life, i have no life to breathe what thou hast said to me.
thus i mend it: time himself is bald and therefore, to the world's end, will have bald followers.
in brief, to set the needless process by, how i persuaded, how i pray'd, and kneel'd, how he refell'd me, and how i replied,, i now begin with grief and shame to utter: he would not, but by gift of my chaste body to his concupiscible intemperate lust, release my brother; and, after much debatement, and i did yield to him: but the next morn betimes, his purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant for my poor brother's head.
i must to england, you know that?
i knew 'twould be a bald conclusion: but soft, who wafts us yonder?
this is most likely!
i had forgot. 'tis so concluded on.
ay, ay, antipholus, look strange and frown. some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects. the time was once when thou unurged wouldst vow that never words were music to thine ear, that never object pleasing in thine eye, that never touch well welcome to thy hand, unless i spake, or looked, or touched, or carved to thee. how comes it now, my husband, o, how comes it that thou art thus estranged from thyself? "thyself" i call it, being strange to me, am better than thy dear self's better part. ah, do not tear away thyself from me! for know, my love, as easy mayest thou fall a drop of water in the breaking gulf, without addition or diminishing, as take from me thyself and not me too. how dearly would it touch thee to the quick, shouldst thou but hear i were licentious
o, that it were as like as it is true!
there's letters sealed, and my two schoolfellows, whom i will trust as i will adders fanged, they bear the mandate. they must sweep my way for 'tis the sport to have the engineer hoist with his own petard. and 't shall go hard, but i will delve one yard below their mines, and blow them at the moon. oh, 'tis most sweet (indicates polonius ) this man shall set me packing. i'll lug the guts into the neighbor room. mother, good night. indeed this counselor who was in life a foolish prating knave., come, sir, to draw toward an end with you., good night, mother.
by ruffian lust should be contaminate! wouldst thou not spit at me, and spurn at me, and hurl the name of husband in my face, and tear the stained skin off my harlot brow, and break it with a deep-divorcing vow? i know thou canst, and therefore see thou do it. i am possessed with an adulterate blot; my blood is mingled with the crime of lust; i do digest the poison of thy flesh, being strumpeted by thy contagion. keep then fair league and truce with thy true bed, i live disstained, thou undishonorèd.
by heaven, fond wretch, thou knowist not what thou speak'st, or else thou art suborn'd against his honour in hateful practise. first, his integrity stands without blemish. next, it imports no reason faults proper to himself: if he had so offended, he would have weigh'd thy brother by himself and not have cut him off. some one hath set you on: confess the truth, and say by whose advice
(to gertrude) there's matter in these sighs, these profound heaves. you must translate. 'tis fit we understand them. where is your son?
in ephesus i am but two hours old, as strange unto your town as to your talk, who, every word by all my wit being scanned, want wit in all one word to understand.
and is this all? then, o you blessed ministers above, keep me in patience, and with ripen'd time unfold the evil which is here wrapt up as i, thus wrong'd, hence unbelieved go!
(to rosencrantz and guildenstern)
when were you wont to use my sister thus? she sent for you by dromio home to dinner.
i know you'ld fain be gone. an officer! to prison with her! shall we thus permit a blasting and a scandalous breath to fall who knew of your intent and coming hither?
ah, my good lord, what have i seen tonight!
by dromio?
one that i would were here, friar lodowick.
what, gertrude? how does hamlet?
by me?
a ghostly father, belike. who knows that lodowick?
mad as the sea and wind when both contend which is the mightier. in his lawless fit, whips out his rapier, cries, "a rat, a rat!" and in this brainish apprehension kills the unseen good old man.
that he did buffet thee and, in his blows, denied my house for his, me for his wife.
my lord, i know him; 'tis a meddling friar; for certain words he spake against your grace in your retirement, i had swinged him soundly.
o heavy deed! it had been so with us, had we been there. to you yourself, to us, to everyone. alas, how shall this bloody deed be answered? it will be laid to us, whose providence should have kept short, restrained and out of haunt, we would not understand what was most fit,
did you converse, sir, with this gentlewoman? what is the course and drift of your compact?
words against me? this is a good friar, belike! and to set on this wretched woman here
but, like the owner of a foul disease, to keep it from divulging, let it feed even on the pith of life. where is he gone?
i, sir? i never saw her till this time.
but yesternight, my lord, she and that friar, i saw them at the prison: a saucy friar, a very scurvy fellow.
o'er whom his very madness, like some ore among a mineral of metals base, shows itself pure. he weeps for what is done.
villain, thou liest; for even her very words didst thou deliver to me on the mart.
blessed be your royal grace! your royal ear abused. first, hath this woman most wrongfully accused your substitute, who is as free from touch or soil with her as she from one ungot.
o gertrude, come away! but we will ship him hence, and this vile deed we must, with all our majesty and skill, both countenance and excuse., ho, guildenstern!
i never spake with her in all my life.
know you that friar lodowick that she speaks of?
friends both, go join you with some further aid. and from his mother's closet hath he dragged him. go seek him out, speak fair, and bring the body into the chapel. i pray you, haste in this.
how can she thus then call us by our names, 
i know him for a man divine and holy; not scurvy, nor a temporary meddler, as he's reported by this gentleman; did, as he vouches, misreport your grace.
come, gertrude, we'll call up our wisest friends, and what's untimely done. so dreaded slander, whose whisper o'er the world's diameter, as level as the cannon to his blank, transports the poisoned shot, may miss our name my soul is full of discord and dismay.
how ill agrees it with your gravity to counterfeit thus grossly with your slave, abetting him to thwart me in my mood. be it my wrong you are from me exempt, come, i will fasten on this sleeve of thine. thou art an elm, my husband, i a vine, whose weakness, married to thy stronger state, makes me with thy strength to communicate. usurping ivy, brier, or idle moss, who, all for want of pruning, with intrusion infect thy sap and live on thy confusion.
my lord, most villanously; believe it.
safely stowed.
to me she speaks; she moves me for her theme. or sleep i now and think i hear all this? what error drives our eyes and ears amiss? until i know this sure uncertainty i'll entertain the offered fallacy.
well, he in time may come to clear himself; but at this instant he is sick my lord, being come to knowledge that there was complaint intended 'gainst lord angelo, came i hither, to speak, as from his mouth, what he doth know is true and false; and what he with his oath whensoever he's convented. first, for this woman. to justify this worthy nobleman, so vulgarly and personally accused, her shall you hear disproved to her eyes,
(from within) hamlet! lord hamlet!
dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.
good friar, let's hear it.
but soft, what noise? who calls on hamlet? oh, here they come.
o, for my beads! i cross me for a sinner. this is the fairy land. o spite of spites!
do you not smile at this, lord angelo? o heaven, the vanity of wretched fools! give us some seats. come, cousin angelo; of your own cause. is this the witness, friar? first, let her show her face, and after speak.
what have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
we talk with goblins, owls, and sprites: if we obey them not, this will ensue:
pardon, my lord; i will not show my face until my husband bid me.
compounded it with dust, whereto 'tis kin.
why prat'st thou to thyself and answer'st not? dromio, thou, dromio, thou snail, thou slug, thou sot.
what, are you married?
tell us where 'tis, that we may take it thence and bear it to the chapel.
i am transformèd, master, am i not?
no, my lord.
do not believe it.
i think thou art in mind, and so am i.
are you a maid?
believe what?
nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.
no, my lord.
that i can keep your counsel and not mine own. besides, to be demanded of a sponge! what replication should be made by the son of a king?
thou hast thine own form.
a widow, then?
take you me for a sponge, my lord?
no, i am an ape.
neither, my lord.
ay, sir, that soaks up the king's countenance, his rewards, his authorities. but such officers do the king best service in the end. he keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw, first mouthed to be last swallowed. when he needs what you have gleaned, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shall be dry again.
if thou art changed to aught, 'tis to an ass.
why, you are nothing then: neither maid, widow, nor wife?
i understand you not, my lord.
'tis true. she rides me, and i long for grass. 'tis so. i am an ass; else it could never be
my lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are neither maid, widow, nor wife.
i am glad of it. a knavish speech sleeps in a foolish ear.
come, come, no longer will i be a fool, to put the finger in the eye and weep whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn. come, sir, to dinner., dromio, keep the gate. , and shrive you of a thousand idle pranks. sirrah, if any ask you for your master, say he dines forth, and let no creature enter., come, sister., dromio, play the porter well.
silence that fellow: i would he had some cause
my lord, you must tell us where the body is and go with us to the king.
sleeping or waking, mad or well-advised?
well, my lord.
the king is a thing, 
known unto these, and to myself disguised! i'll say as they say, and persever so, and in this mist at all adventures go.
my lord; i do confess i ne'er was married; and i confess besides i am no maid: i have known my husband; yet my husband
a thing, my lord?
master, shall i be porter at the gate?
he was drunk then, my lord: it can be no better.
of nothing. bring me to him. hide, fox, and all after.
ay; and let none enter, lest i break your pate.
for the benefit of silence, would thou wert so too!
i have sent to seek him and to find the body. how dangerous is it that this man goes loose! yet must not we put the strong law on him. he's loved of the distracted multitude, and where 'tis so, th' offender's scourge is weighed, but never the offense. to bear all smooth and even, this sudden sending him away must seem deliberate pause. diseases desperate grown or not at all.
come, come, antipholus, we dine too late.
well, my lord.
how now, what hath befall'n?
good signior angelo, you must excuse us all; my wife is shrewish when i keep not hours. say that i lingered with you at your shop to see the making of her carcanet, but here's a villain that would face me down he met me on the mart, and that i beat him and charged him with a thousand marks in gold, and that i did deny my wife and house., 
this is no witness for lord angelo.
where the dead body is bestowed, my lord, we cannot get from him.
say what you will, sir, but i know what i know. that you beat me at the mart i have your hand to show; if the skin were parchment and the blows you gave were ink, your own handwriting would tell you what i think.
she that accuses him of fornication, in self-same manner doth accuse my husband, and charges him my lord, with such a time when i'll depose i had him in mine arms
but where is he?
i think thou art an ass.
charges she more than me?
without, my lord; guarded, to know your pleasure.
marry, so it doth appear by the wrongs i suffer and the blows i bear. i should kick being kicked; and, being at that pass, you would keep from my heels and beware of an ass.
not that i know.
bring him before us.
you're sad, signior balthasar. pray god our cheer
no? you say your husband.
ho, guildenstern! bring in my lord.
i hold your dainties cheap, sir, and your welcome dear.
why, just, my lord, and that is angelo, but knows he thinks that he knows isabel's.
now, hamlet, where's polonius?
o signior balthasar, either at flesh or fish a table full of welcome make scarce one dainty dish.
this is a strange abuse. let's see thy face.
at supper.
good meat, sir, is common; that every churl affords.
my husband bids me; now i will unmask.
at supper where?
and welcome more common, for that's nothing but words.
this is that face, thou cruel angelo, this is the hand which, with a vow'd contract, was fast belock'd in thine; this is the body that took away the match from isabel, and did supply thee at thy garden-house
not where he eats, but where he is eaten. a certain convocation of politic worms are e'en at him. your worm is your only emperor for diet. we fat all creatures else to fat us, and we fat ourselves for maggots. your fat king and your lean beggar is but variable service, two dishes, but to one table. that's the end.
small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast.
know you this woman?
alas, alas!
ay, to a niggardly host and more sparing guest. but though my cates be mean, take them in good part. better cheer may you have, but not with better heart.
carnally, she says.
a man may fish with the worm that hath eat of a king, and eat of the fish that hath fed of that worm.
maud, bridget, marian, ciceley, gillian, ginn!
sirrah, no more!
what dost you mean by this?
(within) mome, malt-horse, capon, coxcomb, idiot, patch! either get thee from the door or sit down at the hatch. dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou call'st for such store when one is one too many? go, get thee from the door.
enough, my lord.
nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through the guts of a beggar.
what patch is made our porter? my master stays in the street.
and five years since there was some speech of marriage betwixt myself and her; which was broke off, partly for that her promised proportions came short of composition, but in chief in levity: since which time of five years i never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her, upon my faith and honour.
where is polonius?
(within) let him walk from whence he came, lest he catch cold on 's feet.
noble prince, as there is sense in truth and truth in virtue, i am affianced this man's wife as strongly as words could make up vows: and, my good lord, but tuesday night last gone in's garden-house let me in safety raise me from my knees or else for ever be confixed here, a marble monument!
in heaven. send hither to see. if your messenger find him not there, seek him i' th' other place yourself. but if indeed you find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up the stairs into the lobby.
who talks within there? ho, open the door.
i did but smile till now: my patience here is touch'd. i do perceive these poor informal women are no more but instruments of some more mightier member that sets them on: let me have way, my lord,
(to attendants) go seek him there.
(within) right, sir, i'll tell you when an you tell me wherefore.
ay, with my heart and punish them to your height of pleasure. thou foolish friar, and thou pernicious woman, compact with her that's gone, think'st thou thy oaths, were testimonies against his worth and credit that's seal'd in approbation? you, lord escalus, sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains to find out this abuse, whence 'tis derived. let him be sent for.
he will stay till ye come.
wherefore? for my dinner. i have not dined today.
would he were here, my lord! for he indeed hath set the women on to this complaint: your provost knows the place where he abides
which we do tender as we dearly grieve for that which thou hast done, must send thee hence with fiery quickness. therefore prepare thyself. the bark is ready and the wind at help, for england.
(within) nor today here you must not. come again when you may.
go do it instantly.
for england?
what art thou that keep'st me out from the house i owe?
and you, my noble and well-warranted cousin, whom it concerns to hear this matter forth, do with your injuries as seems you best, but stir not you till you have well determined upon these slanderers.
ay, hamlet.
(within) the porter for this time, sir, and my name is dromio.
my lord, we'll do it throughly.
good.
o villain, thou hast stolen both mine office and my name! the one ne'er got me credit, the other mickle blame. if thou hadst been dromio today in my place, thou wouldst have changed thy face for a name, or thy name for an ass.
signior lucio, did not you say you knew that
so is it, if thou knew'st our purposes.
(within) what a coil is there, dromio! who are those at the gate?
'cucullus non facit monachum:' honest in nothing but in his clothes; and one that hath spoke most villanous speeches of the duke.
i see a cherub that sees them. but come, for england. farewell, dear mother.
let my master in, luce.
we shall entreat you to abide here till he come and notable fellow.
thy loving father, hamlet.
(within) faith, no, he comes too late, and so tell your master.
as any in vienna, on my word.
my mother. father and mother is man and wife, man and wife is one flesh, and so, my mother., come, for england!
o lord, i must laugh. have at you with a proverb: shall i set in my staff?
call that same isabel here once again; i would speak with her.
follow him at foot. tempt him with speed aboard. delay it not. i'll have him hence tonight. away! for everything is sealed and done that else leans on the affair. pray you, make haste.
(within) have at you with another: that's, when, can you tell?
pray you, my lord, give me leave to question; you
as my great power thereof may give thee sense, since yet thy cicatrice looks raw and red after the danish sword and thy free awe
(within) if thy name be called "luce," luce, thou hast answered him well.
not better than he, by her own report.
pays homage to us, thou mayst not coldly set by letters congruing to that effect, the present death of hamlet. do it, england, for like the hectic in my blood he rages, and thou must cure me. till i know 'tis done,
do you hear, you minion? you'll let us in, i hope?
say you?
go, captain, from me greet the danish king tell him that, by his license, fortinbras craves the conveyance of a promised march over his kingdom. you know the rendezvous. we shall express our duty in his eye, and let him know so.
(within) i thought to have asked you.
marry, sir, i think, if you handled her privately, she would sooner confe perchance, publicly,
i will do 't, my lord.
(within) and you said no.
i will go darkly to work with her.
go softly on.
so, come, help. well struck! there was blow for blow.
that's the way; for women are light at midnight.
good sir, whose powers are these?
thou baggage, let me in.
come on, mistre here's a gentlewoman denies all that you have said.
they are of norway, sir.
(within) can you tell for whose sake?
the provost.
how purposed, sir, i pray you?
master, knock the door hard.
in very good time: speak not you to him till we call upon you.
against some part of poland.
(within) let him knock till it ache.
mum.
who commands them, sir?
you'll cry for this, minion, if i beat the door down.
lord angelo? they have confessed you did.
the nephew to old norway, fortinbras.
(within) what needs all that, and a pair of stocks in the town?
'tis false.
goes it against the main of poland, sir,
(within) who is that at the door that keeps all this noise?
how! know you where you are?
truly to speak, and with no addition, we go to gain a little patch of ground that hath in it no profit but the name. to pay five ducats, five, i would not farm it. a ranker rate, should it be sold in fee.
(within) by my troth, your town is troubled with unruly boys.
respect to your great place! and let the devil where is the duke? 'tis he should hear me speak.
why, then the polack never will defend it.
are you there, wife? you might have come before.
the duke's in us; and we will hear you speak: look you speak justly.
yes, it is already garrisoned.
(within) your wife, sir knave? go, get you from the door.
boldly, at least. but, o, poor souls, good night to your redress! is the duke gone? then is your cause gone too. the duke's unjust, thus to retort your manifest appeal, and put your trial in the villain's mouth
two thousand souls and twenty thousand ducats this is th' impostume of much wealth and peace, that inward breaks and shows no cause without why the man dies., i humbly thank you, sir.
if you went in pain, master, this knave would go sore.
this is the rascal; this is he i spoke of.
god be wi' you, sir.
fain have either.
why, thou unreverend and unhallow'd friar, is't not enough thou hast suborn'd these women to accuse this worthy man, but, in foul mouth to call him villain? and then to glance from him to the duke himself, to tax him with injustice? take him hence; to the rack with him! we'll touse you joint by joint, but we will know his purpose.
will 't please you go, my lord?
in debating which was best, we shall part with neither.
be not so hot; the duke dare no more stretch this finger of mine than he dare rack his own: his subject am i not, nor here provincial. my business in this state where i have seen corruption boil and bubble till it o'er-run the stew; laws for all faults, but faults so countenanced, that the strong statutes stand like the forfeits in a barber's shop,
i'll be with you straight. go a little before.
they stand at the door, master. bid them welcome hither.
slander to the state! away with him to prison!
how all occasions do inform against me, and spur my dull revenge! what is a man if his chief good and market of his time be but to sleep and feed? a beast, no more. looking before and after, gave us not that capability and godlike reason to fust in us unused. now, whether it be bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple
there is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.
what can you vouch against him, signior lucio? is this the man that you did tell us of?
a thought which, quartered, hath but one part wisdom and ever three parts coward, i do not know why yet i live to say "this thing's to do," sith i have cause and will and strength and means witness this army of such mass and charge led by a delicate and tender prince, whose spirit with divine ambition puffed makes mouths at the invisible event, to all that fortune, death, and danger dare, even for an eggshell. rightly to be great is not to stir without great argument, but greatly to find quarrel in a straw that have a father killed, a mother stained, excitements of my reason and my blood, and let all sleep, while, to my shame, i see the imminent death of twenty thousand men, go to their graves like beds, fight for a plot whereon the numbers cannot try the cause, which is not tomb enough and continent to hide the slain? oh, from this time forth,
you would say so, master, if your garments were thin. it would make a man mad as a buck to be so bought and sold.
'tis he, my lord. come hither, goodman baldpate:
i will not speak with her.
go, fetch me something: i'll break ope the gate.
i remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice: i met you at the prison, in the absence of the duke.
she is importunate, indeed distract. her mood will needs be pitied.
(within) break any breaking here, and i'll break your knave's pate.
o, did you so? and do you remember what you said of the duke?
what would she have?
a man may break a word with you, sir, and words are but wind, ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.
most notedly, sir.
she speaks much of her father, says she hears spurns enviously at straws, speaks things in doubt that carry but half sense. her speech is nothing, yet the unshaped use of it doth move the hearers to collection. they aim at it, which, as her winks and nods and gestures yield them, indeed would make one think there might be thought, though nothing sure, yet much unhappily.
(within) it seems thou want'st breaking. out upon thee, hind!
fool, and a coward, as you then reported him to be?
'twere good she were spoken with, for she may strew
here's too much "out upon thee!" i pray thee, let me in.
you must, sir, change persons with me, ere you make that my report: you, indeed, spoke so of him; and much more, much worse.
let her come in.
(within) ay, when fowls have no feathers and fish have no fin.
nose for thy speeches?
(aside) to my sick soul (as sin's true nature is) each toy seems prologue to some great amiss. so full of artless jealousy is guilt, it spills itself in fearing to be spilt.
well, i'll break in. go, borrow me a crow.
i protest i love the duke as i love myself.
where is the beauteous majesty of denmark?
a crow without feather? master, mean you so? for a fish without a fin, there's a fowl without a feather., (to dromio of syracuse) if a crow help us in, sirrah, we'll pluck a crow together.
hark, how the villain would close now, after his treasonable abuses!
how now, ophelia?
go, get thee gone. fetch me an iron crow.
him to prison! where is the provost? away with him to prison! lay bolts enough upon him: let him speak no more. away with those giglots too, and with the other confederate companion!
(sings) how should i your true love know from another one? by his cockle hat and staff, and his sandal shoon.
have patience, sir. o, let it not be so. herein you war against your reputation, and draw within the compass of suspect th' unviolated honor of your wife. her sober virtue, years, and modesty plead on her part some cause to you unknown. and doubt not, sir, but she will well excuse why at this time the doors are made against you. and let us to the tiger all to dinner, and about evening come yourself alone to know the reason of this strange restraint. if by strong hand you offer to break in a vulgar comment will be made of it; and that supposèd by the common rout against your yet ungallèd estimation that may with foul intrusion enter in for slander lives upon succession, forever housèd where it gets possession.
(to provost) stay, sir; stay awhile.
alas, sweet lady, what imports this song?
you have prevailed. i will depart in quiet and, in despite of mirth, mean to be merry. pretty and witty, wild and yet, too, gentle. there will we dine. this woman that i mean, my wife, but, i protest, without desert, hath oftentimes upbraided me withal; and fetch the chain; by this i know 'tis made. bring it, i pray you, to the porpentine, for there's the house. that chain will i bestow, be it for nothing but to spite my wife, since mine own doors refuse to entertain me, i'll knock elsewhere, to see if they'll disdain me.
what, resists he? help him, lucio.
say you? nay, pray you, mark. he is dead and gone, lady, he is dead and gone, at his head a grass-green turf, at his heels a stone. oh, ho!
i'll meet you at that place some hour hence.
come, sir; come, sir; come, sir; foh, sir! why, you bald-pated, lying rascal, you must be hooded, must you? show your knave's visage, with a pox to you! will't not off?
nay, but, ophelia, 
do so. this jest shall cost me some expense.
thou art the first knave that e'er madest a duke. first, provost, let me bail these gentle three. (to lucio) sneak not away, sir; for the friar and you must have a word anon. lay hold on him.
pray you, mark. (sings) white his shroud as the mountain snow, 
and may it be that you have quite forgot a husband's office? shall, antipholus, even in the spring of love thy love-springs rot? shall love, in building, grow so ruinous? then for her wealth's sake use her with more kindness. or if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth, muffle your false love with some show of blindness. let not my sister read it in your eye; look sweet, be fair, become disloyalty; apparel vice like virtue's harbinger. bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted. teach sin the carriage of a holy saint. what simple thief brags of his own attaint? 'tis double wrong to truant with your bed and let her read it in thy looks at board. shame hath a bastard fame, well managèd; alas, poor women, make us but believe, being compact of credit, that you love us. though others have the arm, show us the sleeve; we in your motion turn, and you may move us. comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife. 'tis holy sport to be a little vain when the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.
this may prove worse than hanging.
alas, look here, my lord.
sweet mistress, what your name is else i know not,
(to escalus) what you have spoke i pardon: sit you down: we'll borrow place of him. (to angelo) sir, by your leave. hast thou or word, or wit, or impudence, that yet can do thee office? if thou hast, and hold no longer out.
(sings) larded all with sweet flowers, which bewept to the ground did not go with true-love showers.
less in your knowledge and your grace you show not than our earth's wonder, more than earth divine. teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak. lay open to my earthy gross conceit, the folded meaning of your words' deceit. against my soul's pure truth why labour you to make it wander in an unknown field? are you a god? would you create me new? but if that i am i, then well i know your weeping sister is no wife of mine, nor to her bed no homage do i owe. far more, far more, to you do i decline. to drown me in thy sister's flood of tears. sing, siren, for thyself, and i will dote. spread o'er the silver waves thy golden hairs, and as a bed i'll take them and there lie, he gains by death that hath such means to die. let love, being light, be drownèd if she sink.
o my dread lord, i should be guiltier than my guiltiness, to think i can be undiscernible, hath look'd upon my passes. then, good prince, no longer session hold upon my shame, but let my trial be mine own confession: immediate sentence then and sequent death
how do you, pretty lady?
what, are you mad that you do reason so?
come hither, mariana. say, wast thou e'er contracted to this woman?
well, god'ield you! they say the owl was a baker's daughter. lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. god be at your table.
not mad, but mated, how, i do not know.
i was, my lord.
conceit upon her father.
it is a fault that springeth from your eye.
go take her hence, and marry her instantly. return him here again. go with him, provost.
pray you, let's have no words of this, but when they ask you what it means, say you this: (sings) tomorrow is saint valentine's day, all in the morning betime, and i a maid at your window, to be your valentine. then up he rose, and donned his clothes, and dupped the chamber door. let in the maid that out a maid never departed more.
for gazing on your beams, fair sun, being by.
my lord, i am more amazed at his dishonour than at the strangeness of it.
pretty ophelia, 
gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.
come hither, isabel. advertising and holy to your business, not changing heart with habit, i am still attorney'd at your service.
(sings) by gis and by saint charity, alack, and fie, for shame! young men will do 't, if they come to 't. by cock, they are to blame. quoth she, "before you tumbled me, you promised me to wed." he answers, "so would i ha' done, by yonder sun, an thou hadst not come to my bed."
as good to wink, sweet love, as look on night.
o, give me pardon, your unknown sovereignty!
how long hath she been thus?
why call you me "love"? call my sister so.
you are pardon'd, isabel: and now, dear maid, be you as free to us. your brother's death, i know, sits at your heart; labouring to save his life, and would not rather make rash remonstrance of my hidden power than let him so be lost. o most kind maid, it was the swift celerity of his death, that brain'd my purpose. but, peace be with him! that life is better life, past fearing death, than that which lives to fear: make it your comfort, so happy is your brother.
i hope all will be well. we must be patient, but i cannot choose but weep, to think they should lay him i' th' cold ground. my brother shall know of it, and so i thank you for your good counsel. come, my coach! good night, ladies. good night, sweet ladies. good night, good night.
thy sister's sister.
i do, my lord.
follow her close. give her good watch, i pray you.
that's my sister.
for this new-married man approaching here, whose salt imagination yet hath wrong'd your well defended honour, you must pardon for mariana's sake: but as he adjudged your brother,, of sacred chastity and of promise-breach thereon dependent, for your brother's life,, the very mercy of the law cries out most audible, even from his proper tongue, haste still pays haste, and leisure answers leisure; like doth quit like, and measure still for measure matthew : - : "judge not, that ye be not judged...with what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you again." measure still for measure . then, angelo, thy fault's thus manifested; which, though thou wouldst deny, denies thee vantage. where claudio stoop'd to death, and with like haste. away with him!
oh, this is the poison of deep grief. it springs o gertrude, gertrude, when sorrows come, they come not single spies but in battalions. first, her father slain. next, your son gone, and he most violent author thick, and unwholesome in their thoughts and whispers for good polonius' death, and we have done but greenly in hugger-mugger to inter him. poor ophelia divided from herself and her fair judgment, last, and as much containing as all these, her brother is in secret come from france, feeds on his wonder, keeps himself in clouds, and wants not buzzers to infect his ear wherein necessity, of matter beggared, will nothing stick our person to arraign in ear and ear. o my dear gertrude, this, like to a murdering piece, in many places
no, it is thyself, mine own self's better part, mine eye's clear eye, my dear heart's dearer heart, my food, my fortune, and my sweet hope's aim, my sole earth's heaven, and my heaven's claim.
o my most gracious lord, i hope you will not mock me with a husband.
alack, what noise is this?
all this my sister is, or else should be.
consenting to the safeguard of your honour, i thought your marriage fit; else imputation, for that he knew you, might reproach your life and choke your good to come; for his possessions, we do instate and widow you withal, to buy you a better husband.
where are my switzers? let them guard the door.
call thyself "sister," sweet, for i am thee. thee will i love and with thee lead my life; thou hast no husband yet, nor i no wife. give me thy hand.
o my dear lord, i crave no other, nor no better man.
what is the matter?
o soft, sir! hold you still.
never crave him; we are definitive.
save yourself, my lord. the ocean, overpeering of his list, eats not the flats with more impiteous haste o'erbears your officers. the rabble call him "lord" and, as the world were now but to begin, antiquity forgot, custom not known, the ratifiers and props of every word, caps, hands, and tongues applaud it to the clouds: "laertes shall be king, laertes king!"
why, how now, dromio. where runn'st thou so fast?
gentle my liege,, 
how cheerfully on the false trail they cry. o, this is counter, you false danish dogs!
do you know me, sir? am i dromio? am i your man? am i myself?
you do but lose your labour. away with him to death!
the doors are broke.
thou art dromio, thou art my man, thou art thyself.
now, sir, to you.
where is this king?, sirs, stand you all without.
i am an ass, i am a woman's man, and besides myself.
lend me your knees, and all my life to come i'll lend you all my life to do you service.
no, let's come in!
what woman's man? and how besides thyself?
against all sense you do importune her: should she kneel down in mercy of this fact, and take her hence in horror.
i pray you, give me leave.
marry, sir, besides myself i am due to a woman, one that claims me, one that haunts me, one that will have me.
isabel, sweet isabel, do yet but kneel by me; hold up your hands, say nothing; i'll speak all. and, for the most, become much more the better for being a little bad: so may my husband. o isabel, will you not lend a knee?
we will, we will.
what claim lays she to thee?
he dies for claudio's death.
give me my father!
marry, sir, such claim as you would lay to your horse; and she would have me as a beast; not that i being a beast she would have me, but that she, being a very beastly creature, lays claim to me.
as if my brother lived: i partly think a due sincerity govern'd his deeds, till he did look on me: since it is so, let him not die. my brother had but justice, for angelo, his act did not o'ertake his bad intent, and must be buried but as an intent that perish'd by the way: thoughts are no subjects;
calmly, good laertes.
what is she?
merely, my lord.
that drop of blood that's calm proclaims me bastard, cries "cuckold!" to my father, brands the "harlot" even here between the chaste unsmirchèd brow
a very reverent body, ay, such a one as a man may not speak of without he say "sir-reverence." i have but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a wondrous fat marriage.
your suit's unprofitable; stand up, i say. i have bethought me of another fault. provost, how came it claudio was beheaded
what is the cause, laertes, that thy rebellion looks so giant-like?, let him go, gertrude. do not fear our person. there's such divinity doth hedge a king that treason can but peep to what it would, why thou art thus incensed., let him go, gertrude., speak, man.
how dost thou mean a "fat marriage"?
it was commanded so.
where is my father?
marry, sir, she's the kitchen wench, and all grease, and i know not what use to put her to but to make a lamp of her and run from her by her own light. i warrant her rags and the
had you a special warrant for the deed?
dead.
tallow in them will burn a poland winter. if she lives till doomsday, she'll burn a week longer than the whole world.
no, my good lord; it was by private message.
but not by him.
what complexion is she of?
for which i do discharge you of your office:
let him demand his fill.
swart like my shoe, but her face nothing like so clean kept. for why? she sweats. a man may go overshoes in the grime of it.
pardon me, noble lord: i thought it was a fault, but knew it not; yet did repent me, after more advice; for testimony whereof, one in the prison, i have reserved alive.
how came he dead? i'll not be juggled with. conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit! i dare damnation. to this point i stand that both the worlds i give to negligence. let come what comes, only i'll be revenged
that's a fault that water will mend.
what's he?
who shall stay you?
no, sir, 'tis in grain; noah's flood could not do it.
his name is barnardine.
my will, not all the world. and for my means, i'll husband them so well, they shall go far with little.
what's her name?
i would thou hadst done so by claudio.
good laertes, of your dear father's death, is 't writ in your revenge, that, swoopstake, you will draw both friend and foe, winner and loser?
nell, sir, but her name and three quarters, that's an ell and three quarters, will not measure her from hip to hip.
i am sorry, one so learned and so wise as you, lord angelo, have still appear'd, should slip so grossly, both in the heat of blood. and lack of temper'd judgment afterward.
none but his enemies.
then she bears some breadth?
and so deep sticks it in my penitent heart that i crave death more willingly than mercy; 'tis my deserving, and i do entreat it.
will you know them then?
no longer from head to foot than from hip to hip. she is spherical, like a globe. i could find out countries in her.
which is that barnardine?
to his good friends thus wide i'll ope my arms and, like the kind life-rendering pelican, repast them with my blood.
in what part of her body stands ireland?
this, my lord.
why, now you speak like a good child and a true gentleman. and am most sensible in grief for it, it shall as level to your judgment pierce as day does to your eye.
marry, sir, in her buttocks. i found it out by the bogs.
there was a friar told me of this man. sirrah, thou art said to have a stubborn soul. that apprehends no further than this world, and squarest thy life according. thou'rt condemn'd: and pray thee take this mercy to provide for better times to come. friar, advise him; i leave him to your hand. what muffled fellow's that?
how now? what noise is that?
where scotland?
this is another prisoner that i saved. as like almost to claudio as himself.
burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye! by heaven, thy madness shall be paid by weight, till our scale turn the beam. o rose of may, dear maid, kind sister, sweet ophelia! should be as mortal as an old man's life? nature is fine in love, and where 'tis fine, it sends some precious instance of itself after the thing it loves.
i found it by the barrenness; hard in the palm of the hand.
[to isabella] if he be like your brother, for his sake is he pardon'd; and, for your lovely sake, give me your hand and say you will be mine. by this lord angelo perceives he's safe; methinks i see a quickening in his eye. well, angelo, your evil quits you well: look that you love your wife; her worth worth yours. and yet here's one in place i cannot pardon. [to lucio] you, sirrah, that knew me for a fool, a coward, one all of luxury, an ass, a madman; wherein have i so deserved of you, that you extol me thus?
they bore him barefaced on the bier, hey, non nonny, nonny, hey, nonny, and in his grave rained many a tear. fare you well, my dove.
where france?
trick. if you will hang me for it, you may; but i had rather it would please you i might be whipt.
hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade revenge, it could not move thus.
in her forehead, armed and reverted, making war against her heir.
whipt first, sir, and hanged after. proclaim it, provost, round about the city. as i have heard him swear himself there's one whom he begot with child, let her appear, and he shall marry her: the nuptial finish'd, let him be whipt and hang'd.
you must sing a-down a-down, and you, call him a- down-a, oh, how the wheel becomes it! it is the false steward that stole his master's daughter.
where england?
your highness said even now, i made you a duke: good my lord, do not recompense me in making me a cuckold.
this nothing's more than matter.
i looked for the chalky cliffs, but i could find no whiteness in them. but i guess it stood in her chin, by the salt rheum that ran between france and it.
upon mine honour, thou shalt marry her. thy slanders i forgive; and therewithal and see our pleasure herein executed.
there's rosemary, that's for remembrance. pray you, love, remember. and there is pansies, that's for thoughts.
where spain?
marrying a punk, my lord, is pressing to death, whipping, and hanging.
a document in madness. thoughts and remembrance fitted.
faith, i saw it not, but i felt it hot in her breath.
slandering a prince deserves it.
there's fennel for you, and columbines., there's rue for you, and here's some for me. we may call it "herb of grace" o' sundays., oh, you must wear your rue with a difference., there's a daisy. i would give you some violets, but they withered all when my father died. they say he made a good end (sings) for bonny sweet robin is all my joy, 
where america, the indies?
joy to you, mariana! love her, angelo: i have confess'd her and i know her virtue. thanks, good friend escalus, for thy much goodne there's more behind that is more gratulate. we shill employ thee in a worthier place. forgive him, angelo, that brought you home the head of ragozine for claudio's: the offence pardons itself. dear isabel, whereto if you'll a willing ear incline, what's mine is yours and what is yours is mine. so, bring us to our palace; where we'll show what's yet behind, that's meet you all should know.
thought and affliction, passion, hell itself, she turns to favor and to prettiness.
o, sir, upon her nose, all o'er-embellished with rubies, carbuncles, sapphires, declining their rich aspect to the hot breath of spain, who sent whole armadas of caracks to be ballast at her nose.
and will he not come again? and will he not come again? no, no, he is dead, go to thy deathbed. he never will come again. his beard was as white as snow, all flaxen was his poll. he is gone, he is gone, and we cast away moan, god ha' mercy on his soul., and of all christian souls, i pray god. god be wi' ye.
where stood belgia, the netherlands?
so shaken as we are, so wan with care, find we a time for frighted peace to pant and breathe short-winded accents of new broils to be commenced in strands afar remote. shall daub her lips with her own children's blood. nor more shall trenching war channel her fields, nor bruise her flow'rets with the armed hoofs of hostile paces. those opposèd eyes, all of one nature, of one substance bred, did lately meet in the intestine shock and furious close of civil butchery shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks, against acquaintance, kindred, and allies. the edge of war, like an ill-sheathèd knife, no more shall cut his master. therefore, friends, as far as to the sepulcher of christ, we are impressèd and engaged to fight, forthwith a power of english shall we levy, whose arms were molded in their mothers' womb to chase these pagans in those holy fields which fourteen hundred years ago were nailed for our advantage on the bitter cross.
do you see this, o god?
o, sir, i did not look so low. to conclude: this drudge or diviner laid claim to me, call'd me dromio, swore i was assured to her, told me what privy marks i had about me, as the mark of my shoulder, the mole in my neck, the great wart on my left arm, that i, amazed, ran from her as a witch. and, i think, if my breast had not been made of faith, and my heart of steel, she had transformed me to a curtal dog and made me turn i' th' wheel.
but this our purpose now is twelve month old, and bootless 'tis to tell you we will go. of you, my gentle cousin westmoreland, what yesternight our council did decree in forwarding this dear expedience.
laertes, i must commune with your grief, or you deny me right. go but apart, and they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me. if by direct or by collateral hand they find us touched, we will our kingdom give, our crown, our life, and all that we can ours, be you content to lend your patience to us, and we shall jointly labor with your soul to give it due content.
go, hie thee presently. post to the road. an if the wind blow any way from shore, if any bark put forth, come to the mart, where i will walk till thou return to me. if every one knows us, and we know none, 'tis time, i think, to trudge, pack, and be gone.
my liege, this haste was hot in question, but yesternight: when all athwart there came a post from wales loaden with heavy news, whose worst was that the noble mortimer, leading the men of herefordshire to fight was by the rude hands of that welshman taken, a thousand of his people butcherèd, upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse, such beastly shameless transformation without much shame retold or spoken of.
let this be so. his means of death, his obscure funeral, no noble rite nor formal ostentation, cry to be heard as 'twere from heaven to earth, that i must call 't in question.
so fly i from her that would be my wife.
it seems then that the tidings of this broil brake off our business for the holy land.
so you shall. and where the offense is, let the great ax fall.
there's none but witches do inhabit here, and therefore 'tis high time that i were hence. she that doth call me husband, even my soul possessed with such a gentle sovereign grace,
this matched with other did, my gracious lord. came from the north and thus it did import: on holy-rood day, the gallant hotspur there, young harry percy, and brave archibald, that ever valiant and approvèd scot, a sad and bloody hour, as by discharge of their artillery and shape of likelihood the news was told; for he that brought them, in the very heat uncertain of the issue any way.
what are they that would speak with me?
of such enchanting presence and discourse, hath almost made me traitor to myself. but lest myself be guilty to self wrong,
here is a dear, a true-industrious friend, sir walter blunt, new lighted from his horse. stained with the variation of each soil and he hath brought us smooth and welcome news. the earl of douglas is discomfited; ten thousand bold scots, two-and-twenty knights, balked in their own blood, did sir walter see mordake, earl of fife, and eldest son to beaten douglas, and the earl of atholl, of murray, angus, and menteith. and is not this an honorable spoil?
seafaring men, sir. they say they have letters for you.
master antipholus.
in faith, it is a conquest for a prince to boast of.
let them come in.
ay, that's my name.
yea, there thou mak'st me sad, and mak'st me sin in envy that my lord northumberland should be the father to so blest a son, amongst a grove the very straightest plant, who is sweet fortune's minion and her pride; whilst i, by looking on the praise of him, see riot and dishonor stain the brow that some night-tripping fairy had exchanged in cradle-clothes our children where they lay, and called mine "percy," his "plantagenet"! then would i have his harry, and he mine. of this young percy's pride? the prisoners, which he in this adventure hath surprised to his own use he keeps, and sends me word i shall have none but mordake, earl of fife.
i do not know from what part of the world
i know it well, sir. lo, here's the chain. i thought to have ta'en you at the porpentine; the chain unfinished made me stay thus long.
malevolent to you in all aspects, which makes him prune himself, and bristle up the crest of youth against your dignity.
god bless you, sir.
what is your will that i shall do with this?
but i have sent for him to answer this. our holy purpose to jerusalem. cousin, on wednesday next our council we will hold at windsor. so inform the lords. but come yourself with speed to us again, than out of anger can be utterèd.
let him bless thee too.
what please yourself, sir. i have made it for you.
i will, my liege.
he shall, sir, an 't please him. there's a letter for you, sir, it comes from the ambassador that was bound for england, if your name be horatio, as i am let to know it is. (gives horatio a letter)
made it for me, sir? i bespoke it not.
now, hal, what time of day is it, lad?
(reads) "horatio, when thou shalt have overlooked this, give these fellows some means to the king. they have letters for him. ere we were two days old at sea, a pirate of very warlike appointment gave us chase. finding ourselves too slow of sail, we put on a compelled valor, and in the grapple i boarded them. on the instant, they got clear of our ship, so i alone became their prisoner. they have dealt with me like thieves of mercy, but they knew what they did; i am to do a good turn for them.
not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have. go home with it and please your wife withal, and then receive my money for the chain.
thou art so fat-witted, with drinking of old sack, and unbuttoning thee after supper, and sleeping upon benches after noon, that thou hast forgotten to demand that truly which thou wouldst truly know. what a devil hast thou to do with the time of the day? unless hours were cups of sack, and minutes capons, and clocks the tongues of bawds, and dials the signs of leaping-houses, and the blessed sun himself a fair hot wench in flame-colored taffeta, i see no reason why thou shouldst be so superfluous to demand the time of the day.
let the king have the letters i have sent, and repair thou to me with as much speed as thou wouldst fly death. i have words to speak in thine ear will make thee dumb, yet are they much too light for the bore of the matter. these good fellows will bring thee where i am. rosencrantz and guildenstern hold their course for england. of them i have much to tell thee. fare-well. he that thou knowest thine, hamlet." come, i will give you way for these your letters, and do 't the speedier, that you may direct me to him from whom you brought them.
i pray you, sir, receive the money now, for fear you ne'er see chain nor money more.
indeed, you come near me now, hal, for we that take purses go by the moon and the seven stars, and not by phoebus, he,that wand'ring knight so fair. and i prithee, sweet wag, when thou art king, as god save thy grace, majesty, i should say, for grace thou wilt have none, 
now must your conscience my acquaintance seal, and you must put me in your heart for friend, sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear, that he which hath your noble father slain
you are a merry man, sir. fare you well.
what, none?
it well appears. but tell me why you proceeded not against these feats, so criminal and so capital in nature, as by your safety, wisdom, all things else, you mainly were stirred up.
but this i think: there's no man is so vain that would refuse so fair an offered chain.
no, by my troth, not so much as will serve to be prologue to an egg and butter.
oh, for two special reasons, but yet to me they are strong. the queen his mother lives almost by his looks, and for myself, my virtue or my plague, be it either which, she's so conjunctive to my life and soul, i could not but by her. the other motive why to a public count i might not go, is the great love the general gender bear him, who, dipping all his faults in their affection, convert his gyves to graces, so that my arrows, too slightly timbered for so loud a wind, would have reverted to my bow again, and not where i had aimed them.
i see a man here needs not live by shifts when in the streets he meets such golden gifts. if any ship put out, then straight away.
well, how then? come, roundly, roundly.
a sister driven into desperate terms, whose worth, if praises may go back again, stood challenger on mount of all the age for her perfections. but my revenge will come.
you know since pentecost the sum is due, and since i have not much importuned you, nor now i had not, but that i am bound to persia, and want guilders for my voyage. or i'll attach you by this officer.
marry, then, sweet wag, when thou art king, let not us that are squires of the night's body be called thieves of the day's beauty. let us be diana's foresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of the moon, and let men say we be men of good government, being governed, as the sea is, by our noble and chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal.
that we are made of stuff so flat and dull that we can let our beard be shook with danger and think it pastime. you shortly shall hear more. i loved your father, and we love ourself.
even just the sum that i do owe to you is growing to me by antipholus. and in the instant that i met with you, i shall receive the money for the same. pleaseth you walk with me down to his house, i will discharge my bond and thank you too.
thou sayest well, and it holds well too, for the fortune of us that are the moon's men doth ebb and flow like the sea, being governed, as the sea is, by the moon. as for proof now: a purse of gold most resolutely snatched on monday night and most dissolutely spent on tuesday morning, got with swearing "lay by" and spent with crying "bring in"; now in as low an ebb as the foot of the ladder, and by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the gallows.
how now, what news?
that labor may you save. see where he comes.
by the lord, thou sayest true, lad. and is not my hostess of the tavern a most sweet wench?
letters, my lord, from hamlet. this to your majesty, this to the queen. (gives claudius letters)
and buy a rope's end. that will i bestow among my wife and her confederates for locking me out of my doors by day. but soft. i see the goldsmith. get thee gone.
as the honey of hybla, my old lad of the castle. and is not a buff jerkin a most sweet robe of durance?
from hamlet? who brought them?
i buy a thousand pound a year! i buy a rope!
how now, how now, mad wag? what, in thy quips and thy quiddities? what a plague have i to do with a buff jerkin?
sailors, my lord, they say. i saw them not. of him that brought them.
(to angelo) a man is well holp up that trusts to you! i promisèd your presence and the chain, but neither chain nor goldsmith came to me. if it were chained together, and therefore came not.
why, what a pox have i to do with my hostess of the tavern?
laertes, you shall hear them., leave us.
saving your merry humor, here's the note how much your chain weighs to the utmost carat, the fineness of the gold, and chargeful fashion, than i stand debted to this gentleman. i pray you, see him presently discharged, for he is bound to sea, and stays but for it.
well, thou hast called her to a reckoning many a time and oft.
(reads) "high and mighty, you shall know i am set naked on your kingdom. tomorrow shall i beg leave to see your kingly eyes, when i shall, first asking your pardon thereunto, recount the occasion of my sudden and more strange return. hamlet."
i am not furnished with the present money. good signior, take the stranger to my house, and with you take the chain, and bid my wife disburse the sum on the receipt thereof. perchance i will be there as soon as you.
did i ever call for thee to pay thy part?
what should this mean? are all the rest come back? or is it some abuse, and no such thing?
then you will bring the chain to her yourself.
no, i'll give thee thy due. thou hast paid all there.
know you the hand?
no, bear it with you lest i come not time enough.
yea, and elsewhere, so far as my coin would stretch, and where it would not, i have used my credit.
'tis hamlet's character. "naked"? can you advise me?
well, sir, i will. have you the chain about you?
yea, and so used it that were it not here apparent that thou art heir apparent, but i prithee, sweet wag, shall there be gallows standing in england when thou art king? and resolution thus fubbed as it is with the rusty curb of old father antic the law? do not thou, when thou art king, hang a thief.
i'm lost in it, my lord. but let him come. it warms the very sickness in my heart that i shall live and tell him to his teeth,
an if i have not, sir, i hope you have, or else you may return without your money.
no, thou shalt.
if it be so, laertes, as how should it be so? how otherwise?, will you be ruled by me?
both wind and tide stays for this gentleman, and i, to blame, have held him here too long.
shall i? o rare! by the lord, i'll be a brave judge.
ay, my lord, so you will not o'errule me to a peace.
good lord! you use this dalliance to excuse your breach of promise to the porpentine. but, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.
thou judgest false already: i mean thou shalt have the hanging of the thieves, and so become a rare hangman.
to thine own peace. if he be now returned, no more to undertake it, i will work him to an exploit, now ripe in my devise, under the which he shall not choose but fall. and for his death no wind of blame shall breathe, and call it accident.
the hour steals on. i pray you, sir, dispatch.
well, hal, well, and in some sort it jumps with my humor as well as waiting in the court, i can tell you.
my lord, i will be ruled the rather if you could devise it so that i might be the organ.
you hear how he importunes me. the chain!
for obtaining of suits?
it falls right. you have been talked of since your travel much, wherein, they say, you shine. your sum of parts did not together pluck such envy from him as did that one, and that, in my regard, of the unworthiest siege.
why, give it to my wife, and fetch your money.
yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangman hath no lean wardrobe. 'sblood, i am as melancholy as a gib cat or a lugged bear.
what part is that, my lord?
either send the chain, or send me by some token.
or an old lion, or a lover's lute.
yet needful too, for youth no less becomes the light and careless livery that it wears than settled age his sables and his weeds, importing health and graveness. two months since, i've seen myself, and served against, the french, and they can well on horseback. but this gallant had witchcraft in 't. he grew unto his seat, and to such wondrous doing brought his horse with the brave beast. so far he topped my thought, that i, in forgery of shapes and tricks, come short of what he did.
fie, now you run this humor out of breath. come, where's the chain? i pray you, let me see it.
yea, or the drone of a lincolnshire bagpipe.
a norman was 't?
my business cannot brook this dalliance. if not, i'll leave him to the officer.
moorditch?
a norman.
i answer you? what should i answer you?
thou hast the most unsavory similes, and art indeed the most comparative, rascaliest, sweet young prince. but, hal, i comparative, rascaliest, sweet young prince. but, hal, i prithee trouble me no more with vanity. i would to god thou and i knew where a commodity of good names were to be bought. an old lord of the council rated me the other day in the street about you, sir, but i marked him not, and yet he talked very wisely, but i regarded him not, and yet he talked wisely, and in the street, too.
upon my life, lamond!
the money that you owe me for the chain.
thou didst well, for wisdom cries out in the streets and no man regards it.
the very same.
i owe you none till i receive the chain.
o, thou hast damnable iteration, and art indeed able to corrupt a saint. thou hast done much harm upon me, hal, god forgive thee for it. before i knew thee, hal, i knew nothing, and now am i, if a man should speak truly, little better than one of the wicked. i must give over this life, and i will give it over. by the lord, an i do not, i am a villain. i'll be damned for never a king's son in christendom.
i know him well. he is the brooch indeed and gem of all the nation.
you know i gave it you half an hour since.
where shall we take a purse tomorrow, jack?
he made confession of you, and gave you such a masterly report for art and exercise in your defense, that he cried out 'twould be a sight indeed if one could match you. the 'scrimers of their nation, he swore, had had neither motion, guard, nor eye, if you opposed them. sir, this report of his that he could nothing do but wish and beg your sudden coming o'er, to play with him. now, out of this, 
you gave me none. you wrong me much to say so.
zounds, where thou wilt, lad. i'll make one. an i do not, call me villain and baffle me.
what out of this, my lord?
you wrong me more, sir, in denying it. consider how it stands upon my credit.
i see a good amendment of life in thee, from praying to purse-taking.
laertes, was your father dear to you? a face without a heart?
well, officer, arrest him at my suit.
why, hal, 'tis my vocation, hal. 'tis no sin for a man to labor in his vocation.
why ask you this?
i do, (to angelo) and charge you in the duke's name to obey me.
poins!, now shall we know if gadshill have set a match. o, if men were to be saved by merit, what hole in hell were hot enough for him? this is the most omnipotent villain that ever cried "stand!" to a true man.
not that i think you did not love your father but that i know love is begun by time, and that i see, in passages of proof, there lives within the very flame of love a kind of wick or snuff that will abate it. and nothing is at a like goodness still. for goodness, growing to a pleurisy, we should do when we would, for this "would" changes and hath abatements and delays as many as there are tongues, are hands, are accidents. and then this "should" is like a spendthrift sigh hamlet comes back. what would you undertake to show yourself in deed your father's son more than in words?
this touches me in reputation. either consent to pay this sum for me, or i attach you by this officer.
good morrow, ned.
to cut his throat i' th' church.
consent to pay thee that i never had?, 
good morrow, sweet hal., what says monsieur remorse? what says sir john sack-and-sugar? jack, how agrees the devil and thee about thy soul that thou soldest him on good friday last for a cup of madeira and a cold capon's leg?
no place, indeed, should murder sanctuarize. will you do this, keep close within your chamber. hamlet returned shall know you are come home. we'll put on those shall praise your excellence and set a double varnish on the fame and wager on your heads. he, being remiss, most generous and free from all contriving, will not peruse the foils; so that, with ease, or with a little shuffling, you may choose requite him for your father.
here is thy fee. arrest him, officer. i would not spare my brother in this case if he should scorn me so apparently.
sir john stands to his word. the devil shall have his bargain, for he was never yet a breaker of proverbs. he will give the devil his due.
i will do 't. and for that purpose i'll anoint my sword. i bought an unction of a mountebank, so mortal that, but dip a knife in it, collected from all simples that have virtue under the moon, can save the thing from death that is but scratched withal. i'll touch my point with this contagion, that if i gall him slightly
i do arrest you, sir. you hear the suit.
(to falstaff )then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil.
let's further think of this, weigh what convenience both of time and means may fit us to our shape. if this should fail, and that our drift look through our bad performance, 'twere better not assayed. therefore this project
but, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear as all the metal in your shop will answer.
else he had been damned for cozening the devil.
if this should blast in proof., soft, let me see., we'll make a solemn wager on your cunnings., i ha 't! when in your motion you are hot and dry, as make your bouts more violent to that end, a chalice for the nonce, whereon but sipping, if he by chance escape your venomed stuck, our purpose may hold there., but stay, what noise?
sir, sir, i will have law in ephesus, to your notorious shame, i doubt it not.
but, my lads, my lads, tomorrow morning, by four o'clock, early at gad's hill, there are pilgrims going to canterbury with rich offerings, and traders riding to london with fat purses. i have vizards for you all. you have horses for yourselves. gadshill lies tonight in rochester. i have bespoke supper tomorrow night in eastcheap. we may do it as secure as sleep. if you will go, i will stuff your purses full of crowns. if you will not, tarry at home and be hanged.
one woe doth tread upon another's heel,
that stays but till her owner comes aboard, and then, sir, she bears away. our fraughtage, sir, i have conveyed aboard, and i have bought the oil, the balsamum and aqua vitae. blows fair from land. they stay for naught at all but for their owner, master, and yourself.
hear ye, yedward, if i tarry at home and go not, i'll hang you for going.
drowned? oh, where?
how now? a madman? why, thou peevish sheep, what ship of epidamnum stays for me?
you will, chops?
there is a willow grows aslant a brook that shows his hoar leaves in the glassy stream. there with fantastic garlands did she come that liberal shepherds give a grosser name, but our cold maids do "dead men's fingers" call them. there, on the pendant boughs her coronet weeds clambering to hang, an envious sliver broke, fell in the weeping brook. her clothes spread wide, and mermaid-like a while they bore her up, which time she chanted snatches of old lauds as one incapable of her own distress, unto that element. but long it could not be till that her garments, heavy with their drink, pulled the poor wretch from her melodious lay to muddy death.
a ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.
hal, wilt thou make one?
alas, then she is drowned.
thou drunken slave, i sent thee for a rope and told thee to what purpose and what end.
who, i rob? i a thief? not i, by my faith.
drowned, drowned.
you sent me for a rope's end as soon. you sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.
there's neither honesty, manhood, nor good fellowship in thee, nor thou cam'st not of the blood royal, if thou darest not stand for ten shillings.
too much of water hast thou, poor ophelia, and therefore i forbid my tears. but yet it is our trick. nature her custom holds, the woman will be out., adieu, my lord. i have a speech of fire that fain would blaze, but that this folly doubts it.
and teach your ears to list me with more heed. to adriana, villain, hie thee straight. give her this key, and tell her in the desk that's cover'd o'er with turkish tapestry tell her i am arrested in the street, and that shall bail me. hie thee, slave. begone., on, officer, to prison till it come.
well then, once in my days i'll be a madcap.
let's follow, gertrude. how much i had to do to calm his rage! therefore let's follow.
to adriana. that is where we dined, she is too big, i hope, for me to compass. thither i must, although against my will, for servants must their masters' minds fulfill.
why, that's well said.
is she to be buried in christian burial when she willfully seeks her own salvation?
ah, luciana, did he tempt thee so? mightst thou perceive austerely in his eye that he did plead in earnest, yea or no? looked he or red or pale, or sad or merrily? of his heart's meteors tilting in his face?
well, come what will, i'll tarry at home.
i tell thee she is. therefore make her grave straight. the crowner hath sat on her and finds it christian burial.
first he denied you had in him no right.
by the lord, i'll be a traitor then when thou art king.
how can that be, unless she drowned herself in her own defense?
he meant he did me none; the more my spite.
i care not.
why, 'tis found so.
then swore he that he was a stranger here.
sir john, i prithee, leave the prince and me alone. i will lay him down such reasons for this adventure that he shall go.
it must be se offendendo. it cannot be else. for here lies the point: if i drown myself wittingly, it argues an act. and an act hath three branches, it is to act, to do, to perform. argal, she drowned herself wittingly.
and true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.
well, god give thee the spirit of persuasion, and him the ears of profiting, that what thou speakest may move, and what he hears may be believed, that the true prince may, for recreation sake, prove a false thief, for the poor abuses of the time want countenance. farewell. you shall find me in eastcheap.
nay, but hear you, goodman delver, 
then pleaded i for you.
farewell, thou latter spring. farewell, all-hallown summer.
give me leave. here lies the water. good. here stands the man. good. if the man go to this water and drown himself, it is, will he nill he, he goes. mark you that. but if the water come to him and drown him, he drowns not himself. argal, he that is not guilty of his own death shortens not his own life.
and what said he?
now, my good sweet honey lord, ride with us tomorrow. i have a jest to execute that i cannot manage alone. falstaff, peto, bardolph, and gadshill shall rob those men that we have already waylaid. yourself and i will not be there. and when they have the booty, if you and i do not rob them, cut this head off from my shoulders.
but is this law?
that love i begged for you he begged of me.
how shall we part with them in setting forth?
ay, marry, is 't. crowner's quest law.
with what persuasion did he tempt thy love?
why, we will set forth before or after them, and appoint them a place of meeting, wherein it is at our pleasure to fail; and then will they adventure upon the exploit themselves, which they shall have no sooner achieved but we'll set upon them.
will you ha' the truth on 't? if this had not been a gentlewoman, she should have been buried out o' christian burial.
with words that in an honest suit might move.
yea, but 'tis like that they will know us by our horses, by our habits, and by every other appointment to be ourselves.
why, there thou sayst. and the more pity that great folk should have countenance in this world to drown or hang themselves more than their even christian. come, my spade. there is no ancient gentleman but gardeners, ditchers, and grave-makers. they hold up adam's profession.
did'st speak him fair?
tut, our horses they shall not see; i'll tie them in the wood. our vizards we will change after we leave them. and, sirrah, i have cases of buckram for the nonce, to immask our noted outward garments.
was he a gentleman?
have patience, i beseech.
yea, but i doubt they will be too hard for us.
he was the first that ever bore arms.
i cannot, nor i will not hold me still; my tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will. he is deformèd, crooked, old, and sere, vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind, stigmatical in making, worse in mind.
well, for two of them, i know them to be as true-bred cowards as ever turned back; and for the third, if he fight longer than he sees reason, i'll forswear arms. the virtue of this jest will be the incomprehensible lies that this same fat rogue will tell us when we meet at supper: how thirty at least he fought with, what wards, what blows, what extremities he endured; and in the reproof of this lies the jest.
why, he had none.
who would be jealous, then, of such a one? no evil lost is wailed when it is gone.
well, i'll go with thee. provide us all things necessary and meet me tomorrow night in eastcheap. there i'll sup. farewell.
what, art a heathen? how dost thou understand the scripture? the scripture says adam digged. could he dig without arms? i'll put another question to thee. if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confess thyself, 
and yet would herein others' eyes were worse. far from her nest the lapwing cries away. my heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse.
farewell, my lord.
go to.
here, go, the desk, the purse! sweet, now make haste.
the unyoked humor of your idleness. yet herein will i imitate the sun, who doth permit the base contagious clouds to smother up his beauty from the world, being wanted, he may be more wondered at by breaking through the foul and ugly mist of vapors that did seem to strangle him.
what is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?
how hast thou lost thy breath?
if all the year were playing holidays, but when they seldom come, they wished for come, and nothing pleaseth but rare accidents. so when this loose behavior i throw off and pay the debt i never promisèd, by so much shall i falsify men's hopes; and, like bright metal on a sullen ground, my reformation, glitt'ring o'er my fault, shall show more goodly and attract more eyes i'll so offend to make offense a skill, redeeming time when men think least i will.
the gallows-maker, for that frame outlives a thousand tenants.
by running fast.
my blood hath been too cold and temperate, unapt to stir at these indignities, and you have found me, for accordingly you tread upon my patience. but be sure mighty and to be feared, than my condition, which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down, and therefore lost that title of respect which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud.
i like thy wit well, in good faith. the gallows does well, but how does it well? it does well to those that do ill.
where is thy master, dromio? is he well?
the scourge of greatness to be used on it, and that same greatness too which our own hands have holp to make so portly.
now thou dost ill to say the gallows is built stronger than the church. argal, the gallows may do well to thee. to 't again, come.
no, he's in tartar limbo, worse than hell. a devil in an everlasting garment hath him, one whose hard heart is buttoned up with steel; a wolf, nay, worse, a fellow all in buff; a back-friend, a shoulder clapper, one that countermands
my lord, 
"who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a carpenter?"
the passages of alleys, creeks, and narrow lands; a hound that runs counter and yet draws dryfoot well,
worcester, get thee gone; for i do see o sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory, and majesty might never yet endure the moody frontier of a servant brow. you have good leave to leave us. when we need
ay, tell me that, and unyoke.
why, man, what is the matter?
(to northumberland)you were about to speak.
marry, now i can tell.
i do not know the matter. he is 'rested on the case.
yea, my good lord. those prisoners in your highness' name demanded, which harry percy here at holmedon took, were, as he says, not with such strength denied either envy, therefore, or misprison is guilty of this fault, and not my son.
to 't.
what, is he arrested? tell me at whose suit.
my liege, i did deny no prisoners. but i remember, when the fight was done, breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword, came there a certain lord, neat, and trimly dressed, fresh as a bridegroom, and his chin new reaped showed like a stubble land at harvest home. and 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held a pouncet box, which ever and anon he gave his nose and took 't away again, who therewith angry, when it next came there, and as the soldiers bore dead bodies by, he called them untaught knaves, unmannerly, to bring a slovenly unhandsome corse betwixt the wind and his nobility. he questioned me; amongst the rest demanded my prisoners in your majesty's behalf. i then, all smarting with my wounds being cold, to be so pestered with a popinjay, answered neglectingly i know not what, he should, or he should not; for he made me mad to see him shine so brisk and smell so sweet and talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman
mass, i cannot tell.
i know not at whose suit he is arrested well, will you send him, mistress, redemption, the money in his desk?
and telling me the sovereignest thing on earth was parmacety for an inward bruise, and that it was great pity, so it was, this villanous saltpeter should be digged which many a good tall fellow had destroyed so cowardly, and but for these vile guns he would himself have been a soldier. this bald unjointed chat of his, my lord, and i beseech you, let not his report come current for an accusation betwixt my love and your high majesty.
cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull ass will not mend his pace with beating. and when you are asked this question next, say "a grave-maker." the houses that he makes last till doomsday. go, get thee in. fetch me a stoup of liquor.
go fetch it, sister.
the circumstance considered, good my lord, to such a person and in such a place, at such a time, with all the rest retold, may reasonably die and never rise to do him wrong or any way impeach
(digs and sings) in youth when i did love, did love, methought it was very sweet to contract, o, the time, for, a, my behove, oh, methought, there, a, was nothing, a, meet.
this i wonder at, that he, unknown to me, should be in debt. tell me, was he arrested on a band?
why, yet he doth deny his prisoners, but with proviso and exception that we at our own charge shall ransom straight his brother-in-law, the foolish mortimer, the lives of those that he did lead to fight against that great magician, damned glendower, whose daughter, as we hear, the earl of march hath lately married. shall our coffers then shall we buy treason and indent with fears when they have lost and forfeited themselves? no, on the barren mountains let him starve, for i shall never hold that man my friend to ransom home revolted mortimer.
has this fellow no feeling of his business? he sings at grave- making.
a chain, a chain. do you not hear it ring?
revolted mortimer! he never did fall off, my sovereign liege, but by the chance of war. to prove that true those mouthèd wounds, which valiantly he took when on the gentle severn's sedgy bank in single opposition hand to hand he did confound the best part of an hour three times they breathed, and three times did they drink, upon agreement, of swift severn's flood, who then, affrighted with their bloody looks, ran fearfully among the trembling reeds bloodstainèd with these valiant combatants. never did bare and rotten policy color her working with such deadly wounds, nor could the noble mortimer then let not him be slandered with revolt.
custom hath made it in him a property of easiness.
what, the chain?
thou dost belie him, percy; thou dost belie him. he never did encounter with glendower. i tell thee, he durst as well have met the devil alone art thou not ashamed? but, sirrah, henceforth let me not hear you speak of mortimer. send me your prisoners with the speediest means, or you shall hear in such a kind from me we license your departure with your son., 
'tis e'en so. the hand of little employment hath the daintier sense.
no, no, the bell. 'tis time that i were gone. it was two ere i left him, and now the clock strikes one.
send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it.
(sings) but age with his stealing steps hath clawed me in his clutch, and hath shipped me into the land as if i had never been such. (throws up a skull)
the hours come back. that did i never hear.
an if the devil come and roar for them, i will not send them. i will after straight albeit i make a hazard of my head.
that skull had a tongue in it and could sing once. how the knave jowls it to the ground, as if it were cain's jawbone, that did the first murder! it might be the pate of a politician, which this ass now o'erreaches, one that would circumvent god, might it not?
very fear.
what, drunk with choler? stay and pause awhile. here comes your uncle.
it might, my lord.
as if time were in debt. how fondly dost thou reason!
speak of mortimer? zounds, i will speak of him, and let my soul yea, on his part i'll empty all these veins and shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust, but i will lift the downtrod mortimer as high in the air as this unthankful king,
or of a courtier, which could say, "good morrow, sweet lord!" "how dost thou, good lord?" this might be my lord such-a-one that praised my lord such-a-one's horse when he meant to beg it, might it not?
time is a very bankrout and owes more than he's worth to season. nay, he's a thief too. have you not heard men say that time comes stealing on by night and day? hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?
(to worcester) brother, the king hath made your nephew mad.
ay, my lord.
go, dromio. there's the money. bear it straight, and bring thy master home immediately. come, sister, i am pressed down with conceit:
who struck this heat up after i was gone?
why, e'en so. and now my lady worm's, chapless and knocked about the mazard with a sexton's spade. here's fine revolution, an we had the trick to see 't. did these bones cost no more the breeding but to play at loggets with them? mine ache to think on 't.
there's not a man i meet but doth salute me as if i were their well-acquainted friend, and every one doth call me by my name. some tender money to me; some invite me; some offer me commodities to buy. even now a tailor called me in his shop and showed me silks that he had bought for me, and therewithal took measure of my body. and lapland sorcerers inhabit here.
he will forsooth have all my prisoners, of my wife's brother, then his cheek looked pale, and on my face he turned an eye of death, trembling even at the name of mortimer.
(sings) a pickax and a spade, a spade, for and a shrouding sheet, oh, a pit of clay for to be made for such a guest is meet. (throws up another skull)
master, here's the gold you sent me for. what, have you got the picture of old adam new-appareled?
i cannot blame him. was not he proclaimed
there's another. why may not that be the skull of a lawyer? where be his quiddities now, his quillities, his cases, his tenures, and his tricks? why does he suffer this rude knave now to knock him about the sconce with a dirty shovel and will not tell him of his action of battery? hum! this fellow might be in 's time a great buyer of land, with his statutes, his recognizances, his fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries. is this the fine of his fines and the recovery of his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of fine dirt? will his vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases, and double ones too, than the length and breadth of a pair of indentures? the very conveyances of his lands will hardly lie in this box, and must the inheritor himself have no more, ha?
what gold is this? what adam dost thou mean?
he was; i heard the proclamation. and then it was when the unhappy king, whose wrongs in us god pardon!, did set forth upon his irish expedition; to be deposed and shortly murderèd.
not a jot more, my lord.
not that adam that kept the paradise, but that adam that keeps the prison; he that goes in the calf's skin that was killed for the prodigal; he that came behind you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you forsake your liberty.
and for whose death we in the world's wide mouth live scandalized and foully spoken of.
is not parchment made of sheepskins?
i understand thee not.
but soft, i pray you. did king richard then heir to the crown?
ay, my lord, and of calfskins too.
no? why, 'tis a plain case: he that went, like a bass viol in a case of leather; the man, sir, that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a sob and 'rests them; he, sir, that takes pity on decayed men and gives them suits of durance; he that sets up his rest to do more exploits with his mace than a morris-pike.
he did; myself did hear it.
i will speak to this fellow., whose grave's this, sirrah?
what, thou meanest an officer?
nay then, i cannot blame his cousin king that wished him on the barren mountains starve. but shall it be that you that set the crown and for his sake wear the detested blot of murderous subornation, shall it be that you a world of curses undergo, being the agents or base second means, o, pardon me that i descend so low to show the line and the predicament wherein you range under this subtle king. shall it for shame be spoken in these days, that men of your nobility and power
mine, sir. (sings)
ay, sir, the sergeant of the band; he that brings any man to answer it that breaks his band; one that thinks a man always going to bed and says "god give you good rest."
did gage them both in an unjust behalf (as both of you, god pardon it, have done) to put down richard, that sweet lovely rose, and shall it in more shame be further spoken that you are fooled, discarded, and shook off by him for whom these shames you underwent? no, yet time serves wherein you may redeem into the good thoughts of the world again, revenge the jeering and disdain'd contempt of this proud king, who studies day and night to answer all the debt he owes to you therefore i say, 
oh, a pit of clay for to be made for such a guest is meet.
well, sir, there rest in your foolery. is there any ships put forth tonight? may we be gone?
peace, cousin, say no more. and now i will unclasp a secret book, and to your quick-conceiving discontents i'll read you matter deep and dangerous, as to o'erwalk a current roaring loud on the unsteadfast footing of a spear.
i think it be thine, indeed, for thou liest in 't.
why, sir, i brought you word an hour since that the bark expedition put forth tonight, and then were you hindered by the sergeant to tarry for the hoy delay. here are the angels that you sent for to deliver you.
if he fall in, good night, or sink or swim! send danger from the east unto the west, and let them grapple: o, the blood more stirs to rouse a lion than to start a hare!
you lie out on 't, sir, and therefore it is not yours. for my part, i do not lie in 't, and yet it is mine.
and here we wander in illusions. some blessed power deliver us from hence!
imagination of some great exploit drives him beyond the bounds of patience.
thou dost lie in 't, to be in 't and say it is thine. 'tis for the dead, not for the quick. therefore thou liest.
well met, well met, master antipholus. i see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now.
to pluck bright honor from the pale-faced moon, or dive into the bottom of the deep, where fathom line could never touch the ground, and pluck up drownèd honor by the locks, without corrival all her dignities. but out upon this half-faced fellowship!
'tis a quick lie, sir. 'twill away gain from me to you.
satan, avoid! i charge thee, tempt me not.
(to northumberland) he apprehends a world of figures here, but not the form of what he should attend., 
what man dost thou dig it for?
master, is this mistress satan?
i cry you mercy.
for no man, sir.
it is the devil.
those same noble scots that are your prisoners, 
what woman, then?
nay, she is worse; she is the devil's dam, and here she comes in the habit of a light wench. and thereof comes that the wenches say "god damn me" that's as much to say "god make me a light wench." it is written they appear to men like angels of light. light is an effect of fire, and fire will burn: ergo, light wenches will burn. come not near her.
i'll keep them all. by god, he shall not have a scot of them. no, if a scot would save his soul, he shall not.
for none, neither.
will you go with me? we'll mend our dinner here.
you start away and lend no ear unto my purposes: those prisoners you shall keep, 
who is to be buried in 't?
master, if you do, expect spoon meat; or bespeak a long spoon.
nay, i will. that's flat! he said he would not ransom mortimer, forbad my tongue to speak of mortimer. and in his ear i'll hollo "mortimer." nay, i'll have a starling shall be taught to speak nothing but "mortimer," and give it him
one that was a woman, sir, but, rest her soul, she's dead.
why, dromio?
hear you, cousin, a word.
how absolute the knave is! we must speak by the card, or equivocation will undo us. by the lord, horatio, these three years i have taken a note of it. the age is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls his kibe., how long hast thou been a grave-maker?
marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with the devil.
all studies here i solemnly defy, save how to gall and pinch this bolingbroke. and that same sword-and-buckler prince of wales, and would be glad he met with some mischance, i would have him poisoned with a pot of ale.
of all the days i' the year, i came to 't that day that our last king hamlet overcame fortinbras.
(to courtesan) avoid then, fiend! what tell'st thou me of supping? thou art, as you are all, a sorceress. i conjure thee to leave me and be gone.
farewell, kinsman. i'll talk to you when you are better tempered to attend.
how long is that since?
or, for my diamond, the chain you promised, and i'll be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
art thou to break into this woman's mood, tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!
cannot you tell that? every fool can tell that. it was the very day that young hamlet was born, he that is mad and sent into england.
some devils ask but the parings of one's nail, a rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin, a nut, a cherrystone; but she, more covetous, would have a chain. master, be wise. an if you give it her, the devil will shake her chain and fright us with it.
why, look you, i am whipped and scourged with rods, nettled and stung with pismires, when i hear in richard's time, what do you call the place? a plague upon it! it is in gloucestershire. 'twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept, his uncle york; where i first bowed my knee 'sblood, when you and he came back from ravenspurgh.
ay, marry, why was he sent into england?
i pray you, sir, my ring or else the chain. i hope you do not mean to cheat me so.
at berkley castle.
why, because he was mad. he shall recover his wits there, or, if he do not, it's no great matter there.
avaunt, thou witch!, come, dromio, let us go.
you say true. why, what a candy deal of courtesy "look when his infant fortune came to age," and "gentle harry percy," and "kind cousin." o, the devil take such cozeners!, god forgive me! good uncle, tell your tale. i have done.
why?
"fly pride," says the peacock. mistress, that you know.
we will stay your leisure.
'twill not be seen in him there. there the men are as mad as he.
now, out of doubt antipholus is mad; else would he never so demean himself. a ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats, and for the same he promised me a chain. the reason that i gather he is mad, besides this present instance of his rage, is a mad tale he told today at dinner of his own doors being shut against his entrance. on purpose shut the doors against his way. my way is now to hie home to his house and tell his wife that, being lunatic, he rushed into my house and took perforce for forty ducats is too much to lose.
i have done, i' faith.
how came he mad?
fear me not, man. i will not break away: i'll give thee, ere i leave thee, so much money, to warrant thee, as i am 'rested for. my wife is in a wayward mood today that i should be attached in ephesus. i tell you, 'twill sound harshly in her ears.
then once more to your scottish prisoners: deliver them up without their ransom straight, and make the douglas' son your only mean which i shall send you written, be assured will easily be granted., (to northumberland) you, my lord, your son in scotland being thus employed, shall secretly into the bosom creep the archbishop.
very strangely, they say.
here comes my man. i think he brings the money. how now, sir? have you that i sent you for?
of york, is it not?
how "strangely"?
here's that, i warrant you, will pay them all.
true; who bears hard his brother's death at bristol, the lord scroop. i speak not this in estimation, as what i think might be, but what i know and only stays but to behold the face of that occasion that shall bring it on.
faith, e'en with losing his wits.
but where's the money?
i smell it. upon my life, it will do well.
upon what ground?
why, sir, i gave the money for the rope.
before the game is afoot thou still let'st slip.
why, here in denmark. i have been sexton here, man and boy, thirty years.
five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope?
and then the power of scotland and of york to join with mortimer, ha?
how long will a man lie i' the earth ere he rot?
i'll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.
and so they shall.
faith, if he be not rotten before he die, as we have many pocky corses nowadays that will scarce hold the laying in, he will last you some eight year or nine year. a tanner will last you nine year.
to what end did i bid thee hie thee home?
in faith, it is exceedingly well aimed.
why he more than another?
to a rope's end, sir, and to that end am i returned.
and 'tis no little reason bids us speed for, bear ourselves as even as we can, the king will always think him in our debt, and think we think ourselves unsatisfied, till he hath found a time to pay us home. to make us strangers to his looks of love.
why, sir, his hide is so tanned with his trade that he will keep out water a great while, and your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body. (indicates a skull) here's a skull now. this skull has lain in the earth three-and-twenty years.
and to that end, sir, i will welcome you. (beats dromio of ephesus)
he does, he does. we'll be revenged on him.
whose was it?
good sir, be patient.
cousin, farewell. no further go in this than i by letters shall direct your course. i'll steal to glendower and lord mortimer, where you and douglas and our powers at once, as i will fashion it, shall happily meet to bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,
a whoreson mad fellow's it was. whose do you think it was?
nay, 'tis for me to be patient. i am in adversity.
farewell, good brother. we shall thrive, i trust.
nay, i know not.
good now, hold thy tongue.
uncle, adieu: o, let the hours be short till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport.
a pestilence on him for a mad rogue! he poured a flagon of rhenish on my head once. this same skull, sir, was yorick's skull, the king's jester.
nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.
heigh-ho! an it be not four by the day, i'll be hanged. charles's wain is over the new chimney, and yet our horse not packed., what, ostler!
this?
thou whoreson, senseless villain.
(within) anon, anon.
e'en that.
i would i were senseless, sir, that i might not feel your blows.
i prithee, tom, beat cut's saddle. put a few flocks in the point. poor jade is wrung in the withers out of all cess.
let me see. (takes the skull) alas, poor yorick! i knew him, horatio, a fellow of infinite jest, of most excellent fancy. he hath borne me on his back a thousand times, and now, how abhorred in my imagination it is! my gorge rises at it. here hung those lips that i have kissed i know not how oft. , where be your gibes now? your gambols? your songs? your flashes of merriment that were wont to set the table on a roar? not one now to mock your own grinning? quite chapfallen? now get you to my lady's chamber and tell her, let her paint an inch thick, to this favor she must come. make her laugh at that., prithee, horatio, tell me one thing.
thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an ass.
peas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that is the next way to give poor jades the bots. this house is turned upside down since robin ostler died.
what's that, my lord?
i am an ass, indeed; you may prove it by my long ears., i have served him from the hour of my nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his hands for my service but blows. when i am cold, he heats me with beating; when i am warm, he cools me with beating. i am waked with it when i sleep, raised with it when i sit, driven out of doors with it when i go from home, welcomed home with it when i return. nay, i bear it on my shoulders as a beggar wont her brat, and i think when he hath lamed me, i shall beg with it from door to door.
poor fellow never joyed since the price of oats rose. it was the death of him.
dost thou think alexander looked o' this fashion i' th' earth?
come, go along. my wife is coming yonder.
i think this be the most villanous house in all london road for fleas. i am stung like a tench.
e'en so.
mistress, respice finem, respect your end, or rather, the prophecy like the parrot, "beware the rope's end."
like a tench? by the mass, there is ne'er a king christen could be better bit than i have been since the first cock.
and smelt so? pah! (puts down the skull)
wilt thou still talk? (beats dromio of ephesus)
why, they will allo w us ne'er a jordan, and then we leak in your chimney, and your chamber-lye breeds fleas like a loach.
e'en so, my lord.
how say you now? is not your husband mad?
what, ostler, come away and be hanged. come away.
to what base uses we may return, horatio. why may not imagination trace the noble dust of alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole?
his incivility confirms no less., establish him in his true sense again, and i will please you what you will demand.
i have a gammon of bacon and two races of ginger to be delivered as far as charing cross.
'twere to consider too curiously, to consider so.
alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!
god's body, the turkeys in my pannier are quite starved., what, ostler! a plague on thee! hast thou never an eye in thy head? canst not hear? an 'twere not as good deed as drink to break the pate on thee, i am a very villain. come, and be hanged. hast no faith in thee?
no, faith, not a jot. but to follow him thither with modesty enough, and likelihood to lead it, as thus: alexander died, alexander was buried, alexander returneth to dust, the dust is earth, of earth we make loam, and why of that loam, whereto he was converted, might they not stop a beer barrel? imperious caesar, dead and turned to clay, might stop a hole to keep the wind away. should patch a wall t' expel the winter's flaw! but soft, but soft a while.
mark how he trembles in his ecstasy.
good morrow, carriers. what's o'clock?
here comes the king, the queen, the courtiers, who is this they follow, and with such maimèd rites? this doth betoken fordo its own life. 'twas of some estate. couch we a while and mark.
give me your hand, and let me feel your pulse.
i think it be two o'clock.
what ceremony else?
there is my hand, and let it feel your ear. (strikes pinch)
i prithee, lend me thy lantern to see my gelding in the stable.
that is laertes, a very noble youth, mark.
i charge thee, satan, housed within this man, to yield possession to my holy prayers and to thy state of darkness hie thee straight.
nay, by god, soft. i know a trick worth two of that, i' faith.
what ceremony else?
peace, doting wizard, peace. i am not mad.
(to second carrier) i pray thee, lend me thine.
as we have warranty. her death was doubtful, and, but that great command o'ersways the order, she should in ground unsanctified have lodged till the last trumpet. for charitable prayers yet here she is allowed her virgin crants, her maiden strewments, and the bringing home of bell and burial.
o, that thou wert not, poor distressèd soul!
ay, when, canst tell? "lend me thy lantern," quoth he. marry, i'll see thee hanged first.
must there no more be done?
you minion, you, are these your customers? did this companion with the saffron face whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut and i denied to enter in my house?
sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to london?
we should profane the service of the dead to sing a requiem and such rest to her as to peace-parted souls.
o husband, god doth know you dined at home, where would you had remained until this time,
time enough to go to bed with a candle, i warrant thee. come, neighbour mugs, we'll call up the gentlemen. they will along with company, for they have great charge.
lay her i' th' earth, and from her fair and unpolluted flesh a ministering angel shall my sister be when thou liest howling.
"dined at home"? thou villain, what sayest thou?
what ho, chamberlain!
(to horatio) what, the fair ophelia?
sir, sooth to say, you did not dine at home.
(within) at hand, quoth pickpurse.
sweets to the sweet. farewell! (scatters flowers) i thought thy bride-bed to have decked, sweet maid, and not have strewed thy grave.
were not my doors locked up and i shut out?
that's even as fair as "at hand, quoth the chamberlain," for thou variest no more from picking of purses than giving direction doth from laboring: thou layest the plot how.
oh, treble woe fall ten times treble on that cursèd head, whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense till i have caught her once more in mine arms.
perdie, your doors were locked, and you shut out.
good morrow, master gadshill. it holds current that i told you yesternight: there's a franklin in the wild of kent hath brought three hundred marks with him in gold. i heard him tell it to one of his company last night at supper, a kind of auditor, one that hath abundance of charge too, god knows what. they are up already and call for eggs and butter. they will away presently.
now pile your dust upon the quick and dead, till of this flat a mountain you have made, t' o'ertop old pelion or the skyish head
and did not she herself revile me there?
sirrah, if they meet not with saint nicholas' clerks, i'll give thee this neck.
(comes forward) what is he whose grief bears such an emphasis, whose phrase of sorrow conjures the wandering stars, and makes them stand like wonder-wounded hearers? this is i, hamlet the dane. (leaps into the grave)
sans fable, she herself reviled you there.
no, i'll none of it. i pray thee keep that for the hangman, for i know thou worshipest saint nicholas as truly as a man of falsehood may.
the devil take thy soul!
did not her kitchen maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?
what talkest thou to me of the hangman? if i hang, i'll make a fat pair of gallows, for if i hang, old sir john hangs with me, and thou knowest he is no starveling. tut, there are other troyans that thou dream'st not of, the which for sport sake are content to do the profession some grace, that would, if matters should be looked into, for their own credit sake make all whole. i am joined with no foot-land-rakers, no long-staff sixpenny strikers, none of these mad mustachio purple-hued malt-worms, but with nobility and tranquillity, burgomasters and great oneyers, such as can hold in, such as will strike sooner than speak, and speak sooner than drink, and drink sooner than pray, and yet, zounds, i lie, for they pray continually to their saint the commonwealth, or rather not pray to her but prey on her, for they ride up and down on her and make her their boots.
thou pray'st not well. i prithee, take thy fingers from my throat, for though i am not splenitive and rash, yet have i something in me dangerous,
certes, she did; the kitchen vestal scorned you.
what, the commonwealth their boots? will she hold out water in foul way?
pluck them asunder.
and did not i in rage depart from thence?
she will, she will. justice hath liquored her. we steal as in a castle, cocksure. we have the receipt of fern seed; we walk invisible.
hamlet, hamlet!
that since have felt the vigour of his rage.
nay, by my faith, i think you are more beholding to the night than to fern seed for your walking invisible.
gentlemen, 
(to pinch) is't good to soothe him in these contraries?
give me thy hand. thou shalt have a share in our purchase, as i am a true man.
(to hamlet) good my lord, be quiet.
it is no shame. the fellow finds his vein and, yielding to him, humors well his frenzy.
nay, rather let me have it as you are a false thief.
why, i will fight with him upon this theme
(to adriana) thou hast suborned the goldsmith to arrest me.
go to. homo is a common name to all men. bid the ostler bring my gelding out of the stable. farewell, you muddy knave.
o my son, what theme?
alas, i sent you money to redeem you by dromio here, who came in haste for it.
come, shelter, shelter! i have removed falstaff's horse, and he frets like a gummed velvet.
i loved ophelia. forty thousand brothers could not with all their quantity of love make up my sum. what wilt thou do for her?
money by me! heart and goodwill you might, but surely, master, not a rag of money.
stand close.
o, he is mad, laertes.
went'st not thou to her for a purse of ducats?
poins! poins, and be hanged! poins!
for love of god, forbear him.
he came to me, and i delivered it.
peace, you fat-kidneyed rascal. what a brawling dost thou keep!
'swounds, show me what thou'lt do. woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear thyself? woo't drink up eisel, eat a crocodile? to outface me with leaping in her grave? be buried quick with her?, and so will i. and if thou prate of mountains let them throw millions of acres on us, till our ground, make ossa like a wart! nay, an thou'lt mouth, i'll rant as well as thou.
and i am witness with her that she did.
where's poins, hal?
this is mere madness. and thus a while the fit will work on him. anon, as patient as the female dove his silence will sit drooping.
god and the rope-maker bear me witness that i was sent for nothing but a rope.
he is walked up to the top of the hill. i'll go seek him.
hear you, sir. what is the reason that you use me thus? i loved you ever. but it is no matter. let hercules himself do what he may,
i know it by their pale and deadly looks. they must be bound and laid in some dark room.
i am accursed to rob in that thief's company. the rascal hath removed my horse and tied him i know not where. if i travel but four foot by the square further afoot, i shall break my wind. well, i doubt not but to die a fair death for all this, if i 'scape hanging for killing that rogue. i have forsworn his company hourly any time this two-and-twenty years, and yet i am bewitched with the rogue's company. if the rascal hath not given me medicines to make me love him, i'll be hanged. it could not be else: i have drunk medicines., poins! hal! a plague upon you both., bardolph! peto!, i'll starve ere i'll rob a foot further. an 'twere not as good a deed as drink to turn true man and to leave these rogues, i am the veriest varlet that ever chewed with a tooth. eight yards of uneven ground is threescore and ten miles afoot with me, and the stony-hearted villains know it well enough. a plague upon it when thieves cannot be true one to another!
i pray thee, good horatio, wait upon him.
(to adriana) say wherefore didst thou lock me forth today. (to dromio of ephesus) and why dost thou deny the bag of gold?
whew!
(to laertes) strengthen your patience in our last night's speech. we'll put the matter to the present push., good gertrude, set some watch over your son., an hour of quiet shortly shall we see. till then in patience our proceeding be.
i did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.
a plague upon you all! give me my horse, you rogues. give me my horse and be hanged!
so much for this, sir. now shall you see the other. you do remember all the circumstance?
and, gentle master, i received no gold. but i confess, sir, that we were locked out.
peace, you fat guts! lie down, lay thine ear close to the ground, and list if thou canst hear the tread of travelers.
remember it, my lord?
dissembling villain, thou speak'st false in both.
have you any levers to lift me up again being down? 'sblood, i'll not bear mine own flesh so far afoot again for all the coin in thy father's exchequer. what a plague mean you to colt me thus?
sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting worse than the mutines in the bilboes. rashly, and praised be rashness for it: let us know our indiscretion sometimes serves us well when our deep plots do pall, and that should teach us rough-hew them how we will, 
dissembling harlot, thou art false in all, to make a loathsome abject scorn of me. but with these nails i'll pluck out these false eyes that would behold in me this shameful sport.
thou liest. thou art not colted; thou art uncolted.
that is most certain.
o bind him, bind him! let him not come near me.
i prithee, good prince hal, help me to my horse, good king's son.
up from my cabin, my sea-gown scarfed about me, in the dark fingered their packet, and in fine withdrew to mine own room again, making so bold (my fears forgetting manners) to unseal their grand commission, where i found, horatio, larded with many several sorts of reasons importing denmark's health, and england's too, with, ho!, such bugs and goblins in my life that, on the supervise (no leisure bated, my head should be struck off.
more company! the fiend is strong within him.
out, you rogue! shall i be your ostler?
is 't possible?
ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!
hang thyself in thine own heir-apparent garters! if i be ta'en, i'll peach for this. an i have not ballads made on you all and sung to filthy tunes, let a cup of sack be my poison, when a jest is so forward, and afoot too! i hate it.
(shows horatio a document) here's the commission. read it at more leisure. but wilt thou hear me how i did proceed?
what, will you murder me?, thou jailer, thou, i am thy prisoner. wilt thou suffer them to make a rescue?
stand.
i beseech you.
masters, let him go.
so i do, against my will.
being thus benetted round with villainies, ere i could make a prologue to my brains, they had begun the play, i sat me down, devised a new commission, wrote it fair. a baseness to write fair, and labored much how to forget that learning, but, sir, now it did me yeoman's service. wilt thou know th' effect of what i wrote?
go, bind this man, for he is frantic too.
o, 'tis our setter. i know his voice, bardolph. , what news?
ay, good my lord.
what wilt thou do, thou peevish officer? hast thou delight to see a wretched man do outrage and displeasure to himself?
case you, case you. on with your vizards. there's money of the king's coming down the hill. 'tis going to the king's exchequer.
an earnest conjuration from the king, as england was his faithful tributary, as love between them like the palm might flourish, as peace should stiff her wheaten garland wear and many suchlike "as's" of great charge, that, on the view and knowing of these contents, without debatement further, more or less, he should the bearers put to sudden death,
the debt he owes will be required of me.
you lie, you rogue. 'tis going to the king's tavern.
how was this sealed?
i will discharge thee ere i go from thee. bear me forthwith unto his creditor, and, knowing how the debt grows, i will pay it., home to my house. o most unhappy day!
there's enough to make us all.
why, even in that was heaven ordinant. i had my father's signet in my purse, which was the model of that danish seal. subscribed it, gave 't th' impression, placed it safely, the changeling never known. now, the next day was our sea fight, and what to this was sequent thou know'st already.
o most unhappy strumpet!
to be hanged.
so guildenstern and rosencrantz go to 't.
master, i am here entered in bond for you.
sirs, you four shall front them in the narrow lane. ned poins and i will walk lower. if they 'scape from your encounter, then they light on us.
why, man, they did make love to this employment. they are not near my conscience. their defeat does by their own insinuation grow. 'tis dangerous when the baser nature comes of mighty opposites.
out on thee, villain! wherefore dost thou mad me?
how many be there of them?
why, what a king is this!
cry "the devil!"
some eight or ten.
does it not, think thee, stand me now upon, he that hath killed my king and whored my mother, thrown out his angle for my proper life (and with such cozenage!), is 't not perfect conscience to quit him with this arm? and is 't not to be damned to let this canker of our nature come
god help poor souls! how idly do they talk!
zounds, will they not rob us?
it must be shortly known to him from england what is the issue of the business there.
go bear him hence sister, go you with me.
what, a coward, sir john paunch?
it will be short. the interim's mine. and a man's life's no more than to say "one." that to laertes i forgot myself, for by the image of my cause i see the portraiture of his. i'll court his favors. but sure the bravery of his grief did put me
say now whose suit is he arrested at.
indeed, i am not john of gaunt, your grandfather, but yet no coward, hal.
peace., who comes here?
one angelo, a goldsmith. do you know him?
well, we leave that to the proof.
your lordship is right welcome back to denmark.
i know the man. what is the sum he owes?
sirrah jack, thy horse stands behind the hedge. when thou needest him, there thou shalt find him. farewell, and stand fast.
i humbly thank you, sir. (aside to horatio) dost know this water-fly?
two hundred ducats.
now cannot i strike him, if i should be hanged.
(aside to hamlet) no, my good lord.
say, how grows it due?
(aside to poins ) ned, where are our disguises?
(aside to horatio) thy state is the more gracious, for 'tis a vice to know him. he hath much land, and fertile. let a beast be lord of beasts and his crib shall stand at the king's mess. 'tis a chough, but, as i say, spacious in the possession of dirt.
due for a chain your husband had of him.
(aside to prince henry) here, hard by. stand close.
sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, i should impart a thing to you from his majesty.
he did bespeak a chain for me but had it not.
now, my masters, happy man be his dole, say i. every man to his business.
i will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. put your bonnet to his right use. 'tis for the head.
came to my house and took away my ring, the ring i saw upon his finger now, straight after did i meet him with a chain.
come, neighbor, the boy shall lead our horses down the hill.
i thank your lordship. it is very hot.
it may be so, but i did never see it., i long to know the truth hereof at large.
stand!
no, believe me, 'tis very cold. the wind is northerly.
god for thy mercy, they are loose again!
jesus bless us!
it is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
and come with naked swords. let's call more help to have them bound again.
strike! down with them! cut the villains' throats! ah, whoreson caterpillars, bacon-fed knaves, they hate us youth. down with them! fleece them!
but yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.
away! they'll kill us.
o, we are undone, both we and ours forever!
exceedingly, my lord. it is very sultry, as 'twere, i cannot tell how. my lord, his majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager on your head. sir, this is the matter, 
i see these witches are afraid of swords.
hang, you gorbellied knaves! are you undone? no, you fat chuffs. i would your store were here. on, bacons, on! what, you knaves, young men must live. you are grandjurors, are you? we'll jure you, faith.
i beseech you, remember, (indicates that osric should put on his hat)
she that would be your wife now ran from you.
the thieves have bound the true men. now could thou and i rob the thieves and go merrily to london, it would be argument for a week, laughter for a month, and a good jest forever.
nay, good my lord, for mine ease, in good faith. sir, here is newly come to court laertes, believe me, an absolute gentleman, full of most excellent differences, of very soft society and great showing. indeed, to speak feelingly of him, he is the card or calendar of gentry, for you shall find in him the continent of what part a gentleman would see.
come to the centaur. fetch our stuff from thence. i long that we were safe and sound aboard.
stand close, i hear them coming.
sir, his definement suffers no perdition in you, though i know to divide him inventorially would dizzy th' arithmetic of memory, and yet but yaw neither, in respect of his quick sail.
faith, stay here this night. they will surely do us no harm. you saw they speak us fair, give us gold. methinks they are such a gentle nation that, but for the mountain of mad flesh
come, my masters, let us share, and then to horse before day. an the prince and poins be not two arrant cowards, there's no equity stirring. there's no more valor in that poins than in a wild duck.
but in the verity of extolment, i take him to be a soul of great article, and his infusion of such dearth and rareness as, to make true diction of him, his semblable is his mirror. and who else would trace him? his umbrage, nothing more.
that claims marriage of me, i could find in my heart to stay here still, and turn witch.
your money!
your lordship speaks most infallibly of him.
i will not stay tonight for all the town.
villains!
the concernancy, sir? why do we wrap the gentleman in our more rawer breath?
i am sorry, sir, that i have hindered you, but i protest he had the chain of me, though most dishonestly he doth deny it.
got with much ease. now merrily to horse. the thieves are all scattered, and possessed with fear so strongly that they dare not meet each other. away, good ned. falstaff sweats to death, and lards the lean earth as he walks along. were 't not for laughing, i should pity him.
sir?
how is the man esteemed here in the city?
how the fat rogue roared!
(aside to hamlet) is 't not possible to understand in another tongue? you will do 't, sir, really.
of credit infinite, highly beloved, second to none that lives here in the city. his word might bear my wealth at any time.
but, for mine own part, my lord, i could be well contented to be there, in respect of the love i bear your house. he could be contented; why is he not, then? in respect of the love he bears our house, he shows in this he loves his own barn better than he loves our house. let me see some more. the purpose you undertake is dangerous. why, that's certain. 'tis dangerous to take a cold, to sleep, to drink; but i tell you, my lord fool, out of this nettle, danger, we pluck this flower, safety. the purpose you undertake is dangerous, the friends you have named uncertain, the time itself unsorted, and your whole plot too light for the counterpoise of so great an opposition. say you so, say you so? i say unto you again, you are a shallow, cowardly hind, and you lie. what a lack-brain is this! by the lord, our plot is a good plot as ever was laid, our friends true and constant, a good plot, good friends, and full of expectation; an excellent plot, very good friends. what a frosty-spirited rogue is this! why, my lord of york commends the plot and the general course of the action. zounds, an i were now by this rascal, i could brain him with his lady's fan. is there not my father, my uncle, and myself? lord edmund mortimer, my lord of york, and owen glendower? is there not besides the douglas? have i not all their letters to meet me in arms by the ninth of the next month, and are they not some of them set forward already? what a pagan rascal is this, an infidel! ha, you shall see now in very sincerity of fear and cold heart, will he to the king and lay open all our proceedings. o, i could divide myself and go to buffets, for moving such a dish of skim milk with so honorable an action! hang him, let him tell the king. we are prepared. i will set forward tonight.
what imports the nomination of this gentleman?
speak softly. yonder, as i think, he walks.
how now, kate? i must leave you within these two hours.
of laertes?
which he forswore most monstrously to have. good sir, draw near to me. i'll speak to him., signior antipholus, i wonder much that you would put me to this shame and trouble, with circumstance and oaths so to deny this chain, which now you wear so openly. beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment, you have done wrong to this my honest friend, had hoisted sail and put to sea today. this chain you had of me. can you deny it?
o my good lord, why are you thus alone? for what offense have i this fortnight been a banished woman from my harry's bed? thy stomach, pleasure, and thy golden sleep? why dost thou bend thine eyes upon the earth and start so often when thou sit'st alone? why hast thou lost the fresh blood in thy cheeks to thick-eyed musing and curst melancholy? in thy faint slumbers i by thee have watched, and heard thee murmur tales of iron wars, speak terms of manage to thy bounding steed, of sallies and retires, of trenches, tents, of palisadoes, frontiers, parapets, of basilisks, of cannon, culverin, of prisoners' ransom and of soldiers slain, thy spirit within thee hath been so at war, and thus hath so bestirred thee in thy sleep, that beads of sweat have stood upon thy brow like bubbles in a late-disturbèd stream, such as we see when men restrain their breath on some great sudden hest. o, what portents are these? some heavy business hath my lord in hand, and i must know it, else he loves me not.
(aside to hamlet) his purse is empty already. all 's golden words are spent.
i think i had. i never did deny it.
what, ho!
of him, sir.
yes, that you did, sir, and forswore it too.
is gilliams with the packet gone?
i know you are not ignorant, 
who heard me to deny it or forswear it?
he is, my lord, an hour ago.
i would you did, sir. yet in faith, if you did, it would not much approve me. well, sir?
these ears of mine, thou know'st did hear thee. fie on thee, wretch. 'tis pity that thou liv'st to walk where any honest men resort.
hath butler brought those horses from the sheriff?
you are not ignorant of what excellence laertes is, 
thou art a villain to impeach me thus. against thee presently if thou dar'st stand.
one horse, my lord, he brought even now.
i dare not confess that lest i should compare with him in excellence, but to know a man well were to know himself.
i dare, and do defy thee for a villain.
what horse? a roan, a crop-ear, is it not?
i mean, sir, for his weapon. but in the imputation laid on him by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.
hold, hurt him not, for god's sake. he is mad., some get within him; take his sword away.
it is, my lord.
what's his weapon?
run, master, run. for god's sake, take a house. this is some priory. in, or we are spoiled.
that roan shall be my throne. well, i will back him straight. o, esperance! bid butler lead him forth into the park.
rapier and dagger.
be quiet, people. wherefore throng you hither?
but hear you, my lord.
that's two of his weapons. but well.
to fetch my poor distracted husband hence. and bear him home for his recovery.
what say'st thou, my lady?
the king, sir, hath wagered with him six barbary horses, against the which he has impawned, as i take it, six french rapiers and poniards with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to fancy, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal conceit.
i knew he was not in his perfect wits.
what is it carries you away?
what call you the carriages?
i am sorry now that i did draw on him.
why, my horse,
(aside to hamlet) i knew you must be edified by the margin ere you had done.
how long hath this possession held the man?
out, you mad-headed ape! a weasel hath not such a deal of spleen as you are tossed with. in faith, i'll know your business, harry, that i will. i fear my brother mortimer doth stir to line his enterprise; but if you go, 
the carriages, sir, are the hangers.
and much different from the man he was. but till this afternoon his passion ne'er brake into extremity of rage.
, so far afoot, i shall be weary, love.
the phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could carry cannon by our sides. i would it might be hangers till then. but, on: six barbary horses against six french swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages, that's the french bet against the danish. why is this "impawned," as you call it?
hath he not lost much wealth by wrack of sea? stray'd his affection in unlawful love, a sin prevailing much in youthful men who give their eyes the liberty of gazing? which of these sorrows is he subject to?
come, come, you paraquito, answer me directly unto this question that i ask. an if thou wilt not tell me all things true.
the king, sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes between yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits. he hath laid on twelve for nine, and it would come to immediate trial if your lordship would vouchsafe the answer.
namely, some love that drew him oft from home.
away! away, you trifler. love, i love thee not. i care not for thee, kate. this is no world we must have bloody noses and cracked crowns, and pass them current too., gods me, my horse!, what say'st thou, kate? what would'st thou have with me?
how if i answer "no"?
you should for that have reprehended him.
do you not love me? do you not indeed? i will not love myself. do you not love me? nay, tell me if you speak in jest or no.
i mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
why, so i did.
come, wilt thou see me ride? and when i am a-horseback, i will swear i must not have you henceforth question me whither i go, nor reason whereabout. whither i must, i must; and to conclude, this evening must i leave you, gentle kate. than harry percy's wife; constant you are, but yet a woman; and for secrecy no lady closer, for i well believe thou wilt not utter what thou dost not know,
sir, i will walk here in the hall. if it please his majesty, 'tis the breathing time of day with me. let the foils be brought, the gentleman willing, and the king hold his purpose. i will win for him an i can. if not, i will gain nothing but my shame and the odd hits.
ay, but not rough enough.
how? so far?
shall i redeliver you e'en so?
as roughly as my modesty would let me.
not an inch further. but hark you, kate, whither i go, thither shall you go too. today will i set forth, tomorrow you.
to this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.
haply in private.
it must, of force.
i commend my duty to your lordship.
and in assemblies too.
ned, prithee, come out of that fat room and lend me thy hand to laugh a little.
yours, yours.
ay, but not enough.
where hast been, hal?
he does well to commend it himself. there are no tongues else for 's turn.
it was the copy of our conference. in bed he slept not for my urging it; at board he fed not for my urging it. in company i often glancèd it. still did i tell him it was vile and bad.
with three or four loggerheads amongst three or fourscore hogsheads. i have sounded the very bass string of humility. sirrah, i am sworn brother to a leash of drawers, and can call them all by their christen names, as tom, dick, and francis. they take it already upon their salvation that though i be but prince of wales, yet i am the king of courtesy, and tell me flatly am no proud jack, like falstaff, but a corinthian, a lad of mettle, a good boy, by the lord, so they call me, and when i am king of england, i shall command all the good lads in eastcheap. they call drinking deep "dyeing scarlet," and when you breathe in your watering, they cry "hem!" and bid you "play it off!" to conclude, i am so good a proficient in one quarter of an hour that i can drink with any tinker in his own language during my life. i tell thee, ned, thou hast lost much honor that thou wert not with me in this action; but, sweet ned, to sweeten which name of ned, i give thee this pennyworth of sugar, clapped even now into my hand by an underskinker, one that never spake other english in his life than "eight shillings and sixpence," and "you are welcome," with this shrill addition, "anon, anon, sir., score a pint of bastard in the half-moon," or so. but, ned, to drive away the time till falstaff come, i prithee, do thou stand in some by-room while i question my puny drawer to what end he gave me the sugar; and do thou never leave calling "francis," that his tale to me may be nothing but "anon." step aside, and i'll show thee a precedent.
this lapwing runs away with the shell on his head.
and thereof came it that the man was mad. the venom clamors of a jealous woman it seems his sleeps were hinder'd by thy railing, and therefore comes it that his head is light. thou sayst his meat was sauced with thy upbraidings. unquiet meals make ill digestions. and what's a fever but a fit of madness? thou sayest his sports were hinderd by thy brawls. sweet recreation barred, what doth ensue but moody and dull melancholy, and at her heels a huge infectious troop of pale distemperatures and foes to life? in food, in sport, and life-preserving rest to be disturbed, would mad or man or beast. have scared thy husband from the use of wits.
(within) francis!
he did comply, sir, with his dug before he sucked it. thus has he, and many more of the same bevy that i know the drossy age dotes on, only got the tune of the time and outward habit of encounter, a kind of yeasty collection, which carries them through and through the most fond and winnowed opinions; and do but blow them to their trial, the bubbles are out.
she never reprehended him but mildly when he demeaned himself rough, rude, and wildly., (to adriana) why bear you these rebukes and answer not?
thou art perfect.
my lord, his majesty commended him to you by young osric, who brings back to him that you attend him in the hall. he sends to know if your pleasure hold to play with laertes, or that you will take longer time.
good people, enter and lay hold on him.
(within) francis!
i am constant to my purpose. they follow the king's pleasure. if his fitness speaks, mine is ready, now or whensoever, provided i be so able as now.
no, not a creature enters in my house.
anon, anon, sir., look down into the pomgarnet, ralph.
the king and queen and all are coming down.
then let your servants bring my husband forth.
come hither, francis.
in happy time.
neither: he took this place for sanctuary, till i have brought him to his wits again or lose my labor in assaying it.
my lord?
the queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to laertes before you fall to play.
i will attend my husband, be his nurse, diet his sickness, for it is my office and therefore let me have him home with me.
how long hast thou to serve, francis?
she well instructs me.
be patient, for i will not let him stir till i have used the approvd means i have, with wholesome syrups, drugs, and holy prayers, it is a branch and parcel of mine oath, a charitable duty of my order. therefore depart and leave him here with me.
forsooth, five years, and as much as to, 
you will lose this wager, my lord.
i will not hence and leave my husband here; to separate the husband and the wife.
(within) francis!
i do not think so. since he went into france, i have been in continual practice. i shall win at the odds. but thou wouldst not think how ill all's here about my heart. but it is no matter.
be quiet and depart. thou shalt not have him.
anon, anon, sir.
nay, good my lord, 
complain unto the duke of this indignity.
five year! by 'r lady, a long lease for the clinking of pewter! but, francis, darest thou be so valiant as to play the coward with thy indenture, and show it a fair pair of heels, and run from it?
it is but foolery, but it is such a kind of gain-giving as would perhaps trouble a woman.
come, go. i will fall prostrate at his feet have won his grace to come in person hither and take perforce my husband from the abbess.
o lord, sir, i'll be sworn upon all the books in england, i could find in my heart, 
if your mind dislike anything, obey it. i will forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit.
by this, i think, the dial points at five. anon, i'm sure, the duke himself in person the place of death and sorry execution behind the ditches of the abbey here.
(within) francis!
not a whit. we defy augury. there's a special providence in the fall of a sparrow. if it be now, 'tis not to come. if it be not to come, it will be now. if it be not now, yet it will come, the readiness is all. since no man of aught he leaves knows, what is 't to leave betimes? let be.
upon what cause?
anon, sir.
come, hamlet, come, and take this hand from me. (puts laertes' hand into hamlet's)
to see a reverend syracusian merchant, against the laws and statutes of this town, beheaded publicly for his offense.
how old art thou, francis?
give me your pardon, sir. i've done you wrong. but pardon 't, as you are a gentleman. this presence knows, with sore distraction. what i have done, that might your nature, honor, and exception roughly awake, i here proclaim was madness. was 't hamlet wronged laertes? never hamlet. and when he's not himself does wrong laertes, then hamlet does it not. hamlet denies it. who does it, then? his madness. if't be so, hamlet is of the faction that is wronged. sir, in this audience,
see where they come. we will behold his death.
let me see. about michaelmas next, i shall be, 
let my disclaiming from a purposed evil free me so far in your most generous thoughts that i have shot mine arrow o'er the house
kneel to the duke before he pass the abbey.
(within) francis!
i am satisfied in nature, whose motive in this case should stir me most to my revenge. but in my terms of honor i stand aloof, and will no reconcilement till by some elder masters, of known honor, to keep my name ungored. but till that time i do receive your offered love like love and will not wrong it.
if any friend will pay the sum for him, he shall not die; so much we tender him.
anon, sir. (to prince henry) pray, stay a little, my lord.
i embrace it freely, and will this brother's wager frankly play., 
justice, most sacred duke, against the abbess.
nay, but hark you, francis, for the sugar thou gavest me,'twas a pennyworth, was 't not?
come, one for me.
she is a virtuous and a reverend lady.
o lord, i would it had been two!
i'll be your foil, laertes. in mine ignorance your skill shall, like a star i' th' darkest night, stick fiery off indeed.
may it please your grace, antipholus my husband, whom i made lord of me and all i had at your important letters, this ill day a most outrageous fit of madness took him, with him his bondman, all as mad as he, doing displeasure to the citizens by rushing in their houses, bearing thence rings, jewels, any thing his rage did like. whilst to take order for the wrongs i went that here and there his fury had committed. anon, i wot not by what strong escape, he broke from those that had the guard of him, each one with ireful passion, with drawn swords, met us again and, madly bent on us, chased us away, till, raising of more aid, we came again to bind them. then they fled and here the abbess shuts the gates on us and will not suffer us to fetch him out, nor send him forth that we may bear him hence. therefore, most gracious duke, with thy command
i will give thee for it a thousand pound. ask me when thou wilt, and thou shalt have it.
you mock me, sir.
long since thy husband served me in my wars, and i to thee engaged a prince's word, when thou didst make him master of thy bed, to do him all the grace and good i could.
(within) francis!
no, by this hand.
and bid the lady abbess come to me. i will determine this before i stir.
anon, anon.
give them the foils, young osric., cousin hamlet, you know the wager?
o mistress, mistress, shift and save yourself. my master and his man are both broke loose, whose beard they have singed off with brands of fire, and ever as it blazed, they threw on him great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair. my master preaches patience to him, and the while and sure, unless you send some present help, between them they will kill the conjurer.
anon, francis? no, francis, but tomorrow, francis; or, but, francis, 
very well, my lord. your grace hath laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
peace, fool. thy master and his man are here, and that is false thou dost report to us.
my lord?
i do not fear it. i have seen you both.
i have not breathed almost since i did see it. he cries for you, and vows, if he can take you, to scorch your face and to disfigure you.
wilt thou rob this leathern jerkin, crystal-button, not-pated, agate-ring, puke-stocking, caddis-garter, smooth-tongue, spanish-pouch, 
(tests a rapier) this is too heavy. let me see another.
hark, hark, i hear him, mistress. fly, begone!
o lord, sir, who do you mean?
(tests a rapier) this likes me well. these foils have all a length?
come, stand by me. fear nothing., guard with halberds.
why, then, your brown bastard is your only drink, for look you, francis, your white canvas doublet will sully. in barbary, sir, it cannot come to so much.
ay, my good lord.
ay me, it is my husband. witness you that he is borne about invisible. even now we housed him in the abbey here, and now he's there, past thought of human reason.
what, sir?
set me the stoups of wine upon that table. or quit in answer of the third exchange, let all the battlements their ordnance fire! the king shall drink to hamlet's better breath, and in the cup an union shall he throw in denmark's crown have worn. give me the cups. and let the kettle to the trumpet speak, the trumpet to the cannoneer without, the cannons to the heavens, the heavens to earth, and you, the judges, bear a wary eye.
even for the service that long since i did thee when i bestrid thee in the wars and took deep scars to save thy life. even for the blood that then i lost for thee, now grant me justice.
(within) francis!
come on, sir.
i see my son antipholus and dromio.
away, you rogue! dost thou not hear them call?
come, my lord.
justice, sweet prince, against that woman there, she whom thou gav'st to me to be my wife, that hath abusèd and dishonored me beyond imagination is the wrong that she this day hath shameless thrown on me.
what, stand'st thou still and hear'st such a calling? look to the guests within.
one.
discover how, and thou shalt find me just.
shall i let them in?
no.
this day, great duke, she shut the doors upon me
let them alone awhile, and then open the door.
judgment?
a grievous fault., say, woman, didst thou so?
poins!
a hit, a very palpable hit.
no, my good lord. myself, he, and my sister today did dine together. so befall my soul as this is false he burdens me withal.
anon, anon, sir.
well, again.
but she tells to your highness simple truth.
shall we be merry?
stay, give me drink., hamlet, this pearl is thine.
o perjured woman! , they are both forsworn. in this the madman justly chargeth them.
as merry as crickets, my lad. but hark you, what cunning match have you made with this jest of the drawer. come, what's the issue?
give him the cup.
my liege, i am advisèd what i say, nor heady-rash, provoked with raging ire, albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad. this woman locked me out this day from dinner. that goldsmith there, were he not packed with her, who parted with me to go fetch a chain, promising to bring it to the porpentine, where balthasar and i did dine together. our dinner done and he not coming thither, and in his company that gentleman. (points to the second merchant) there did this perjured goldsmith swear me down that i this day of him received the chain, which, god he knows, i saw not; for the which i did obey, and sent my peasant home for certain ducats. he with none returned. then fairly i bespoke the officer to go in person with me to my house. my wife, her sister, and a rabble more of vile confederates. along with them they brought one pinch, a hungry, lean-faced villain, a mere anatomy, a mountebank, a needy, hollow-eyed, sharp-looking wretch, a living dead man. this pernicious slave, forsooth, took on him as a conjurer, and, gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse,
i am now of all humors that have showed themselves humors since the old days of goodman adam to the pupil age of this present twelve o'clock at midnight.
i'll play this bout first. set it by a while. come.
cries out i was possessed. then all together they fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence, and in a dark and dankish vault at home there left me and my man, both bound together, i gained my freedom and immediately ran hither to your grace, whom i beseech to give me ample satisfaction for these deep shames and great indignities.
what's o'clock, francis?
another hit. what say you?
that he dined not at home, but was locked out.
anon, anon, sir.
a touch, a touch, i do confess 't.
but had he such a chain of thee or no?
that ever this fellow should have fewer words than a parrot, and yet the son of a woman! his industry is upstairs and downstairs, his eloquence the parcel of a reckoning. i am not yet of percy's mind, the hotspur of the north, he that kills me some six or seven dozen of scots at a breakfast, washes his hands, and says to his wife "fie upon this quiet life! i want work." "o my sweet harry," says she, "how many hast thou killed today?" "give my roan horse a drench," says he, and answers "some fourteen," an hour after. "a trifle, a trifle." i prithee, call in falstaff. i'll play percy, and that damned brawn shall play dame mortimer his wife. "rivo!" says the drunkard. call in ribs, call in tallow.
our son shall win.
he had, my lord, and when he ran in here, these people saw the chain about his neck.
welcome, jack. where hast thou been?
he's fat, and scant of breath., here, hamlet, take my napkin, rub thy brows. the queen carouses to thy fortune, hamlet. (picks up the cup with the pearl)
heard you confess you had the chain of him after you first forswore it on the mart, and thereupon i drew my sword on you, and then you fled into this abbey here,
a plague of all cowards, i say, and a vengeance too! marry and amen!, give me a cup of sack, boy., ere i lead this life long, i'll sew netherstocks and mend them, and foot them too. a plague of all cowards!, give me a cup of sack, rogue. , is there no virtue extant? (he drinketh)
good madam.
i never came within these abbey walls, nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me. i never saw the chain, so help me heaven, and this is false you burden me withal.
didst thou never see titan kiss a dish of butter?, pitiful- hearted titan!, that melted at the sweet tale of the sun's? if thou didst, then behold that compound.
gertrude, do not drink.
i think you all have drunk of circe's cup. if here you housed him, here he would have been. (to adriana) if he were mad, he would not plead so coldly.
(to francis ) you rogue, here's lime in this sack too., there is nothing but roguery to be found in villanous man, yet a coward is worse than a cup of sack with lime in it. a villanous coward! go thy ways, old jack. die when thou wilt. if manhood, good manhood, be not forgot upon the face of the earth, then am i a shotten herring. there lives not three good men unhanged in england, and one of them is fat and grows old, god help the while. a bad world, i say. i would i were a weaver. i could sing psalms, or anything. a plague of all cowards, i say still.
i will, my lord. i pray you, pardon me. (drinks)
you say he dined at home; the goldsmith here
how now, woolsack, what mutter you?
(aside) it is the poisoned cup. it is too late.
sir, he dined with her there, at the porpentine.
a king's son! if i do not beat thee out of thy kingdom with a dagger of lath, and drive all thy subjects afore thee like a flock of wild geese, i'll never wear hair on my face more. you, prince of wales!
i dare not drink yet, madam. by and by.
he did, and from my finger snatched that ring.
why, you whoreson round man, what's the matter?
come, let me wipe thy face.
'tis true, my liege; this ring i had of her.
are not you a coward? answer me to that, and poins there?
(aside to claudius) my lord, i'll hit him now.
saw'st thou him enter at the abbey here?
zounds, ye fat paunch, an you call me coward, by the lord, i'll stab thee.
i do not think 't.
as sure, my liege, as i do see your grace.
i call thee coward? i'll see thee damned ere i call thee coward, but i would give a thousand pound i could run as fast as thou canst. you are straight enough in the shoulders you care not who sees your back. call you that backing of your friends? a plague upon such backing! give me them that will face me., give me a cup of sack., i am a rogue if i drunk today.
(aside) and yet it is almost 'gainst my conscience.
why, this is strange., go call the abbess hither. i think you are all mated or stark mad.
o villain, thy lips are scarce wiped since thou drunk'st last.
come, for the third, laertes. you do but dally. i pray you, pass with your best violence.
most mighty duke, vouchsafe me speak a word. haply i see a friend will save my life
all is one for that. (he drinketh) a plague of all cowards, still say i.
say you so? come on.
speak freely, syracusian, what thou wilt.
what's the matter?
nothing, neither way.
(to antipholus of ephesus) is not your name, sir, called antipholus? and is not that your bondman dromio?
what's the matter? there be four of us here have ta'en a thousand pound this day morning.
have at you now!
but he, i thank him, gnawed in two my cords. now am i dromio, and his man, unbound.
where is it, jack? where is it?
part them! they are incensed.
i am sure you both of you remember me.
where is it? taken from us it is. a hundred upon poor four of us.
nay, come, again.
ourselves we do remember, sir, by you. you are not pinch's patient, are you, sir?
what, a hundred, man?
look to the queen there, ho!
why look you strange on me? you know me well.
i am a rogue if i were not at half-sword with a dozen of them two hours together. i have 'scaped by miracle. i am eight times thrust through the doublet, four through the hose, my buckler cut through and through, my sword hacked like a handsaw. ecce signum! i never dealt better since i was a man. all would not do. a plague of all cowards! (points to gadshill, peto and bardolph ) let them speak. if they speak more or less than truth, they are villains, and the sons of darkness.
they bleed on both sides., how is it, my lord?
i never saw you in my life till now.
speak, sirs, how was it?
how is 't, laertes?
o, grief hath changed me since you saw me last, have written strange defeatures in my face. but tell me yet, dost thou not know my voice?
we four set upon some dozen.
why, as a woodcock to mine own springe, osric. i am justly killed with mine own treachery. (falls)
neither.
sixteen at least, my lord.
how does the queen?
dromio, nor thou?
and bound them.
she swoons to see them bleed.
no, trust me, sir, nor i.
no, no, they were not bound.
the drink, the drink! i am poisoned. (dies)
i am sure thou dost.
jew else, an ebrew jew.
o villainy! ho, let the door be locked.
ay, sir, but i am sure i do not, and whatsoever a man denies, you are now bound to believe him.
as we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us.
treachery! seek it out.
not know my voice! o time's extremity, hast thou so crack'd and splitted my poor tongue knows not my feeble key of untuned cares? though now this grainèd face of mine be hid in sap-consuming winter's drizzled snow, and all the conduits of my blood froze up, my wasting lamps some fading glimmer left, my dull deaf ears a little use to hear. all these old witnesses, i cannot err, tell me thou art my son antipholus.
and unbound the rest, and then come in the other.
it is here, hamlet. hamlet, thou art slain. in thee there is not half an hour of life. the treacherous instrument is in thy hand, unbated and envenomed. the foul practice hath turned itself on me. lo, here i lie, i can no more. the king, the king's to blame.
i never saw my father in my life.
what, fought you with them all?
the point envenomed too!, then, venom, to thy work.
but seven years since, in syracusa, boy, thou know'st we parted. but perhaps, my son, thou sham'st to acknowledge me in misery.
all? i know not what you call all, but if i fought not with fifty of them i am a bunch of radish. if there were not two- or hree-and-fifty upon poor old jack, then am i no two-legged creature.
treason! treason!
the duke and all that know me in the city i ne'er saw syracusa in my life.
pray god you have not murdered some of them.
o, yet defend me, friends. i am but hurt.
i tell thee, syracusian, twenty years have i been patron to antipholus, during which time he ne'er saw syracusa.
nay, that's past praying for. i have peppered two of them. two i am sure i have paid, two rogues in buckram suits. i tell thee what, hal, if i tell thee a lie, spit in my face, call me horse. thou knowest my old ward. here i lay, and thus i bore my point. four rogues in buckram let drive at me.
drink off this potion. is thy union here? follow my mother.
most mighty duke, behold a man much wronged.
what, four? thou saidst but two even now.
he is justly served. it is a poison tempered by himself. exchange forgiveness with me, noble hamlet. nor thine on me. (dies)
i see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive me.
four, hal, i told thee four.
heaven make thee free of it. i follow thee., i am dead, horatio., wretched queen, adieu!, you that look pale and tremble at this chance, had i but time (as this fell sergeant, death, is strict in his arrest), o, i could tell you, but let it be., horatio, i am dead. thou livest. report me and my cause aright
(looks at the antipholus twins) one of these men is genius to the other. and which the spirit? who deciphers them?
ay, ay, he said four.
never believe it. i am more an antique roman than a dane. here's yet some liquor left. (lifts the poisoned cup)
i, sir, am dromio. command him away.
these four came all afront, and mainly thrust at me. i made me no more ado, but took all their seven points in my target, thus.
as thou'rt a man, give me the cup. let go! by heaven, i'll have 't. o god, horatio, what a wounded name, things standing thus unknown, shall live behind me! if thou didst ever hold me in thy heart absent thee from felicity a while, to tell my story.
i, sir, am dromio. please, let me stay.
seven? why there were but four even now.
what warlike noise is this?
egeon art thou not, or else his ghost?
in buckram?
young fortinbras, with conquest come from poland, to th' ambassadors of england gives
o, my old master., who hath bound him here?
ay, four in buckram suits.
o, i die, horatio. the potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit. i cannot live to hear the news from england. but i do prophesy the election lights on fortinbras. he has my dying voice. which have solicited. the rest is silence. o, o, o, o. (dies)
whoever bound him, i will loose his bonds and gain a husband by his liberty., speak, old egeon, if thou be'st the man that bore thee at a burden two fair sons. o, if thou be'st the same egeon, speak, and speak unto the same emilia.
seven, by these hilts, or i am a villain else.
now cracks a noble heart., good night, sweet prince, and flights of angels sing thee to thy rest!, 
why, here begins his morning story right; and these two dromios, one in semblance, besides her urging of her wreck at sea, these are the parents to these children, which accidentally are met together.
(aside to poins ) prithee, let him alone. we shall have more anon.
where is this sight?
if thou art she, tell me where is that son that floated with thee on the fatal raft?
dost thou hear me, hal?
what is it ye would see? if aught of woe or wonder, cease your search.
by men of epidamnum he and i and the twin dromio all were taken up; by force took dromio and my son from them and me they left with those of epidamnum. what then became of them i cannot tell; i to this fortune that you see me in.
ay, and mark thee too, jack.
this quarry cries on havoc. o proud death, that thou so many princes at a shot so bloodily hast struck?
corinth first.
do so, for it is worth the listening to. these nine in buckram that i told thee of, 
the sight is dismal, and our affairs from england come too late. the ears are senseless that should give us hearing, that rosencrantz and guildenstern are dead. where should we have our thanks?
no, sir, not i. i came from syracuse.
so, two more already.
(indicates claudius) not from his mouth, had it th' ability of life to thank you. but since so jump upon this bloody question, you from the polack wars, and you from england, are here arrived, give order that these bodies high on a stage be placèd to the view, how these things came about. so shall you hear of carnal, bloody, and unnatural acts, of accidental judgments, casual slaughters, of deaths put on by cunning and forced cause, fall'n on th' inventors' heads. all this can i truly deliver.
stay, stand apart. i know not which is which.
their points being broken, 
let us haste to hear it, and call the noblest to the audience. for me, with sorrow i embrace my fortune. which now to claim my vantage doth invite me.
i came from corinth, my most gracious lord.
down fell their hose.
of that i shall have also cause to speak, and from his mouth whose voice will draw on more. but let this same be presently performed, on plots and errors happen.
and i with him.
began to give me ground, but i followed me close, came in foot and hand, and with a thought, seven of the eleven i paid.
let four captains bear hamlet like a soldier to the stage, for he was likely, had he been put on, the soldiers' music and the rites of war speak loudly for him. take up the bodies. such a sight as this becomes the field, but here shows much amiss.
brought to this town by that most famous warrior duke menaphon, your most renownèd uncle.
o monstrous! eleven buckram men grown out of two!
which of you two did dine with me today?
but as the devil would have it, three misbegotten knaves in kendal green came at my back, and let drive at me, for it was so dark, hal, that thou couldst not see thy hand.
from fairest creatures we desire increase, that thereby beauty's rose might never die, but as the riper should by time decease his tender heir might bear his memory. but thou, contracted to thine own bright eyes, feed'st thy light's flame with self-substantial fuel, making a famine where abundance lies, thyself thy foe, to thy sweet self too cruel. thou that art now the world's fresh ornament and only herald to the gaudy spring, within thine own bud buriest thy content, and, tender churl, mak'st waste in niggarding. pity the world, or else this glutton be, to eat the world's due, by the grave and thee.
i, gentle mistress.
these lies are like their father that begets them, gross as a mountain, open, palpable. why, thou claybrained guts, thou knotty-pated fool, thou whoreson, obscene, greasy tallow- catch, 
when forty winters shall besiege thy brow and dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field, thy youth's proud livery, so gazed on now, will be a tattered weed, of small worth held. then being asked where all thy beauty lies, where all the treasure of thy lusty days, to say within thine own deep-sunken eyes were an all-eating shame and thriftless praise. how much more praise deserved thy beauty's use if thou couldst answer, "this fair child of mine shall sum my count and make my old excuse," proving his beauty by succession thine. this were to be new made when thou art old, and see thy blood warm when thou feel'st it cold.
and are not you my husband?
what, art thou mad? art thou mad? is not the truth the truth?
look in thy glass and tell the face thou viewest, now is the time that face should form another, whose fresh repair if now thou not renewest, thou dost beguile the world, unbless some mother. for where is she so fair whose uneared womb disdains the tillage of thy husbandry? or who is he so fond will be the tomb of his self-love, to stop posterity? thou art thy mother's glass, and she in thee calls back the lovely april of her prime; so thou through windows of thine age shalt see, despite of wrinkles, this thy golden time. but if thou live remembered not to be, die single and thine image dies with thee.
no, i say nay to that.
why, how couldst thou know these men in kendal green, when it was so dark thou couldst not see thy hand? come, tell us your reason. what sayest thou to this?
unthrifty loveliness, why dost thou spend upon thyself thy beauty's legacy? nature's bequest gives nothing, but doth lend, and, being frank, she lends to those are free. then, beauteous niggard, why dost thou abuse the bounteous largess given thee to give? profitless usurer, why dost thou use so great a sum of sums yet canst not live? for having traffic with thyself alone, thou of thyself thy sweet self dost deceive. then how when nature calls thee to be gone, what acceptable audit canst thou leave? thy unused beauty must be tombed with thee, which usèd lives th' executor to be.
and so do i, yet did she call me so, and this fair gentlewoman, her sister here, did call me brother. (to luciana) what i told you then i hope i shall have leisure to make good,
come, your reason, jack, your reason.
those hours that with gentle work did frame the lovely gaze where every eye doth dwell will play the tyrants to the very same and that unfair which fairly doth excel. for never-resting time leads summer on to hideous winter and confounds him there, sap checked with frost and lusty leaves quite gone, beauty o'er-snowed and bareness everywhere. then were not summer's distillation left, a liquid prisoner pent in walls of glass, beauty's effect with beauty were bereft, nor it nor no remembrance what it was. but flowers distilled, though they with winter meet, leese but their show; their substance still lives sweet.
that is the chain, sir, which you had of me.
what, upon compulsion? zounds, an i were at the strappado or all the racks in the world, i would not tell you on compulsion. give you a reason on compulsion? if reasons were as plentiful as blackberries, i would give no man a reason upon compulsion, i.
then let not winter's ragged hand deface in thee thy summer, ere thou be distilled. make sweet some vial; treasure thou some place with beauty's treasure, ere it be self-killed. that use is not forbidden usury which happies those that pay the willing loan; that's for thyself to breed another thee, or ten times happier, be it ten for one. ten times thyself were happier than thou art, if ten of thine ten times refigured thee. then what could death do if thou shouldst depart, leaving thee living in posterity? be not self-willed, for thou art much too fair to be death's conquest and make worms thine heir.
i think it be, sir. i deny it not.
i'll be no longer guilty of this sin. this sanguine coward, this bed-presser, this horseback-breaker, this huge hill of flesh, 
lo, in the orient when the gracious light lifts up his burning head, each under eye doth homage to his new-appearing sight, serving with looks his sacred majesty; and having climbed the steep-up heavenly hill, resembling strong youth in his middle age, yet mortal looks adore his beauty still, attending on his golden pilgrimage. but when from highmost pitch, with weary car, like feeble age he reeleth from the day, the eyes, 'fore duteous, now converted are from his low tract and look another way. so thou, thyself out-going in thy noon, unlooked on diest unless thou get a son.
and you, sir, for this chain arrested me.
'sblood, you starveling, you elfskin, you dried neat's tongue, you bull's pizzle, you stockfish! o, for breath to utter what is like thee! you tailor's-yard, you sheath, you bowcase, you vile standing tuck, 
music to hear, why hear'st thou music sadly? sweets with sweets war not, joy delights in joy. why lov'st thou that which thou receiv'st not gladly, or else receiv'st with pleasure thine annoy? if the true concord of well-tuned sounds, by unions married, do offend thine ear, they do but sweetly chide thee, who confounds in singleness the parts that thou shouldst bear. mark how one string, sweet husband to another, strikes each in each by mutual ordering, resembling sire and child and happy mother, who all in one, one pleasing note do sing; whose speechless song, being many, seeming one, sings this to thee: "thou single wilt prove none."
i think i did, sir. i deny it not.
well, breathe awhile, and then to it again, and when thou hast tired thyself in base comparisons, hear me speak but this.
is it for fear to wet a widow's eye that thou consum'st thyself in single life? ah, if thou issueless shalt hap to die, the world will wail thee like a makeless wife; the world will be thy widow and still weep, that thou no form of thee hast left behind, when every private widow well may keep, by children's eyes, her husband's shape in mind. look what an unthrift in the world doth spend shifts but his place, for still the world enjoys it; but beauty's waste hath in the world an end, and kept unused, the user so destroys it. no love toward others in that bosom sits that on himself such murd'rous shame commits.
by dromio, but i think he brought it not.
mark, jack.
for shame deny that thou bear'st love to any, who for thyself art so unprovident. grant if thou wilt, thou art belov'd of many, but that thou none lov'st is most evident; for thou art so possessed with murd'rous hate that 'gainst thyself thou stick'st not to conspire, seeking that beauteous roof to ruinate which to repair should be thy chief desire. o change thy thought, that i may change my mind. shall hate be fairer lodged than gentle love? be as thy presence is, gracious and kind, or to thyself at least kind-hearted prove. make thee another self for love of me, that beauty still may live in thine or thee.
no, none by me.
we two saw you four set on four, and bound them and were masters of their wealth. mark now how a plain tale shall put you down. then did we two set on you four and, with a word, outfaced you from your prize, and have it; yea, and can show it you here in the house. and, falstaff, you carried your guts away as nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and roared for mercy, and still run and roared, as ever i heard bull-calf. what a slave art thou to hack thy sword as thou hast done, and then say it was in fight! what trick, what device, what starting-hole canst thou now find out to hide thee from this open and apparent shame?
as fast as thou shalt wane, so fast thou grow'st in one of thine, from that which thou departest; and that fresh blood which youngly thou bestow'st thou mayst call thine when thou from youth convertest. herein lives wisdom, beauty, and increase; without this, folly, age, and cold decay. if all were minded so, the times should cease, and threescore year would make the world away. let those whom nature hath not made for store, harsh, featureless, and rude, barrenly perish. look whom she best endowed, she gave the more, which bounteous gift thou shouldst in bounty cherish. she carved thee for her seal, and meant thereby thou shouldst print more, not let that copy die.
this purse of ducats i received from you, and dromio my man did bring them me. and i was ta'en for him, and he for me, and thereupon these errors are arose.
come, let's hear, jack. what trick hast thou now?
when i do count the clock that tells the time, and see the brave day sunk in hideous night; when i behold the violet past prime, and sable curls all silvered o'er with white; when lofty trees i see barren of leaves, which erst from heat did canopy the herd, and summer's green all girded up in sheaves borne on the bier with white and bristly beard; then of thy beauty do i question make, that thou among the wastes of time must go, since sweets and beauties do themselves forsake and die as fast as they see others grow, and nothing 'gainst time's scythe can make defense save breed to brave him when he takes thee hence.
these ducats pawn i for my father here.
by the lord, i knew you as well as he that made you. why, hear you, my masters, was it for me to kill the heir apparent? should i turn upon the true prince? why, thou knowest i am as valiant as hercules, but beware instinct. the lion will not touch the true prince. instinct is a great matter. i was now a coward on instinct. i shall think the better of myself, and thee, during my life, i for a valiant lion, and thou for a true prince. but, by the lord, lads, i am glad you have the money., hostess, clap to the doors., watch tonight, pray to-morrow. gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold, all the titles of good fellowship come to you. what, shall we be merry? hall we have a play extempore?
o that you were yourself! but, love, you are no longer yours than you yourself here live. against this coming end you should prepare, and your sweet semblance to some other give. so should that beauty which you hold in lease find no determination; then you were yourself again after yourself's decease, when your sweet issue your sweet form should bear. who lets so fair a house fall to decay, which husbandry in honor might uphold against the stormy gusts of winter's day and barren rage of death's eternal cold? o, none but unthrifts, dear my love you know, you had a father; let your son say so.
it shall not need. thy father hath his life.
content, and the argument shall be thy running away.
not from the stars do i my judgment pluck, and yet methinks i have astronomy, but not to tell of good or evil luck, of plagues, of dearths, or seasons' quality; nor can i fortune to brief minutes tell, pointing to each his thunder, rain, and wind, or say with princes if it shall go well, by oft predict that i in heaven find; but from thine eyes my knowledge i derive, and, constant stars, in them i read such art as truth and beauty shall together thrive, if from thyself to store thou wouldst convert; or else of thee this i prognosticate: thy end is truth's and beauty's doom and date.
sir, i must have that diamond from you.
ah, no more of that, hal, an thou lovest me.
when i consider every thing that grows holds in perfection but a little moment; that this huge stage presenteth nought but shows whereon the stars in secret influence commént; when i perceive that men as plants increase, cheerèd and checked ev'n by the self-same sky, vaunt in their youthful sap, at height decrease, and wear their brave state out of memory; then the conceit of this inconstant stay sets you, most rich in youth, before my sight, where wasteful time debateth with decay, to change your day of youth to sullied night; and all in war with time for love of you, as he takes from you, i engraft you new.
there, take it; and much thanks for my good cheer.
o jesu, my lord the prince!
but wherefore do not you a mightier way make war upon this bloody tyrant, time, and fortify yourself in your decay with means more blessèd than my barren rhyme? now stand you on the top of happy hours, and many maiden gardens, yet unset, with virtuous wish would bear your living flowers, much liker than your painted counterfeit. so should the lines of life that life repair which this time's pencil or my pupil pen neither in inward worth nor outward fair can make you live yourself in eyes of men. to give away yourself keeps yourself still, and you must live, drawn by your own sweet skill.
renownèd duke, vouchsafe to take the pains to go with us into the abbey here and hear at large discoursed all our fortunes, that by this sympathizèd one day's error have suffered wrong. go, keep us company, and we shall make full satisfaction., thirty-three years have i but gone in travail my heavy burden ne'er deliverèd., the duke, my husband, and my children both, and you, the calendars of their nativity, go to a gossips' feast, and go with me.
how now, my lady the hostess, what sayest thou to me?
who will believe my verse in time to come if it were filled with your most high deserts? though yet heav'n knows it is but as a tomb which hides your life and shows not half your parts. if i could write the beauty of your eyes and in fresh numbers number all your graces, the age to come would say, "this poet lies, such heavenly touches ne'er touched earthly faces." so should my papers, yellowed with their age, be scorned, like old men of less truth than tongue, and your true rights be termed a poet's rage and stretchèd meter of an ántique song; but were some child of yours alive that time, you should live twice: in it and in my rhyme.
with all my heart i'll gossip at this feast.
marry, my lord, there is a nobleman of the court at door would speak with you. he says he comes from your father.
shall i compare thee to a summer's day? thou art more lovely and more temperate. rough winds do shake the darling buds of may, and summer's lease hath all too short a date. sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines, and often is his gold complexion dimmed; and every fair from fair sometime declines, by chance or nature's changing course untrimmed. but thy eternal summer shall not fade, nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st, nor shall death brag thou wand'rest in his shade, when in eternal lines to time thou grow'st. so long as men can breathe or eyes can see, so long lives this, and this gives life to thee.
(to antipholus of ephesus) master, shall i fetch your stuff from shipboard?
give him as much as will make him a royal man and send him back again to my mother.
devouring time, blunt thou the lion's paws, and make the earth devour her own sweet brood; pluck the keen teeth from the fierce tiger's jaws, and burn the long-lived phoenix in her blood; make glad and sorry seasons as thou fleet'st, and do whate'er thou wilt, swift-footed time, to the wide world and all her fading sweets; but i forbid thee one most heinous crime: o carve not with thy hours my love's fair brow, nor draw no lines there with thine ántique pen. him in thy course untainted do allow for beauty's pattern to succeeding men. yet do thy worst, old time; despite thy wrong, my love shall in my verse ever live young.
dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embarked?
what manner of man is he?
a woman's face, with nature's own hand painted, hast thou, the master-mistress of my passion; a woman's gentle heart, but not acquainted with shifting change, as is false women's fashion; an eye more bright than theirs, less false in rolling, gilding the object whereupon it gazeth; a man in hue, all hues in his controlling, which steals men's eyes and women's souls amazeth. and for a woman wert thou first created, till nature as she wrought thee fell a-doting, and by addition me of thee defeated, by adding one thing to my purpose nothing. but since she pricked thee out for women's pleasure, mine be thy love, and thy love's use their treasure.
your goods that lay at host, sir, in the centaur.
an old man.
so is it not with me as with that muse, stirred by a painted beauty to his verse, who heav'n itself for ornament doth use, and every fair with his fair doth rehearse, making a couplement of proud compare with sun and moon, with earth and sea's rich gems, with april's first-born flow'rs, and all things rare that heaven's air in this huge rondure hems. o let me, true in love but truly write, and then believe me: my love is as fair as any mother's child, though not so bright as those gold candles fixed in heaven's air. let them say more that like of hearsay well; i will not praise that purpose not to sell.
he speaks to me., i am your master, dromio. come, go with us. we'll look to that anon. embrace thy brother there. rejoice with him.
what doth gravity out of his bed at midnight? shall i give him his answer?
my glass shall not persuade me i am old so long as youth and thou are of one date; but when in thee time's furrows i behold, then look i death my days should expiate. for all that beauty that doth cover thee is but the seemly raiment of my heart, which in thy breast doth live, as thine in me. how can i then be elder than thou art? o therefore, love, be of thyself so wary as i, not for myself, but for thee will, bearing thy heart, which i will keep so chary as tender nurse her babe from faring ill. presume not on thy heart when mine is slain; thou gav'st me thine not to give back again.
there is a fat friend at your master's house she now shall be my sister, not my wife.
prithee do, jack.
as an unperfect actor on the stage, who with his fear is put besides his part, or some fierce thing replete with too much rage, whose strength's abundance weakens his own heart; so i, for fear of trust, forget to say the perfect ceremony of love's rite, and in mine own love's strength seem to decay, o'ercharged with burden of mine own love's might. o let my books be then the eloquence and dumb presagers of my speaking breast, who plead for love and look for recompense more than that tongue that more hath more expressed. o learn to read what silent love hath writ! to hear with eyes belongs to love's fine wit.
methinks you are my glass, and not my brother: i see by you i am a sweet-faced youth. will you walk in to see their gossiping?
faith, and i'll send him packing.
mine eye hath played the painter and hath steeled thy beauty's form in table of my heart. my body is the frame wherein 'tis held, and pérspective it is best painter's art. for through the painter must you see his skill to find where your true image pictured lies, which in my bosom's shop is hanging still, that hath his windows glazèd with thine eyes. now see what good turns eyes for eyes have done: mine eyes have drawn thy shape, and thine for me are windows to my breast, wherethrough the sun delights to peep, to gaze therein on thee. yet eyes this cunning want to grace their art; they draw but what they see, know not the heart.
not i, sir. you are my elder.
now, sirs. by 'r lady, you fought fair., so did you, peto., so did you, bardolph., you are lions too. you ran away upon instinct. you will not touch the true prince. no, fie!
let those who are in favor with their stars of public honor and proud titles boast, whilst i, whom fortune of such triumph bars, unlooked for joy in that i honor most. great princes' favorites their fair leaves spread but as the marigold at the sun's eye, and in themselves their pride lies burièd, for at a frown they in their glory die. the painful warrior famousèd for worth, after a thousand victories once foiled, is from the book of honor razèd quite, and all the rest forgot for which he toiled. then happy i that love and am belovèd where i may not remove nor be removèd.
that's a question. how shall we try it?
faith, i ran when i saw others run.
lord of my love, to whom in vassalage thy merit hath my duty strongly knit, to thee i send this written embassage, to witness duty, not to show my wit. duty so great, which wit so poor as mine may make seem bare, in wanting words to show it, but that i hope some good conceit of thine in thy soul's thought, all naked, will bestow it. till whatsoever star that guides my moving points on me graciously with fair aspéct and puts apparel on my tattered loving, to show me worthy of thy sweet respect. then may i dare to boast how i do love thee; till then, not show my head where thou mayst prove me.
we'll draw cuts for the signior. till then, lead thou first.
faith, tell me now in earnest, how came falstaff's sword so hacked?
weary with toil, i haste me to my bed, the dear repose for limbs with travail tired; but then begins a journey in my head to work my mind, when body's work's expired. for then my thoughts, from far where i abide, intend a zealous pilgrimage to thee, and keep my drooping eyelids open wide, looking on darkness which the blind do see. save that my soul's imaginary sight presents thy shadow to my sightless view, which, like a jewel hung in ghastly night, makes black night beauteous, and her old face new. lo thus by day my limbs, by night my mind, for thee, and for myself, no quiet find.
nay, then, thus: we came into the world like brother and brother,
why, he hacked it with his dagger and said he would swear truth out of england but he would make you believe it was done in fight, and persuaded us to do the like.
how can i then return in happy plight that am debarred the benefit of rest? when day's oppression is not eased by night, but day by night and night by day oppressed? and each, though enemies to either's reign, do in consent shake hands to torture me, the one by toil, the other to complain how far i toil, still farther off from thee. i tell the day to please him thou art bright, and dost him grace when clouds do blot the heaven. so flatter i the swart-complexioned night, when sparkling stars twire not, thou gild'st the even. but day doth daily draw my sorrows longer, and night doth nightly make grief's length seem stronger.
yea, and to tickle our noses with speargrass to make them bleed, and then to beslubber our garments with it, and swear it was the blood of true men. i did that i did not this seven year before: i blushed to hear his monstrous devices.
when in disgrace with fortune and men's eyes i all alone beweep my outcast state, and trouble deaf heav'n with my bootless cries, and look upon myself, and curse my fate, wishing me like to one more rich in hope, featured like him, like him with friends possessed, desiring this man's art, and that man's scope, with what i most enjoy contented least; yet in these thoughts myself almost despising, haply i think on thee, and then my state, like to the lark at break of day arising from sullen earth, sings hymns at heaven's gate. for thy sweet love remembered such wealth brings that then i scorn to change my state with kings.
nay, but this dotage of our general's o'erflows the measure. those his goodly eyes, that o'er the files and musters of the war have glowed like plated mars, now bend, now turn upon a tawny front. his captain's heart, which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst the buckles on his breast, reneges all temper and is become the bellows and the fan
o villain, thou stolest a cup of sack eighteen years ago, and wert taken with the manner, and ever since thou hast blushed extempore. thou hadst fire and sword on thy side, and yet thou ran'st away. what instinct hadst thou for it?
when to the sessions of sweet silent thought i summon up remembrance of things past, i sigh the lack of many a thing i sought, and with old woes new wail my dear time's waste. then can i drown an eye unused to flow, for precious friends hid in death's dateless night, and weep afresh love's long since cancelled woe, and moan th' expense of many a vanished sight. then can i grieve at grievances foregone, and heavily from woe to woe tell o'er the sad account of fore-bemoanèd moan, which i new pay as if not paid before. but if the while i think on thee, dear friend, all losses are restored, and sorrows end.
look where they come. take but good note, and you shall see in him the triple pillar of the world transformed into a strumpet's fool. behold and see.
my lord, do you see these meteors? do you behold these exhalations?
thy bosom is endearèd with all hearts which i, by lacking, have supposèd dead; and there reigns love, and all love's loving parts, and all those friends which i thought burièd. how many a holy and obsequious tear hath dear religious love stol'n from mine eye as interest of the dead, which now appear but things removed that hidden in thee lie. thou art the grave where buried love doth live, hung with the trophies of my lovers gone, who all their parts of me to thee did give; that due of many now is thine alone. their images i loved i view in thee, and thou, all they, hast all the all of me.
if it be love indeed, tell me how much.
i do.
if thou survive my well-contented day, when that churl death my bones with dust shall cover, and shalt by fortune once more re-survey these poor rude lines of thy deceasèd lover, compare them with the bett'ring of the time, and though they be outstripped by every pen, reserve them for my love, not for their rhyme, exceeded by the height of happier men. o then vouchsafe me but this loving thought: "had my friend's muse grown with this growing age, a dearer birth than this his love had brought to march in ranks of better equipage. but since he died and poets better prove, theirs for their style i'll read, his for his love."
there's beggary in the love that can be reckoned.
what think you they portend?
full many a glorious morning have i seen flatter the mountain tops with sovereign eye, kissing with golden face the meadows green, gilding pale streams with heavenly alchemy, anon permit the basest clouds to ride with ugly rack on his celestial face, and from the fórlorn world his visage hide, stealing unseen to west with this disgrace. ev'n so my sun one early morn did shine with all triumphant splendor on my brow; but out alack, he was but one hour mine; the region cloud hath masked him from me now. yet him for this my love no whit disdaineth. suns of the world may stain when heav'n's sun staineth.
i'll set a bourn how far to be beloved.
hot livers and cold purses.
why didst thou promise such a beauteous day and make me travel forth without my cloak, to let base clouds o'ertake me in my way, hiding thy brav'ry in their rotten smoke? 'tis not enough that through the cloud thou break, to dry the rain on my storm-beaten face. for no man well of such a salve can speak that heals the wound and cures not the disgrace. nor can thy shame give physic to my grief; though thou repent, yet i have still the loss. the offender's sorrow lends but weak relief to him that bears the strong offense's cross. ah, but those tears are pearl which thy love sheds, and they are rich, and ransom all ill deeds.
then must thou needs find out new heaven, new earth.
choler, my lord, if rightly taken.
no more be grieved at that which thou hast done. roses have thorns, and silver fountains mud; clouds and eclipses stain both moon and sun, and loathsome canker lives in sweetest bud. all men make faults, and even i in this, authórizing thy trespass with compare, myself corrupting, salving thy amiss, excusing these sins more than these sins are. for to thy sensual fault i bring in sense, thy adverse party is thy advocate, and 'gainst myself a lawful plea commence. such civil war is in my love and hate that i an áccessory needs must be to that sweet thief which sourly robs from me.
news, my good lord, from rome.
no, if rightly taken, halter.
let me confess that we two must be twain, although our undivided loves are one. so shall those blots that do with me remain without thy help by me be borne alone. in our two loves there is but one respect, though in our lives a separable spite, which, though it alter not love's sole effect, yet doth it steal sweet hours from love's delight. i may not evermore acknowledge thee, lest my bewailèd guilt should do thee shame; nor thou with public kindness honor me, unless thou take that honor from thy name. but do not so; i love thee in such sort, as, thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
grates me, the sum.
here comes lean jack. here comes bare-bone., how now, my sweet creature of bombast? how long is 't ago, jack, since thou sawest thine own knee?
as a decrepit father takes delight to see his active child do deeds of youth, so i, made lame by fortune's dearest spite, take all my comfort of thy worth and truth. for whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit, or any of these all, or all, or more, entitled in thy parts do crownèd sit, i make my love engrafted to this store. so then i am not lame, poor, nor despised, whilst that this shadow doth such substance give that i in thy abundance am sufficed, and by a part of all thy glory live. look what is best, that best i wish in thee. this wish i have; then ten times happy me.
fulvia perchance is angry. or who knows if the scarce-bearded caesar have not sent his powerful mandate to you, "do this, or this. take in that kingdom, and enfranchise that.
my own knee? when i was about thy years, hal, i was not an eagle's talon in the waist. i could have crept into any alderman's thumb-ring. a plague of sighing and grief! it blows a man up like a bladder. there's villanous news abroad. here was sir john bracy from your father. you must to the court in the morning. that same mad fellow of the north, percy, and he of wales that gave amamon the bastinado, and made lucifer cuckold, and swore the devil his true liegeman upon the cross of a welsh hook, what a plague call you him?
how can my muse want subject to invent while thou dost breathe, that pour'st into my verse thine own sweet argument, too excellent for every vulgar paper to rehearse? o give thyself the thanks, if aught in me worthy perusal stand against thy sight. for who's so dumb that cannot write to thee, when thou thyself dost give invention light? be thou the tenth muse, ten times more in worth than those old nine which rhymers invocate; and he that calls on thee, let him bring forth eternal numbers to outlive long date. if my slight muse do please these curious days, the pain be mine, but thine shall be the praise.
how, my love?
owen glendower.
o how thy worth with manners may i sing, when thou art all the better part of me? what can mine own praise to mine own self bring, and what is't but mine own when i praise thee? even for this, let us divided live, and our dear love lose name of single one, that by this separation i may give that due to thee which thou deserv'st alone. o absence, what a torment wouldst thou prove, were it not thy sour leisure gave sweet leave to entertain the time with thoughts of love, which time and thoughts so sweetly dost deceive, and that thou teachest how to make one twain, by praising him here who doth hence remain.
perchance? nay, and most like. you must not stay here longer. your dismission is come from caesar. therefore hear it, antony. where's fulvia's process? caesar's, i would say, both? thou blushest, antony, and that blood of thine is caesar's homager. else so thy cheek pays shame when shrill-tongued fulvia scolds. the messengers!
owen, owen, the same, and his son-in-law mortimer, and old northumberland, and that sprightly scot of scots, douglas, that runs a-horseback up a hill perpendicular, 
take all my loves, my love; yea, take them all. what hast thou then more than thou hadst before? no love, my love, that thou mayst true love call. all mine was thine before thou hadst this more. then if for my love thou my love receivest, i cannot blame thee, for my love thou usest. but yet be blamed, if thou thyself deceivest by wilful taste of what thyself refusest. i do forgive thy robb'ry, gentle thief, although thou steal thee all my poverty; and yet love knows it is a greater grief to bear love's wrong than hate's known injury. lascivious grace, in whom all ill well shows, kill me with spites; yet we must not be foes.
let rome in tiber melt and the wide arch kingdoms are clay. our dungy earth alike feeds beast as man. the nobleness of life is to do thus, when such a mutual pair and such a twain can do 't, in which i bind, we stand up peerless.
he that rides at high speed, and with his pistol kills a sparrow flying.
those pretty wrongs that liberty commits when i am sometime absent from thy heart, thy beauty and thy years full well befits, for still temptation follows where thou art. gentle thou art, and therefore to be won; beauteous thou art, therefore to be assailed; and when a woman woos, what woman's son will sourly leave her till he have prevailed? ay me, but yet thou might'st my seat forbear, and chide thy beauty and thy straying youth, who lead thee in their riot even there where thou art forced to break a twofold truth: hers by thy beauty tempting her to thee, thine by thy beauty being false to me.
excellent falsehood! why did he marry fulvia, and not love her? i'll seem the fool i am not. antony will be himself.
you have hit it.
that thou hast her it is not all my grief, and yet it may be said i loved her dearly; that she hath thee is of my wailing chief, a loss in love that touches me more nearly. loving offenders, thus i will excuse ye: thou dost love her because thou knowst i love her; and for my sake even so doth she abuse me, suff'ring my friend for my sake to approve her. if i lose thee, my loss is my love's gain, and losing her, my friend hath found that loss; both find each other, and i lose both twain, and both for my sake lay on me this cross. but here's the joy; my friend and i are one; sweet flatt'ry! then she loves but me alone.
but stirred by cleopatra. let's not confound the time with conference harsh. there's not a minute of our lives should stretch without some pleasure now. what sport tonight?
so did he never the sparrow.
when most i wink, then do mine eyes best see, for all the day they view things unrespected; but when i sleep, in dreams they look on thee, and, darkly bright, are bright in dark directed. then thou, whose shadow shadows doth make bright, how would thy shadow's form form happy show to the clear day with thy much clearer light, when to unseeing eyes thy shade shines so? how would, i say, mine eyes be blessèd made by looking on thee in the living day, when in dead night thy fair imperfect shade through heavy sleep on sightless eyes doth stay? all days are nights to see till i see thee, and nights bright days when dreams do show thee me.
hear the ambassadors.
well, that rascal hath good mettle in him. he will not run.
if the dull substance of my flesh were thought, injurious distance should not stop my way; for then, despite of space, i would be brought from limits far remote where thou dost stay. no matter then although my foot did stand upon the farthest earth removed from thee, for nimble thought can jump both sea and land as soon as think the place where he would be. but ah, thought kills me that i am not thought to leap large lengths of miles when thou art gone, but that so much of earth and water wrought, i must attend time's leisure with my moan, receiving naughts by elements so slow but heavy tears, badges of either's woe.
fie, wrangling queen! to weep, whose every passion fully strives to make itself, in thee, fair and admired! no messenger but thine, and all alone tonight we'll wander through the streets and note last night you did desire it., (to the messenger ) speak not to us.
why, what a rascal art thou then to praise him so for running?
the other two, slight air and purging fire, are both with thee, wherever i abide; the first my thought, the other my desire, these present absent with swift motion slide. for when these quicker elements are gone in tender embassy of love to thee, my life, being made of four, with two alone sinks down to death, oppressed with melancholy; until life's composition be recured by those swift messengers returned from thee, who ev'n but now come back again, assured of thy fair health, recounting it to me. this told, i joy, but then no longer glad, i send them back again and straight grow sad.
is caesar with antonius prized so slight?
a-horseback, you cuckoo, but afoot he will not budge a foot.
mine eye and heart are at a mortal war how to divide the conquest of thy sight; mine eye my heart thy picture's sight would bar; my heart mine eye the freedom of that right. my heart doth plead that thou in him dost lie, a closet never pierced with crystal eyes; but the defendant doth that plea deny, and says in him thy fair appearance lies. to 'cide this title is empanellèd a quest of thoughts, all tenants to the heart, and by their verdict is determinèd the clear eye's moiety and the dear heart's part: as thus, mine eye's due is thy outward part, and my heart's right, thy inward love of heart.
sir, sometimes when he is not antony he comes too short of that great property
yes, jack, upon instinct.
betwixt mine eye and heart a league is took, and each doth good turns now unto the other. when that mine eye is famished for a look, or heart in love with sighs himself doth smother, with my love's picture then my eye doth feast and to the painted banquet bids my heart. another time mine eye is my heart's guest, and in his thoughts of love doth share a part. so either by thy picture or my love, thyself away are present still with me; for thou no farther than my thoughts canst move, and i am still with them, and they with thee; or if they sleep, thy picture in my sight awakes my heart to heart's and eye's delight.
i am full sorry that he approves the common liar, who thus speaks of him at rome, but i will hope of better deeds tomorrow. rest you happy!
i grant you, upon instinct. well, he is there too, and one mordake, and a thousand blue-caps more: worcester is stolen away tonight. thy father's beard is turned white with the news. you may buy land now as cheap as stinking mackerel.
how careful was i, when i took my way, each trifle under truest bars to thrust, that to my use it might unusèd stay from hands of falsehood, in sure wards of trust. but thou, to whom my jewels trifles are, most worthy comfort, now my greatest grief, thou best of dearest, and mine only care, art left the prey of every vulgar thief. thee have i not locked up in any chest, save where thou art not, though i feel thou art, within the gentle closure of my breast, from whence at pleasure thou mayst come and part; and even thence thou wilt be stol'n, i fear, for truth proves thievish for a prize so dear.
lord alexas, sweet alexas, most anything alexas, almost most absolute alexas, where's the soothsayer that you praised so to th' queen? oh that i knew this husband, which, you say, must charge his horns with garlands!
why, then, it is like if there come a hot june, and this civil buffeting hold, we shall buy maidenheads as they buy hob- nails, by the hundreds.
against that time (if ever that time come) when i shall see thee frown on my defects; whenas thy love hath cast his utmost sum, called to that audit by advised respects; against that time when thou shalt strangely pass, and scarcely greet me with that sun, thine eye; when love, converted from the thing it was, shall reasons find of settled gravity; against that time do i ensconce me here within the knowledge of mine own desert, and this my hand against myself uprear to guard the lawful reasons on thy part: to leave poor me, thou hast the strength of laws, since why to love i can allege no cause.
soothsayer!
by the mass, thou sayest true. it is like we shall have good trading that way. but tell me, hal, art not thou horrible afeard? thou being heir apparent, could the world pick thee out three such enemies again as that fiend douglas, that spirit percy, and that devil glendower? art thou not horribly afraid? doth not thy blood thrill at it?
how heavy do i journey on the way when what i seek (my weary travel's end) doth teach that ease and that repose to say, "thus far the miles are measured from thy friend." the beast that bears me, tired with my woe, plods dully on to bear that weight in me, as if by some instinct the wretch did know his rider loved not speed, being made from thee. the bloody spur cannot provoke him on that sometimes anger thrusts into his hide, which heavily he answers with a groan, more sharp to me than spurring to his side; for that same groan doth put this in my mind: my grief lies onward and my joy behind.
your will?
not a whit, i' faith; i lack some of thy instinct.
thus can my love excuse the slow offense of my dull bearer, when from thee i speed: from where thou art, why should i haste me thence? till i return, of posting is no need. o what excuse will my poor beast then find, when swift extremity can seem but slow? then should i spur, though mounted on the wind; in wingèd speed no motion shall i know: then can no horse with my desire keep pace; therefore desire, of perfect'st love being made, shall neigh no dull flesh in his fiery race, but love, for love, thus shall excuse my jade: since from thee going he went wilful slow, towards thee i'll run, and give him leave to go.
(to alexas ) is this the man? (to soothsayer ) is 't you, sir, that know things?
well, thou wert be horribly chid tomorrow when thou comest to thy father. if thou love me, practice an answer.
so am i as the rich whose blessèd key can bring him to his sweet up-lockèd treasure, the which he will not every hour survey, for blunting the fine point of seldom pleasure. therefore are feasts so solemn and so rare, since seldom coming in the long year set, like stones of worth they thinly placèd are, or captain jewels in the carcanet. so is the time that keeps you as my chest, or as the wardrobe which the robe doth hide, to make some special instant special blest by new unfolding his imprisoned pride. blessèd are you whose worthiness gives scope, being had, to triumph; being lacked, to hope.
in nature's infinite book of secrecy a little i can read.
do thou stand for my father and examine me upon the particulars of my life.
what is your substance, whereof are you made, that millions of strange shadows on you tend? since everyone hath every one, one shade, and you, but one, can every shadow lend. describe adonis, and the counterfeit is poorly imitated after you. on helen's cheek all art of beauty set, and you in grecian tires are painted new. speak of the spring and foison of the year; the one doth shadow of your beauty show, the other as your bounty doth appear, and you in every blessèd shape we know. in all external grace you have some part, but you like none, none you, for constant heart.
(to charmian ) show him your hand.
shall i? conten. this chair shall be my state, this dagger my scepter, and this cushion my crown.
o how much more doth beauty beauteous seem by that sweet ornament which truth doth give! the rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem for that sweet odor which doth in it live. the canker-blooms have full as deep a dye as the perfumèd tincture of the roses, hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly, when summer's breath their maskèd buds discloses; but for their virtue only is their show, they live unwooed, and unrespected fade, die to themselves. sweet roses do not so; of their sweet deaths are sweetest odors made; and so of you, beauteous and lovely youth; when that shall vade, my verse distills your truth.
(to servants within) bring in the banquet quickly. wine enough cleopatra's health to drink.
thy state is taken for a joined stool, thy golden scepter for a leaden dagger, and thy precious rich crown for a pitiful bald crown.
not marble nor the gilded monuments of princes shall outlive this pow'rful rhyme, but you shall shine more bright in these conténts than unswept stone, besmeared with sluttish time. when wasteful war shall statues overturn, and broils root out the work of masonry, nor mars his sword, nor war's quick fire, shall burn the living record of your memory. 'gainst death and all oblivious enmity shall you pace forth; your praise shall still find room even in the eyes of all posterity that wear this world out to the ending doom. so till the judgment that yourself arise, you live in this, and dwell in lovers' eyes.
(giving hand to soothsayer ) good sir, give me good fortune.
well, an the fire of grace be not quite out of thee, now shalt thou be moved., give me a cup of sack to make my eyes look red, that it may be thought i have wept, for i must speak in passion, and i will do it in king cambyses' vein.
sweet love, renew thy force; be it not said thy edge should blunter be than appetite, which but today by feeding is allayed, tomorrow sharpened in his former might. so love be thou; although today thou fill thy hungry eyes even till they wink with fullness, tomorrow see again, and do not kill the spirit of love with a perpetual dullness. let this sad int'rim like the ocean be which parts the shore, where two contracted new come daily to the banks, that when they see return of love, more blest may be the view; else call it winter, which being full of care, makes summer's welcome, thrice more wished, more rare.
i make not, but foresee.
well, here is my leg.
being your slave, what should i do but tend upon the hours and times of your desire? i have no precious time at all to spend, nor services to do, till you require. nor dare i chide the world without end hour whilst i, my sovereign, watch the clock for you, nor think the bitterness of absence sour when you have bid your servant once adieu. nor dare i question with my jealous thought where you may be, or your affairs suppose, but, like a sad slave, stay and think of nought save, where you are, how happy you make those. so true a fool is love that in your will, though you do anything, he thinks no ill.
pray, then, foresee me one.
and here is my speech. stand aside, nobility.
that god forbid, that made me first your slave, i should in thought control your times of pleasure, or at your hand th' account of hours to crave, being your vassal bound to stay your leisure. o let me suffer, being at your beck, th' imprisoned absence of your liberty; and patience tame to sufferance bide each check, without accusing you of injury. be where you list, your charter is so strong that you yourself may privilege your time to what you will; to you it doth belong yourself to pardon of self-doing crime. i am to wait, though waiting so be hell, not blame your pleasure, be it ill or well.
you shall be yet far fairer than you are.
o jesu, this is excellent sport, i' faith!
if there be nothing new, but that which is hath been before, how are our brains beguiled, which, lab'ring for invention, bear amiss the second burthen of a former child! o that recórd could with a backward look, ev'n of five hundred courses of the sun, show me your image in some ántique book, since mind at first in character was done, that i might see what the old world could say to this composèd wonder of your frame; whether we are mended, or where better they, or whether revolution be the same. o sure i am the wits of former days to subjects worse have giv'n admiring praise.
(to the others) he means in flesh.
weep not, sweet queen, for trickling tears are vain.
like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore, so do our minutes hasten to their end, each changing place with that which goes before, in sequent toil all forwards do contend. nativity, once in the main of light, crawls to maturity, wherewith being crowned, crooked eclipses 'gainst his glory fight, and time that gave doth now his gift confound. time doth transfix the flourish set on youth and delves the parallels in beauty's brow; feeds on the rarities of nature's truth, and nothing stands but for his scythe to mow. and yet to times in hope my verse shall stand, praising thy worth, despite his cruel hand.
no, you shall paint when you are old.
o the father, how he holds his countenance!
is it thy will thy image should keep open my heavy eyelids to the weary night? dost thou desire my slumbers should be broken, while shadows like to thee do mock my sight? is it thy spirit that thou send'st from thee so far from home into my deeds to pry, to find out shames and idle hours in me, the scope and tenor of thy jealousy? o no; thy love, though much, is not so great. it is my love that keeps mine eye awake, mine own true love that doth my rest defeat, to play the watchman ever for thy sake. for thee watch i whilst thou dost wake elsewhére, from me far off, with others all too near.
wrinkles forbid!
for god's sake, lords, convey my tristful queen, for tears do stop the floodgates of her eyes.
sin of self-love possesseth all mine eye and all my soul, and all my every part; and for this sin there is no remedy, it is so grounded inward in my heart. methinks no face so gracious is as mine, no shape so true, no truth of such account; and for myself mine own worth do define, as i all other in all worths surmount. but when my glass shows me myself indeed, beated and chopped with tanned antiquity, mine own self-love quite contrary i read; self so self-loving were iniquity. 'tis thee, myself, that for myself i praise, painting my age with beauty of thy days.
vex not his prescience. be attentive.
o jesu, he doth it as like one of these harlotry players as ever i see.
against my love shall be as i am now, with time's injurious hand crushed and o'erworn; when hours have drained his blood and filled his brow with lines and wrinkles; when his youthful morn hath traveled on to age's steepy night, and all those beauties whereof now he's king are vanishing or vanished out of sight, stealing away the treasure of his spring; for such a time do i now fortify against confounding age's cruel knife, that he shall never cut from memory my sweet love's beauty, though my lover's life. his beauty shall in these black lines be seen, and they shall live, and he in them still green.
hush!
peace, good pint-pot. peace, good tickle-brain., (to prince henry ) harry, i do not only marvel where thou spendest thy time, but also how thou art accompanied. for though the camomile, the more it is trodden on, the faster it grows, so youth, the more it is wasted, the sooner it wears. that thou art my son i have partly thy mother's word, partly my own opinion, but chiefly a villanous trick of thine eye and a foolish-hanging of thy nether lip that doth warrant me. if then thou be son to me, here lies the point: why, being son to me, art thou so pointed at? shall the blessed sun of heaven prove a micher and eat blackberries? a question not to be asked. shall the sun of england prove a thief and take purses? a question to be asked. there is a thing, harry, which thou hast often heard of, and it is known to many in our land by the name of pitch: this pitch, as ancient writers do report, doth defile; so doth the company thou keepest. for, harry, now i do not speak to thee, in drink but in tears; not in pleasure, but in passion; not in words only, but in woes also. and yet there is a virtuous man whom i have often noted in thy company, but i know not his name.
when i have seen by time's fell hand defaced the rich proud cost of outworn buried age; when sometime lofty towers i see down-razed, and brass eternal slave to mortal rage; when i have seen the hungry ocean gain advantage on the kingdom of the shore, and the firm soil win of the watery main, increasing store with loss, and loss with store; when i have seen such interchange of state, or state itself confounded to decay, ruin hath taught me thus to ruminate, that time will come and take my love away. this thought is as a death, which cannot choose but weep to have that which it fears to lose.
you shall be more beloving than beloved.
what manner of man, an it like your majesty?
since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea, but sad mortality o'ersways their power, how with this rage shall beauty hold a plea, whose action is no stronger than a flower? o how shall summer's honey breath hold out against the wrackful siege of batt'ring days, when rocks impregnable are not so stout, nor gates of steel so strong but time decays? o fearful meditation! where, alack, shall time's best jewel from time's chest lie hid? or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back? or who his spoil or beauty can forbid? o none, unless this miracle have might, that in black ink my love may still shine bright.
i had rather heat my liver with drinking.
a goodly portly man, i' faith, and a corpulent; of a cheerful look, a pleasing eye, and a most noble carriage, and, as i think, his age some fifty, or, by 'r lady, inclining to three score; and now i remember me, his name is falstaff. if that man should be lewdly given, he deceiveth me, for, harry, i see virtue in his looks. if then the tree may be known by the fruit, as the fruit by the tree, then peremptorily i speak it: there is virtue in that falstaff; him keep with, the rest banish. and tell me now, thou naughty varlet, tell me, where hast thou been this month?
tired with all these, for restful death i cry, as to behold desert a beggar born, and needy nothing trimmed in jollity, and purest faith unhappily forsworn, and gilded honor shamefully misplaced, and maiden virtue rudely strumpeted, and right perfection wrongfully disgraced, and strength by limping sway disablèd, and art made tongue-tied by authority, and folly, doctor-like, controlling skill, and simple truth miscalled simplicity, and captive good attending captain ill. tired with all these, from these would i be gone, save that to die, i leave my love alone.
nay, hear him.
dost thou speak like a king? do thou stand for me, and i'll play my father.
ah, wherefore with infection should he live, and with his presence grace impiety, that sin by him advantage should achieve and lace itself with his society? why should false painting imitate his cheek, and steal dead seeing of his living hue? why should poor beauty indirectly seek roses of shadow, since his rose is true? why should he live, now nature bankrupt is, beggared of blood to blush through lively veins? for she hath no exchequer now but his, and, proud of many, lives upon his gains. o him she stores, to show what wealth she had in days long since, before these last so bad.
good now, some excellent fortune! let me be married to three kings in a forenoon and widow them all. let me have a child at fifty, to whom herod of jewry may do homage. find me to marry me with octavius caesar, and companion me with my mistress.
depose me? if thou dost it half so gravely, so majestically, both in word and matter, hang me up by the heels for a rabbit- sucker or a poulter's hare.
thus is his cheek the map of days outworn, when beauty lived and died as flow'rs do now, before these bastard signs of fair were born, or durst inhabit on a living brow; before the golden tresses of the dead, the right of sepulchers, were shorn away, to live a second life on second head; ere beauty's dead fleece made another gay. in him those holy ántique hours are seen, without all ornament, itself and true, making no summer of another's green, robbing no old to dress his beauty new; and him as for a map doth nature store, to show false art what beauty was of yore.
you shall outlive the lady whom you serve.
well, here i am set.
those parts of thee that the world's eye doth view want nothing that the thought of hearts can mend. all tongues, the voice of souls, give thee that due, utt'ring bare truth, ev'n so as foes commend. thy outward thus with outward praise is crowned; but those same tongues that give thee so thine own in other accents do this praise confound by seeing farther than the eye hath shown. they look into the beauty of thy mind, and that in guess they measure by thy deeds; then, churls, their thoughts (although their eyes were kind) to thy fair flower add the rank smell of weeds; but why thy odor matcheth not thy show, the soil is this, that thou dost common grow.
oh, excellent! i love long life better than figs.
and here i stand. , (to the others) judge, my masters.
that thou art blamed shall not be thy defect, for slander's mark was ever yet the fair; the ornament of beauty is suspéct, a crow that flies in heaven's sweetest air. so thou be good, slander doth but approve thy worth the greater, being wooed of time; for canker vice the sweetest buds doth love, and thou present'st a pure unstainèd prime. thou hast passed by the ambush of young days, either not assailed, or victor being charged; yet this thy praise cannot be so thy praise, to tie up envy evermore enlarged. if some suspéct of ill masked not thy show, then thou alone kingdoms of hearts shouldst owe.
you have seen and proved a fairer former fortune than that which is to approach.
now, harry, whence come you?
no longer mourn for me when i am dead than you shall hear the surly sullen bell give warning to the world that i am fled from this vile world with vildest worms to dwell: nay, if you read this line, remember not the hand that writ it, for i love you so that i in your sweet thoughts would be forgot, if thinking on me then should make you woe. o if, i say, you look upon this verse when i perhaps compounded am with clay, do not so much as my poor name rehearse, but let your love even with my life decay, lest the wise world should look into your moan and mock you with me after i am gone.
then belike my children shall have no names. prithee, how many boys and wenches must i have?
my noble lord, from eastcheap.
o lest the world should task you to recite what merit lived in me that you should love after my death, dear love, forget me quite, for you in me can nothing worthy prove; unless you would devise some virtuous lie, to do more for me than mine own desert, and hang more praise upon deceasèd i than niggard truth would willingly impart. o lest your true love may seem false in this, that you for love speak well of me untrue, my name be buried where my body is, and live no more to shame nor me nor you. for i am shamed by that which i bring forth, and so should you, to love things nothing worth.
if every of your wishes had a womb, and fertile every wish, a million.
the complaints i hear of thee are grievous.
that time of year thou mayst in me behold when yellow leaves, or none, or few, do hang upon those boughs which shake against the cold, bare ruined choirs, where late the sweet birds sang. in me thou seest the twilight of such day as after sunset fadeth in the west, which by and by black night doth take away, death's second self, that seals up all in rest. in me thou seest the glowing of such fire that on the ashes of his youth doth lie, as the deathbed whereon it must expire consumed with that which it was nourished by. this thou perceiv'st, which makes thy love more strong, to love that well which thou must leave ere long.
out, fool! i forgive thee for a witch.
'sblood, my lord, they are false., (to the others) nay, i'll tickle you for a young prince, i' faith.
but be contented when that fell arrest without all bail shall carry me away; my life hath in this line some interest, which for memorial still with thee shall stay. when thou reviewest this, thou dost review the very part was consecrate to thee. the earth can have but earth, which is his due; my spirit is thine, the better part of me. so then thou hast but lost the dregs of life, the prey of worms, my body being dead, the coward conquest of a wretch's knife, too base of thee to be rememb'red. the worth of that is that which it contains, and that is this, and this with thee remains.
you think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes.
swearest thou? ungracious boy, henceforth ne'er look on me. thou art violently carried away from grace. there is a devil haunts thee in the likeness of an old fat man. a tun of man is thy companion. why dost thou converse with that trunk of humors, that bolting-hutch of beastliness, that swollen parcel of dropsies, that huge bombard of sack, that stuffed cloakbag of guts, that roasted manningtree ox with the pudding in his belly, that reverend vice, that gray iniquity, that father ruffian, that vanity in years? wherein is he good, but to taste sack and drink it? wherein neat and cleanly but to carve a capon and eat it? wherein cunning but in craft? wherein crafty but in villany? wherein villanous but in all things? wherein worthy but in nothing?
so are you to my thoughts as food to life, or as sweet seasoned show'rs are to the ground; and for the peace of you i hold such strife as 'twixt a miser and his wealth is found; now proud as an enjoyer, and anon doubting the filching age will steal his treasure; now counting best to be with you alone, then bettered that the world may see my pleasure; sometime all full with feasting on your sight and by and by clean starvèd for a look; possessing or pursuing no delight, save what is had or must from you be took. thus do i pine and surfeit day by day, or gluttoning on all, or all away.
(to soothsayer ) nay, come, tell iras hers.
i would your grace would take me with you. whom means your grace?
why is my verse so barren of new pride, so far from variation or quick change? why with the time do i not glance aside to new-found methods and to compounds strange? why write i still all one, ever the same, and keep invention in a noted weed, that every word doth almost tell my name, showing their birth, and where they did proceed? o know, sweet love, i always write of you, and you and love are still my argument. so all my best is dressing old words new, spending again what is already spent: for as the sun is daily new and old, so is my love still telling what is told.
we'll know all our fortunes.
that villanous abominable misleader of youth, falstaff, that old white-bearded satan.
thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear, thy dial how thy precious minutes waste; the vacant leaves thy mind's impr'nt will bear, and of this book this learning mayst thou taste: the wrinkles which thy glass will truly show of mouthèd graves will give thee memory; thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know time's thievish progress to eternity. look what thy memory cannot contain, commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find those children nursed, delivered from thy brain, to take a new acquaintance of thy mind. these offices, so oft as thou wilt look, shall profit thee and much enrich thy book.
mine, and most of our fortunes tonight, shall be, drunk to bed.
my lord, the man i know.
so oft have i invoked thee for my muse, and found such fair assistance in my verse, as every alien pen hath got my use, and under thee their poesy disperse. thine eyes, that taught the dumb on high to sing, and heavy ignorance aloft to fly, have added feathers to the learnèd's wing and given grace a double majesty. yet be most proud of that which i compile, whose influence is thine and born of thee. in others' works thou dost but mend the style, and arts with thy sweet graces gracèd be; but thou art all my art, and dost advance as high as learning my rude ignorance.
(giving her hand to the soothsayer ) there's a palm presages chastity, if nothing else.
i know thou dost.
whilst i alone did call upon thy aid, my verse alone had all thy gentle grace, but now my gracious numbers are decayed, and my sick muse doth give another place. i grant, sweet love, thy lovely argument deserves the travail of a worthier pen, yet what of thee thy poet doth invent he robs thee of and pays it thee again. he lends thee virtue, and he stole that word from thy behavior; beauty doth he give and found it in thy cheek; he can afford no praise to thee but what in thee doth live. then thank him not for that which he doth say, since what he owes thee thou thyself dost pay.
e'en as the o'erflowing nilus presageth famine.
but to say i know more harm in him than in myself were to say more than i know. that he is old, the more the pity; his white hairs do witness it. but that he is, saving your reverence, a whoremaster, that i utterly deny. if sack and sugar be a fault, god help the wicked. if to be old and merry be a sin, then many an old host that i know is damned. if to be fat be to be hated, then pharaoh's lean kine are to be loved. no, my good lord, banish peto, banish bardolph, banish poins, but for sweet jack falstaff, kind jack falstaff, true jack falstaff, valiant jack falstaff, and therefore more valiant being, as he is old jack falstaff, banish not him thy harry's company, banish not him thy harry's company. banish plump jack, and banish all the world.
o how i faint when i of you do write, knowing a better spirit doth use your name, and in the praise thereof spends all his might, to make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame. but since your worth, wide as the ocean is, the humble as the proudest sail doth bear, my saucy bark, inferior far to his, on your broad main doth willfully appear. your shallowest help will hold me up afloat, whilst he upon your soundless deep doth ride; or, being wracked, i am a worthless boat, he of tall building and of goodly pride. then, if he thrive and i be cast away, the worst was this: my love was my decay.
go, you wild bedfellow, you cannot soothsay.
i do, i will.
or i shall live, your epitaph to make, or you survive, when i in earth am rotten, from hence your memory death cannot take, although in me each part will be forgotten. your name from hence immortal life shall have, though i, once gone, to all the world must die. the earth can yield me but a common grave, when you entombèd in men's eyes shall lie. your monument shall be my gentle verse, which eyes not yet created shall o'er-read, and tongues to be your being shall rehearse when all the breathers of this world are dead. you still shall live, such virtue hath my pen, where breath most breathes, ev'n in the mouths of men.
nay, if an oily palm be not a fruitful prognostication, i cannot scratch mine ear., prithee, tell her but a workaday fortune.
o, my lord, my lord, the sheriff with a most monstrous watch is at the door.
i grant thou wert not married to my muse, and therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook the dedicated words which writers use of their fair subject, blessing every book. thou art as fair in knowledge as in hue, finding thy worth a limit past my praise, and therefore art enforced to seek anew some fresher stamp of the time-bett'ring days. and do so, love; yet when they have devised what strainèd touches rhetoric can lend, thou, truly fair, wert truly sympathized in true plain words by thy true-telling friend. and their gross painting might be better used where cheeks need blood, in thee it is abused.
your fortunes are alike.
out, you rogue., play out the play. i have much to say in the behalf of that falstaff.
i never saw that you did painting need, and therefore to your fair no painting set. i found, or thought i found, you did exceed the barren tender of a poet's debt. and therefore have i slept in your report, that you yourself, being extant, well might show how far a modern quill doth come too short, speaking of worth, what worth in you doth grow. this silence for my sin you did impute, which shall be most my glory, being dumb. for i impair not beauty, being mute, when others would give life, and bring a tomb. there lives more life in one of your fair eyes than both your poets can in praise devise.
but how, but how? give me particulars.
o jesu, my lord, my lord, 
who is it that says most, which can say more than this rich praise, that you alone are you, in whose conf'ne immurèd is the store which should example where your equal grew? lean penury within that pen doth dwell that to his subject lends not some small glory. but he that writes of you, if he can tell that you are you, so dignifies his story. let him but copy what in you is writ, not making worse what nature made so clear, and such a counterpart shall fame his wit, making his style admired everywhere. you to your beauteous blessings add a curse, being fond on praise, which makes your praises worse.
i have said.
heigh, heigh, the devil rides upon a fiddlestick. what's the matter?
my tongue-tied muse in manners holds her still, while comments of your praise, richly compiled, reserve their character with golden quill and precious phrase by all the muses filed. i think good thoughts, whilst other write good words, and like unlettered clerk still cry "amen" to every hymn that able spirit affords, in polished form of well-refinèd pen. hearing you praised, i say "'tis so, 'tis true," and to the most of praise add something more; but that is in my thought, whose love to you, though words come hindmost, holds his rank before. then others for the breath of words respect, me for my dumb thoughts, speaking in effect.
am i not an inch of fortune better than she?
the sheriff and all the watch are at the door. they are come to search the house. shall i let them in?
was it the proud full sail of his great verse, bound for the prize of all too precious you, that did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse, making their tomb the womb wherein they grew? was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead? no, neither he, nor his compeers by night giving him aid, my verse astonishèd. he, nor that affable familiar ghost which nightly gulls him with intelligence, as victors of my silence cannot boast. i was not sick of any fear from thence; but when your countenance filled up his line, then lacked i matter, that enfeebled mine.
well, if you were but an inch of fortune better than i, where would you choose it?
dost thou hear, hal? never call a true piece of gold a counterfeit. thou art essentially made, without seeming so.
farewell, thou art too dear for my possessing, and like enough thou know'st thy estimate. the charter of thy worth gives thee releasing; my bonds in thee are all determinate. for how do i hold thee but by thy granting, and for that riches where is my deserving? the cause of this fair gift in me is wanting, and so my patent back again is swerving. thyself thou gav'st, thy own worth then not knowing, or me, to whom thou gav'st it, else mistaking; so thy great gift, upon misprision growing, comes home again, on better judgment making. thus have i had thee as a dream doth flatter: in sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
not in my husband's nose.
and thou a natural coward without instinct.
when thou shalt be disposed to set me light and place my merit in the eye of scorn, upon thy side against myself i'll fight, and prove thee virtuous, though thou art forsworn. with mine own weakness being best acquainted, upon thy part i can set down a story of faults concealed, wherein i am attainted, that thou in losing me shalt win much glory. and i by this will be a gainer too, for bending all my loving thoughts on thee, the injuries that to myself i do, doing thee vantage, double vantage me. such is my love, to thee i so belong, that for thy right myself will bear all wrong.
our worser thoughts heavens mend. alexas! (to soothsayer ) come, his fortune, his fortune! oh, let him marry a woman that cannot go, sweet isis, i beseech thee, and let her die too, and give him a worse, and let worse follow worse, till the worst of all follow him laughing to his grave, fifty-fold a cuckold! good isis, hear me this prayer, though thou deny me a matter of more weight, good isis, i beseech thee!
i deny your major. if you will deny the sheriff, so; if not, let him enter. if i become not a cart as well as another man, a plague on my bringing up. i hope i shall as soon be strangled with a halter as another.
say that thou didst forsake me for some fault, and i will comment upon that offense. speak of my lameness, and i straight will halt, against thy reasons making no defense. thou canst not, love, disgrace me half so ill, to set a form upon desired change, as i'll myself disgrace, knowing thy will; i will acquaintance strangle and look strange, be absent from thy walks, and in my tongue thy sweet belovèd name no more shall dwell, lest i, too much profane, should do it wrong and haply of our old acquaintance tell. for thee against myself i'll vow debate, for i must ne'er love him whom thou dost hate.
amen, dear goddess, hear that prayer of the people! for, as it is a heartbreaking to see a handsome man loose-wived, so it is a deadly sorrow to behold a foul knave uncuckolded. therefore, dear isis, keep decorum, and fortune him accordingly.
go, hide thee behind the arras. the rest walk up above., now, my masters, for a true face and good conscience.
then hate me when thou wilt, if ever, now, now while the world is bent my deeds to cross; join with the spite of fortune, make me bow, and do not drop in for an after-loss: ah, do not, when my heart hath 'scaped this sorrow, come in the rearward of a conquered woe. give not a windy night a rainy morrow, to linger out a purposed overthrow. if thou wilt leave me, do not leave me last, when other petty griefs have done their spite but in the onset come; so shall i taste at first the very worst of fortune's might; and other strains of woe, which now seem woe, compared with loss of thee will not seem so.
amen.
both which i have had, but their date is out; and therefore i'll hide me. (he hides behind the arras)
some glory in their birth, some in their skill, some in their wealth, some in their body's force, some in their garments, though new-fangled ill, some in their hawks and hounds, some in their horse; and every humor hath his adjunct pleasure, wherein it finds a joy above the rest. but these particulars are not my measure; all these i better in one general best. thy love is better than high birth to me, richer than wealth, prouder than garments' cost, of more delight than hawks or horses be; and having thee, of all men's pride i boast; wretched in this alone, that thou mayst take all this away, and me most wretched make.
(to himself) lo now, if it lay in their hands to make me a cuckold, they would make themselves whores but they'd do 't.
call in the sheriff.
but do thy worst to steal thyself away, for term of life thou art assurèd mine, and life no longer than thy love will stay, for it depends upon that love of thine. then need i not to fear the worst of wrongs, when in the least of them my life hath end. i see a better state to me belongs than that which on thy humor doth depend. thou canst not vex me with inconstant mind, since that my life on thy revolt doth lie. o what a happy title do i find, happy to have thy love, happy to die! but what's so blessèd-fair that fears no blot? thou mayst be false, and yet i know it not.
hush! here comes antony.
now, master sheriff, what is your will with me?
so shall i live, supposing thou art true, like a deceived husband; so love's face may still seem love to me, though altered new: thy looks with me, thy heart in other place. for there can live no hatred in thine eye, therefore in that i cannot know thy change. in many's looks, the false heart's history is writ in moods and frowns and wrinkles strange, but heav'n in thy creation did decree that in thy face sweet love should ever dwell; whate'er thy thoughts or thy heart's workings be, thy looks should nothing thence but sweetness tell. how like eve's apple doth thy beauty grow, if thy sweet virtue answer not thy show.
not he. the queen.
first pardon me, my lord. a hue and cry hath followed certain men unto this house.
they that have pow'r to hurt, and will do none, that do not do the thing they most do show, who moving others are themselves as stone, unmovèd, cold, and to temptation slow, they rightly do inherit heaven's graces, and husband nature's riches from expense. they are the lords and owners of their faces; others but stewards of their excellence. the summer's flow'r is to the summer sweet, though to itself it only live and die. but if that flow'r with base infection meet, the basest weed outbraves his dignity. for sweetest things turn sourest by their deeds; lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.
saw you my lord?
what men?
how sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame which, like a canker in the fragrant rose, doth spot the beauty of thy budding name! o in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose! that tongue that tells the story of thy days, making lascivious comments on thy sport, cannot dispraise but in a kind of praise; naming thy name blesses an ill report. o what a mansion have those vices got which for their habitation chose out thee, where beauty's veil doth cover every blot, and all things turns to fair that eyes can see! take heed, dear heart, of this large privilege; the hardest knife ill used doth lose his edge.
no, lady.
one of them is well known, my gracious lord, a gross fat man.
some say thy fault is youth, some wantonness, some say thy grace is youth and gentle sport; both grace and faults are loved of more and less; thou mak'st faults graces that to thee resort. as on the finger of a thronèd queen the basest jewel will be well esteemed, so are those errors that in thee are seen to truths translated, and for true things deemed. how many lambs might the stern wolf betray, if like a lamb he could his looks translate; how many gazers mightst thou lead away, if thou wouldst use the strength of all thy state! but do not so. i love thee in such sort, as thou being mine, mine is thy good report.
was he not here?
as fat as butter.
how like a winter hath my absence been from thee, the pleasure of the fleeting year! what freezings have i felt, what dark days seen! what old december's bareness everywhere! and yet this time removed was summer's time, the teeming autumn big with rich increase, bearing the wanton burthen of the prime, like widowed wombs after their lords' decease. yet this abundant issue seemed to me but hope of orphans, and unfathered fruit. for summer and his pleasures wait on thee, and thou away, the very birds are mute. or if they sing, 'tis with so dull a cheer that leaves look pale, dreading the winter's near.
no, madam.
the man, i do assure you is not here, and, sheriff, i will engage my word to thee that i will by tomorrow dinner time send him to answer thee or any man for any thing he shall be charged withal.
from you have i been absent in the spring, when proud-pied april, dressed in all his trim, hath put a spirit of youth in everything, that heavy saturn laughed and leapt with him. yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell of different flow'rs in odor and in hue, could make me any summer's story tell, or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew. nor did i wonder at the lily's white, nor praise the deep vermilion in the rose; they were but sweet, but figures of delight, drawn after you, you pattern of all those. yet seemed it winter still, and, you away, as with your shadow i with these did play.
he was disposed to mirth, but on the sudden
i will, my lord. there are two gentlemen have in this robbery lost three hundred marks.
the forward violet thus did i chide: sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells, if not from my love's breath? the purple pride which on thy soft cheek for complexion dwells in my love's veins thou hast too grossly dyed. the lily i condemnèd for thy hand, and buds of marjoram had stol'n thy hair; the roses fearfully on thorns did stand, one blushing shame, another white despair; a third, nor red nor white, had stol'n of both, and to his robb'ry had annexed thy breath; but for his theft, in pride of all his growth a vengeful canker ate him up to death. more flow'rs i noted, yet i none could see but sweet or color it had stol'n from thee.
madam?
it may be so. if he have robbed these men, he shall be answerable; and so farewell.
where art thou, muse, that thou forget'st so long to speak of that which gives thee all thy might? spend'st thou thy fury on some worthless song, dark'ning thy pow'r to lend base subjects light? return, forgetful muse, and straight redeem in gentle numbers time so idly spent; sing to the ear that doth thy lays esteem, and gives thy pen both skill and argument. rise, resty muse; my love's sweet face survey, if time have any wrinkle graven there; if any, be a satire to decay, and make time's spoils despisèd everywhere. give my love fame faster than time wastes life; so thou prevent'st his scythe and crookèd knife.
seek him and bring him hither., where's alexas?
good night, my noble lord.
o truant muse, what shall be thy amends for thy neglect of truth in beauty dyed? both truth and beauty on my love depends; so dost thou too, and therein dignified. make answer, muse: wilt thou not haply say truth needs no color, with his color fixed, beauty no pencil, beauty's truth to lay; but best is best if never intermixed? because he needs no praise, wilt thou be dumb? excuse not silence so, for 't lies in thee to make him much outlive a gilded tomb, and to be praised of ages yet to be. then do thy office, muse. i teach thee how to make him seem long hence as he shows now.
here at your service. my lord approaches.
i think it is good morrow, is it not?
my love is strengthened, though more weak in seeming; i love not less, though less the show appear. that love is merchandised whose rich esteeming the owner's tongue doth publish everywhere. our love was new, and then but in the spring, when i was wont to greet it with my lays, as philomel in summer's front doth sing, and stops his pipe in growth of riper days. not that the summer is less pleasant now than when her mournful hymns did hush the night, but that wild music burthens every bough, and sweets grown common lose their dear delight. therefore, like her, i sometime hold my tongue, because i would not dull you with my song.
we will not look upon him. go with us.
indeed, my lord, i think it be two o'clock.
alack, what poverty my muse brings forth, that having such a scope to show her pride, the argument all bare is of more worth than when it hath my added praise beside! o blame me not if i no more can write! look in your glass, and there appears a face that overgoes my blunt invention quite, dulling my lines and doing me disgrace. were it not sinful then, striving to mend, to mar the subject that before was well? for to no other pass my verses tend than of your graces and your gifts to tell; and more, much more than in my verse can sit your own glass shows you, when you look in it.
fulvia thy wife first came into the field.
this oily rascal is known as well as paul's. go call him forth.
to me, fair friend, you never can be old, for as you were when first your eye i eyed, such seems your beauty still. three winters cold have from the forests shook three summers' pride; three beauteous springs to yellow autumn turned in process of the seasons have i seen; three april pérfumes in three hot junes burned, since first i saw you fresh, which yet are green. ah yet doth beauty, like a dial hand, steal from his figure, and no pace perceived; so your sweet hue, which methinks still doth stand, hath motion, and mine eye may be deceived. for fear of which, hear this, thou age unbred: ere you were born was beauty's summer dead.
against my brother lucius?
falstaff!, (pulls back the arras) fast asleep behind the arras, and snorting like a horse.
let not my love be called idolatry, nor my belovèd as an idol show, since all alike my songs and praises be to one, of one, still such, and ever so. kind is my love today, tomorrow kind, still constant in a wondrous excellence; therefore my verse to constancy confined, one thing expressing, leaves out difference. fair, kind, and true is all my argument, fair, kind, and true, varying to other words; and in this change is my invention spent, three themes in one, which wondrous scope affords. fair, kind, and true have often lived alone, which three, till now, never kept seat in one.
ay. but soon that war had end, and the time's state whose better issue in the war from italy upon the first encounter drave them.
hark, how hard he fetches breath. search his pockets.
when in the chronicle of wasted time i see descriptions of the fairest wights and beauty making beautiful old rhyme in praise of ladies dead and lovely knights, then in the blazon of sweet beauty's best, of hand, of foot, of lip, of eye, of brow, i see their ántique pen would have expressed ev'n such a beauty as you master now. so all their praises are but prophecies of this our time, all you prefiguring, and for they looked but with divining eyes, they had not skill enough your worth to sing. for we which now behold these present days, have eyes to wonder, but lack tongues to praise.
well, what worst?
what hast thou found?
not mine own fears, nor the prophetic soul of the wide world dreaming on things to come, can yet the lease of my true love control, supposed as forfeit to a cónfined doom. the mortal moon hath her eclipse endured and the sad augurs mock their own preságe; incertainties now crown themselves assured, and peace proclaims olives of endless age. now with the drops of this most balmy time my love looks fresh, and death to me subscribes, since spite of him i'll live in this poor rhyme, while he insults o'er dull and speechless tribes. and thou in this shalt find thy monument, when tyrants' crests and tombs of brass are spent.
the nature of bad news infects the teller.
nothing but papers, my lord.
what's in the brain that ink may character which hath not figured to thee my true spirit? what's new to speak, what now to register, that may express my love or thy dear merit? nothing, sweet boy; but yet, like prayers divine, i must each day say o'er the very same, counting no old thing old, thou mine, i thine, ev'n as when first i hallowed thy fair name. so that eternal love in love's fresh case weighs not the dust and injury of age, nor gives to necessary wrinkles place, but makes antiquity for aye his page, finding the first conceit of love there bred where time and outward form would show it dead.
things that are past are done, with me. 'tis thus: who tells me true, though in his tale lie death, i hear him as he flattered.
let's see what they be. read them.
o never say that i was false of heart, though absence seemed my flame to qualify. as easy might i from myself depart as from my soul, which in thy breast doth lie. that is my home of love; if i have ranged, like him that travels i return again, just to the time, not with the time exchanged, so that myself bring water for my stain. never believe, though in my nature reigned all frailties that besiege all kinds of blood, that it could so preposterously be stained to leave for nothing all thy sum of good. for nothing this wide universe i call, save thou, my rose; in it thou art my all.
labienus, this is stiff news, hath with his parthian force his conquering banner shook, from syria to lydia and to ionia, whilst, 
item, sauce, ... d. item, sack, two gallons, ... s. d. item, anchovies and sack after supper, , , , s. d. item, bread, ob.
alas 'tis true, i have gone here and there, and made myself a motley to the view, gored mine own thoughts, sold cheap what is most dear, made old offenses of affections new. most true it is that i have looked on truth askance and strangely; but by all above, these blenches gave my heart another youth, and worse essays proved thee my best of love. now all is done, save what shall have no end; mine appetite i never more will grind on newer proof, to try an older friend, a god in love, to whom i am confined. then give me welcome, next my heav'n the best, ev'n to thy pure and most most loving breast.
"antony," thou wouldst say.
o monstrous! but one halfpennyworth of bread to this intolerable deal of sack! what there is else, keep close. we'll read it at more advantage. there let him sleep till day. i'll to the court in the morning. we must all to the wars, and thy place shall be honorable. i'll procure this fat rogue a charge of foot, and i know his death will be a march of twelve score. the money shall be paid back again with advantage. be with me betimes in the morning, and so good morrow, peto.
o for my sake do you with fortune chide, the guilty goddess of my harmful deeds, that did not better for my life provide than public means which public manners breeds. thence comes it that my name receives a brand, and almost thence my nature is subdued to what it works in, like the dyer's hand: pity me then, and wish i were renewed, whilst like a willing patient i will drink potions of eisel 'gainst my strong infection; no bitterness that i will bitter think, nor double penance, to correct correction. pity me then, dear friend, and i assure ye, ev'n that your pity is enough to cure me.
o my lord!
good morrow, good my lord.
your love and pity doth th' impression fill which vulgar scandal stamped upon my brow; for what care i who calls me well or ill, so you o'er-green my bad, my good allow? you are my all the world, and i must strive to know my shames and praises from your tongue; none else to me, nor i to none alive, that my steeled sense or changes right or wrong. in so profound abysm i throw all care of others' voices, that my adder's sense to critic and to flatt'rer stoppèd are. mark how with my neglect i do dispense: you are so strongly in my purpose bred that all the world besides methinks y'are dead.
name cleopatra as she is called in rome. rail thou in fulvia's phrase, and taunt my faults with such full license as both truth and malice have power to utter. oh, then we bring forth weeds is as our earing.
these promises are fair, the parties sure, and our induction full of prosperous hope.
since i left you, mine eye is in my mind, and that which governs me to go about doth part his function, and is partly blind, seems seeing, but effectually is out; for it no form delivers to the heart of bird, of flow'r, or shape which it doth latch. of his quick objects hath the mind no part, nor his own vision holds what it doth catch; for if it see the rud'st or gentlest sight, the most sweet favor or deformèd'st creature, the mountain, or the sea, the day, or night, the crow, or dove, it shapes them to your feature. incapable of more, replete with you, my most true mind thus makes mine untrue.
fare thee well awhile.
lord mortimer and cousin glendower, will you sit down? and uncle worcester, 
or whether doth my mind, being crowned with you, drink up the monarch's plague, this flattery? or whether shall i say mine eye saith true, and that your love taught it this alchemy, to make of monsters and things indigest such cherubins as your sweet self resemble, creating every bad a perfect best as fast as objects to his beams assemble? o 'tis the first; 'tis flattery in my seeing, and my great mind most kingly drinks it up. mine eye well knows what with his gust is greeing, and to his palate doth prepare the cup. if it be poisoned, 'tis the lesser sin that mine eye loves it and doth first begin.
at your noble pleasure.
no, here it is. sit, cousin percy sit, good cousin hotspur, for by that name as oft as lancaster doth speak of you his cheek looks pale and with a rising sigh
those lines that i before have writ do lie, ev'n those that said i could not love you dearer. yet then my judgment knew no reason why my most full flame should afterwards burn clearer. but reck'ning time, whose millioned accidents creep in 'twixt vows, and change decrees of kings, tan sacred beauty, blunt the sharp'st intents, divert strong minds to the course of alt'ring things. alas, why, fearing of time's tyranny, might i not then say, "now i love you best," when i was certain o'er incertainty, crowning the present, doubting of the rest? love is a babe; then might i not say so, to give full growth to that which still doth grow?
from sicyon, how, the news? speak there.
and you in hell, as oft as he hears owen glendower spoke of.
let me not to the marriage of true minds admit impediments. love is not love which alters when it alteration finds, or bends with the remover to remove. o no, it is an ever-fixèd mark that looks on tempests and is never shaken; it is the star to every wand'ring bark, whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken. love's not time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks within his bending sickle's compass come: love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, but bears it out even to the edge of doom. if this be error and upon me proved, i never writ, nor no man ever loved.
the man from sicyon, 
i cannot blame him. at my nativity the front of heaven was full of fiery shapes, of burning cressets, and at my birth shaked like a coward.
accuse me thus: that i have scanted all wherein i should your great deserts repay, forgot upon your dearest love to call, whereto all bonds do tie me day by day; that i have frequent been with unknown minds, and giv'n to time your own dear purchased right; that i have hoisted sail to all the winds which should transport me farthest from your sight. book both my willfulness and errors down, and on just proof surmise accumulate. bring me within the level of your frown, but shoot not at me in your wakened hate, since my appeal says i did strive to prove the constancy and virtue of your love.
is there such an one?
why, so it would have done at the same season if your mother's cat had but kittened, though yourself had never been born.
like as to make our appetites more keen with eager compounds we our palate urge; as, to prevent our maladies unseen, we sicken to shun sickness when we purge; ev'n so, being full of your ne'er-cloying sweetness, to bitter sauces did i frame my feeding; and, sick of welfare, found a kind of meetness to be diseased ere that there was true needing. thus policy in love, t' anticipate the ills that were not, grew to faults assured, and brought to medicine a healthful state which, rank of goodness, would by ill be cured; but thence i learn, and find the lesson true, drugs poison him that so fell sick of you.
he stays upon your will.
i say the earth did shake when i was born.
what potions have i drunk of siren tears, distilled from limbecks foul as hell within, applying fears to hopes, and hopes to fears, still losing when i saw myself to win! what wretched errors hath my heart committed, whilst it hath thought itself so blessèd never! how have mine eyes out of their spheres been fitted in the distraction of this madding fever! o benefit of ill, now i find true that better is by evil still made better; and ruined love when it is built anew grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater. so i return rebuked to my content, and gain by ills thrice more than i have spent.
let him appear.
if you suppose as fearing you it shook.
that you were once unkind befriends me now, and for that sorrow which i then did feel needs must i under my transgression bow, unless my nerves were brass or hammered steel. for if you were by my unkindness shaken, as i by yours, you've passed a hell of time, and i, a tyrant, have no leisure taken to weigh how once i suffered in your crime. o that our night of woe might have rememb'red my deepest sense, how hard true sorrow hits, and soon to you as you to me then tendered the humble salve which wounded bosoms fits! but that your trespass now becomes a fee; mine ransoms yours, and yours must ransom me.
these strong egyptian fetters i must break, or lose myself in dotage.
the heavens were all on fire; the earth did tremble.
'tis better to be vile than vile esteemed, when not to be receives reproach of being, and the just pleasure lost which is so deemed not by our feeling but by others' seeing. for why should others' false adulterate eyes give salutation to my sportive blood? or on my frailties why are frailer spies, which in their wills count bad what i think good? no, i am that i am, and they that level at my abuses reckon up their own; i may be straight, though they themselves be bevel. by their rank thoughts my deeds must not be shown, unless this general evil they maintain: all men are bad, and in their badness reign.
what are you?
o, then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire, and not in fear of your nativity. in strange eruptions; oft the teeming earth is with a kind of colic pinched and vexed by the imprisoning of unruly wind within her womb, which, for enlargement striving, steeples and moss-grown towers. at your birth our grandam earth, having this distemperature, in passion shook.
thy gift, thy tables, are within my brain full charactered with lasting memory, which shall above that idle rank remain beyond all date, ev'n to eternity; or at the least, so long as brain and heart have faculty by nature to subsist; till each to razed oblivion yield his part of thee, thy record never can be missed. that poor retention could not so much hold, nor need i tallies thy dear love to score; therefore to give them from me was i bold, to trust those tables that receive thee more; to keep an adjunct to remember thee were to import forgetfulness in me.
fulvia thy wife is dead.
cousin, of many men i do not bear these crossings. give me leave the front of heaven was full of fiery shapes, the goats ran from the mountains, and the herds were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields. these signs have marked me extraordinary, i am not in the roll of common men. where is he living, clipped in with the sea that chides the banks of england, scotland, wales, which calls me pupil or hath read to me? can trace me in the tedious ways of art and hold me pace in deep experiments.
no! time, thou shalt not boast that i do change. thy pyramids built up with newer might to me are nothing novel, nothing strange; they are but dressings of a former sight. our dates are brief, and therefore we admire what thou dost foist upon us that is old, and rather make them born to our desire than think that we before have heard them told. thy registers and thee i both defy, not wond'ring at the present nor the past; for thy recórds and what we see doth lie, made more or less by thy continual haste. this i do vow and this shall ever be: i will be true, despite thy scythe and thee.
where died she?
i think there's no man speaks better welsh. i'll to dinner.
if my dear love were but the child of state, it might for fortune's bastard be unfathered, as subject to time's love or to time's hate, weeds among weeds, or flow'rs with flowers gathered. no, it was builded far from accident; it suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls under the blow of thrallèd discontent, whereto th' inviting time our fashion calls. it fears not policy, that heretic, which works on leases of short numb'red hours. but all alone stands hugely politic, that it nor grows with heat nor drowns with showers. to this i witness call the fools of time, which die for goodness, who have lived for crime.
in sicyon. importeth thee to know, this bears.
peace, cousin percy. you will make him mad.
were't ought to me i bore the canopy, with my extern the outward honoring, or laid great bases for eternity, which prove more short than waste or ruining? have i not seen dwellers on form and favor lose all and more by paying too much rent, for compound sweet forgoing simple savor, pitiful thrivers, in their gazing spent? no, let me be obsequious in thy heart, and take thou my oblation, poor but free, which is not mixed with seconds, knows no art, but mutual render, only me for thee. hence, thou suborned informer! a true soul when most impeached stands least in thy control.
forbear me.
i can call spirits from the vasty deep.
o thou, my lovely boy, who in thy pow'r dost hold time's fickle glass, his sickle hour, who hast by waning grown, and therein show'st thy lovers withering, as thy sweet self grow'st, if nature, sovereign mistress over wrack, as thou goest onwards still will pluck thee back, she keeps thee to this purpose: that her skill may time disgrace, and wretched minute kill. yet fear her, o thou minion of her pleasure; she may detain, but not still keep, her treasure. her audit, though delayed, answered must be, and her quietus is to render thee. ( ) ( )
(to himself) there's a great spirit gone! thus did i desire it. what our contempts doth often hurl from us we wish it ours again. the present pleasure, the opposite of itself. she's good, being gone. the hand could pluck her back that shoved her on. i must from this enchanting queen break off. ten thousand harms, more than the ills i know
why, so can i, or so can any man, but will they come when you do call for them?
in the old age black was not counted fair, or if it were, it bore not beauty's name. but now is black beauty's successive heir, and beauty slandered with a bastard shame. for since each hand hath put on nature's pow'r, fairing the foul with art's false borrowed face, sweet beauty hath no name, no holy bow'r, but is profaned, if not lives in disgrace. therefore my mistress' eyes are raven black, her eyes so suited, and they mourners seem at such who, not born fair, no beauty lack, sland'ring creation with a false esteem. yet so they mourn, becoming of their woe, that every tongue says beauty should look so.
what's your pleasure, sir?
why, i can teach you, cousin, to command the devil.
how oft when thou, my music, music play'st upon that blessèd wood whose motion sounds with thy sweet fingers, when thou gently sway'st the wiry concord that mine ear confounds, do i envy' those jacks that nimble leap to kiss the tender inward of thy hand, whilst my poor lips, which should that harvest reap, at the wood's boldness by thee blushing stand. to be so tickled they would change their state and situation with those dancing chips, o'er whom thy fingers walk with gentle gait, making dead wood more blest than living lips. since saucy jacks so happy are in this, give them thy fingers, me thy lips to kiss.
i must with haste from hence.
by telling truth. tell truth and shame the devil. if thou have power to raise him, bring him hither, and i'll be sworn i have power to shame him hence. o, while you live, tell truth and shame the devil!
th' expense of spirit in a waste of shame is lust in action, and till action, lust is perjured, murd'rous, bloody, full of blame, savage, extreme, rude, cruel, not to trust, enjoyed no sooner but despisèd straight, past reason hunted, and no sooner had, past reason hated as a swallowed bait on purpose laid to make the taker mad; mad in pursuit, and in possession so, had, having, and in quest to have, extreme; a bliss in proof, and proved, a very woe; before, a joy proposed; behind, a dream. all this the world well knows, yet none knows well to shun the heaven that leads men to this hell.
why, then, we kill all our women. we see how mortal an unkindness is to them. if they suffer our departure, death's the word.
come, come, no more of this unprofitable chat.
my mistress' eyes are nothing like the sun; coral is far more red than her lips' red; if snow be white, why then her breasts are dun; if hairs be wires, black wires grow on her head; i have seen roses damasked, red and white, but no such roses see i in her cheeks; and in some pérfumes is there more delight than in the breath that from my mistress reeks. i love to hear her speak, yet well i know that music hath a far more pleasing sound. i grant i never saw a goddess go; my mistress, when she walks, treads on the ground. and yet, by heaven, i think my love as rare as any she belied with false compare.
i must be gone.
three times hath henry bolingbroke made head against my power; thrice from the banks of wye and sandy-bottomed severn have i sent him bootless home and weather-beaten back.
thou art as tyrannous, so as thou art, as those whose beauties proudly make them cruel; for well thou know'st, to my dear doting heart thou art the fairest and most precious jewel. yet in good faith some say, that thee behold, thy face hath not the pow'r to make love groan. to say they err i dare not be so bold, although i swear it to myself alone; and to be sure that is not false, i swear a thousand groans but thinking on thy face; one on another's neck do witness bear thy black is fairest in my judgment's place. in nothing art thou black save in thy deeds, and thence this slander, as i think, proceeds.
under a compelling occasion, let women die. it were pity to cast them away for nothing, though between them and a great cause they should be esteemed nothing. cleopatra, catching but the least noise of this, dies instantly. i have seen her die twenty times upon far poorer moment. i do think there is mettle in death, which commits some loving act upon her, she hath such a celerity in dying.
how 'scapes he agues, in the devil's name?
thine eyes i love, and they, as pitying me, knowing thy heart torment me with disdain, have put on black, and loving mourners be, looking with pretty ruth upon my pain; and truly, not the morning sun of heav'n better becomes the gray cheeks of the east, nor that full star that ushers in the ev'n doth half that glory to the sober west, as those two mourning eyes become thy face. o let it then as well beseem thy heart to mourn for me, since mourning doth thee grace, and suit thy pity like in every part. then will i swear beauty herself is black, and all they foul that thy complexion lack.
she is cunning past man's thought.
come, here's the map. shall we divide our right according to our threefold order ta'en?
beshrew that heart that makes my heart to groan for that deep wound it gives my friend and me; is't not enough to torture me alone, but slave to slavery my sweet'st friend must be? me from myself thy cruel eye hath taken, and my next self thou harder hast engrossed; of him, myself, and thee i am forsaken, a torment thrice threefold thus to be crossed. prison my heart in thy steel bosom's ward, but then my friend's heart let my poor heart bail. whoe'er keeps me, let my heart be his guard; thou canst not then use rigor in my jail. and yet thou wilt, for i being pent in thee, perforce am thine, and all that is in me.
alack, sir, no, her passions are made of nothing but the finest part of pure love. we cannot call her winds and waters sighs and tears. they are greater storms and tempests than almanacs can report. this cannot be cunning in her. if it be, she makes a shower of rain as well as jove.
the archdeacon hath divided it england, from trent and severn hitherto, by south and east is to my part assigned;
so now i have confessed that he is thine, and i myself am mortgaged to thy will, myself i'll forfeit, so that other mine thou wilt restore to be my comfort still. but thou wilt not, nor he will not be free, for thou art covetous, and he is kind. he learned but surety-like to write for me, under that bond that him as fast doth bind. the statute of thy beauty thou wilt take, thou usurer, that put'st forth all to use, and sue a friend came debtor for my sake; so him i lose through my unkind abuse. him have i lost; thou hast both him and me; he pays the whole, and yet am i not free.
would i had never seen her!
all westward, wales beyond the severn shore, and all the fertile land within that bound the remnant northward, lying off from trent. and our indentures tripartite are drawn, which being sealèd interchangeably, a business that this night may execute, and my good lord of worcester will set forth to meet your father and the scottish power, as is appointed us, at shrewsbury. my father glendower is not ready yet, (to glendower ) within that space you may have drawn together your tenants, friends, and neighboring gentlemen.
whoever hath her wish, thou hast thy will, and will to boot, and will in overplus; more than enough am i, that vex thee still, to thy sweet will making addition thus. wilt thou, whose will is large and spacious, not once vouchsafe to hide my will in thine? shall will in others seem right gracious, and in my will no fair acceptance shine? the sea, all water, yet receives rain still, and in abundance addeth to his store; so thou, being rich in will, add to thy will one will of mine, to make thy large will more. let no unkind, no fair beseechers kill; think all but one, and me in that one will.
o sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece of work which not to have been blessed withal would have discredited your travel.
a shorter time shall send me to you, lords, and in my conduct shall your ladies come, for there will be a world of water shed upon the parting of your wives and you.
if thy soul check thee that i come so near, swear to thy blind soul that i was thy will, and will, thy soul knows, is admitted there; thus far for love my love-suit sweet fulfill. will will fulfill the treasure of thy love, ay, fill it full with wills, and my will one. in things of great receipt with ease we prove among a number one is reckoned none. then in the number let me pass untold, though in thy store's account i one must be. for nothing hold me, so it please thee hold that nothing me, a something sweet to thee. make but my name thy love, and love that still; and then thou lov'st me, for my name is will.
fulvia is dead.
methinks my moiety, north from burton here, in quantity equals not one of yours. and cuts me from the best of all my land a huge half-moon, a monstrous cantle out. i'll have the current in this place dammed up, and here the smug and silver trent shall run it shall not wind with such a deep indent, to rob me of so rich a bottom here.
thou blind fool love, what dost thou to mine eyes, that they behold, and see not what they see? they know what beauty is, see where it lies, yet what the best is take the worst to be. if eyes corrupt by over-partial looks be anchored in the bay where all men ride, why of eyes' falsehood hast thou forgèd hooks, whereto the judgment of my heart is tied? why should my heart think that a several plot which my heart knows the wide world's common place? or mine eyes, seeing this, say this is not, to put fair truth upon so foul a face? in things right true my heart and eyes have erred, and to this false plague are they now transferred.
sir?
not wind? it shall, it must. you see it doth.
when my love swears that she is made of truth i do believe her, though i know she lies, that she might think me some untutored youth unlearnèd in the world's false subtleties. thus vainly thinking that she thinks me young, although she knows my days are past the best, simply i credit her false speaking tongue; on both sides thus is simple truth suppressed. but wherefore says she not she is unjust? and wherefore say not i that i am old? o love's best habit is in seeming trust, and age in love loves not t' have years told. therefore i lie with her, and she with me, and in our faults by lies we flattered be.
fulvia is dead.
yea, but mark how he bears his course, and runs me up gelding the opposèd continent as much as on the other side it takes from you.
o call not me to justify the wrong that thy unkindness lays upon my heart. wound me not with thine eye, but with thy tongue; use pow'r with pow'r, and slay me not by art. tell me thou lov'st elsewhére; but in my sight, dear heart, forbear to glance thine eye aside. what need'st thou wound with cunning when thy might is more than my o'er-pressed defense can bide? let me excuse thee: ah, my love well knows her pretty looks have been mine enemies, and therefore from my face she turns my foes, that they elsewhére might dart their injuries. yet do not so, but since i am near slain, kill me outr'ght with looks, and rid my pain.
fulvia?
yea, but a little charge will trench him here and on this north side win this cape of land,
be wise as thou art cruel; do not press my tongue-tied patience with too much disdain, lest sorrow lend me words, and words express the manner of my pity-wanting pain. if i might teach thee wit, better it were, though not to love, yet love, to tell me so, as testy sick men, when their deaths be near, no news but health from their physicians know. for if i should despair, i should grow mad, and in my madness might speak ill of thee. now this ill-wresting world is grown so bad, mad sland'rers by mad ears believèd be. that i may not be so, nor thou belied, bear thine eyes straight, though thy proud heart go wide.
dead.
i'll have it so. a little charge will do it.
in faith, i do not love thee with mine eyes, for they in thee a thousand errors note; but 'tis my heart that loves what they despise, who in despite of view is pleased to dote. nor are mine ears with thy tongue's tune delighted, nor tender feeling to base touches prone, nor taste, nor smell, desire to be invited to any sensual feast with thee alone. but my five wits, nor my five senses, can dissuade one foolish heart from serving thee, who leaves unswayed the likeness of a man, thy proud heart's slave and vassal wretch to be. only my plague thus far i count my gain, that she that makes me sin awards me pain.
why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice. when it pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a man from him, it shows to man the tailors of the earth, comforting therein, that when old robes are worn out, there are members to make new. if there were no more women but fulvia, then had you indeed a cut, and the case to be lamented. this grief is crowned with consolation. your old smock brings forth a new petticoat, and indeed the tears live in an onion that should water this sorrow.
i'll not have it altered.
love is my sin, and thy dear virtue hate, hate of my sin, grounded on sinful loving. o but with mine compare thou thine own state, and thou shalt find it merits not reproving; or, if it do, not from those lips of thine, that have profaned their scarlet ornaments and sealed false bonds of love as oft as mine, robbed others' beds' revénues of their rents. be it lawful i love thee as thou lov'st those whom thine eyes woo as mine impórtune thee. root pity in thy heart, that when it grows, thy pity may deserve to pitied be. if thou dost seek to have what thou dost hide, by self-example mayst thou be denied.
the business she hath broached in the state
will not you?
lo, as a careful housewife runs to catch one of her feathered creatures broke away, sets down her babe and makes all swift dispatch in púrsuit of the thing she would have stay; whilst her neglected child holds her in chase, cries to catch her whose busy care is bent to follow that which flies before her face, not prizing her poor infant's discontent: so run'st thou after that which flies from thee, whilst i, thy babe, chase thee afar behind. but if thou catch thy hope, turn back to me, and play the mother's part, kiss me, be kind. so will i pray that thou mayst have thy will, if thou turn back and my loud crying still.
and the business you have broached here cannot be without you, especially that of cleopatra's, which wholly depends on your abode.
no, nor you shall not.
two loves i have, of comfort and despair, which, like two spirits, do suggest me still; the better angel is a man right fair, the worser spirit a woman colored ill. to win me soon to hell, my female evil tempteth my better angel from my side, and would corrupt my saint to be a devil, wooing his purity with her foul pride. and whether that my angel be turned fiend suspect i may, but not directly tell; but being both from me both to each friend, i guess one angel in another's hell. yet this shall i ne'er know, but live in doubt, till my bad angel fire my good one out.
no more light answers. let our officers the cause of our expedience to the queen and get her leave to part. for not alone the death of fulvia, with more urgent touches, do strongly speak to us, but the letters too petition us at home. sextus pompeius hath given the dare to caesar and commands the empire of the sea. our slippery people, whose love is never linked to the deserver pompey the great and all his dignities upon his son, who, high in name and power, higher than both in blood and life, stands up for the main soldier, whose quality, going on, which, like the courser's hair, hath yet but life, and not a serpent's poison. say our pleasure, to such whose place is under us, requires our quick remove from hence.
who shall say me nay?
those lips that love's own hand did make breathed forth the sound that said "i hate" to me that languished for her sake; but when she saw my woeful state, straight in her heart did mercy come, chiding that tongue that, ever sweet, was used in giving gentle doom, and taught it thus anew to greet: "i hate" she altered with an end that followed it as gentle day doth follow night, who like a fiend from heav'n to hell is flown away. "i hate" from hate away she threw, and saved my life, saying "not you."
i shall do 't.
why, that will i.
poor soul, the center of my sinful earth, [ thrall to due to a printer's error in the earliest edition of the sonnets, no one knows what shakespeare intended for the first two syllables of line . the guesses editors have made over the centuries include "thrall to," "hemm'd by," "fool'd by, "foil'd by," and "feeding." thrall to ] these rebel pow'rs that thee array, why dost thou pine within and suffer dearth, painting thy outward walls so costly gay? why so large cost, having so short a lease, dost thou upon thy fading mansion spend? shall worms, inheritors of this excess, eat up thy charge? is this thy body's end? then, soul, live thou upon thy servant's loss, and let that pine to aggravate thy store; buy terms divine in selling hours of dross; within be fed, without be rich no more. so shalt thou feed on death, that feeds on men, and death once dead, there's no more dying then.
where is he?
let me not understand you, then; speak it in welsh.
my love is as a fever, longing still for that which longer nurseth the disease, feeding on that which doth preserve the ill, th' uncertain sickly appetite to please. my reason, the physician to my love, angry that his prescriptions are not kept, hath left me, and i desp'rate now approve desire is death, which physic did except. past cure i am, now reason is past care, and frantic mad with evermore unrest, my thoughts and my discourse as madmen's are, at random from the truth vainly expressed; for i have sworn thee fair and thought thee bright, who art as black as hell, as dark as night.
i did not see him since.
i can speak english, lord, as well as you, for i was trained up in the english court, where being but young i framèd to the harp many an english ditty lovely well a virtue that was never seen in you.
o me! what eyes hath love put in my head, which have no correspondence with true sight! or, if they have, where is my judgment fled, that censures falsely what they see aright? if that be fair whereon my false eyes dote, what means the world to say it is not so? if it be not, then love doth well denote love's eye is not so true as all men's: no, how can it? o how can love's eye be true, that is so vexed with watching and with tears? no marvel then, though i mistake my view; the sun itself sees not till heaven clears. o cunning love! with tears thou keep'st me blind, lest eyes well seeing thy foul faults should find.
(to alexas ) see where he is, who's with him, what he does. i did not send you. if you find him sad, say i am dancing. if in mirth, report
marry, and i am glad of it with all my heart: i had rather be a kitten and cry "mew"
canst thou, o cruel, say i love thee not, when i against myself with thee partake? do i not think on thee, when i forgot am of myself, all, tyrant, for thy sake? who hateth thee that i do call my friend? on whom frown'st thou that i do fawn upon? nay, if thou lour'st on me, do i not spend revenge upon myself with present moan? what merit do i in myself respect, that is so proud thy service to despise, when all my best doth worship thy defect, commanded by the motion of thine eyes? but, love, hate on, for now i know thy mind; those that can see thou lov'st, and i am blind.
madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly, you do not hold the method to enforce the like from him.
i had rather hear a brazen can'stick turned, or a dry wheel grate on the axletree, and that would set my teeth nothing an edge, nothing so much as mincing poetry.
o from what pow'r hast thou this pow'rful might, with insufficiency my heart to sway, to make me give the lie to my true sight, and swear that brightness doth not grace the day? whence hast thou this becoming of things ill, that in the very refuse of thy deeds there is such strength and warrantise of skill that in my mind thy worst all best exceeds? who taught thee how to make me love thee more, the more i hear and see just cause of hate? o, though i love what others do abhor, with others thou shouldst not abhor my state. if thy unworthiness raised love in me, more worthy i to be beloved of thee.
what should i do i do not?
come, you shall have trent turned.
love is too young to know what conscience is, yet who knows not conscience is born of love? then, gentle cheater, urge not my amiss, lest guilty of my faults thy sweet self prove; for, thou betraying me, i do betray my nobler part to my gross body's treason. my soul doth tell my body that he may triumph in love, flesh stays no father reason, but, rising at thy name, doth point out thee as his triumphant prize, proud of this pride, he is contented thy poor drudge to be, to stand in thy affairs, fall by thy side. no want of conscience hold it that i call her "love" for whose dear love i rise and fall.
in each thing give him way. cross him in nothing.
i do not care. i'll give thrice so much land to any well-deserving friend; but in the way of bargain, mark you me, are the indentures drawn? shall we be gone?
in loving thee thou know'st i am forsworn; but thou art twice forsworn to me love swearing, in act thy bed-vow broke and new faith torn, in vowing new hate after new love bearing. but why of two oaths' breach do i accuse thee, when i break twenty? i am perjured most, for all my vows are oaths but to misuse thee, and all my honest faith in thee is lost; for i have sworn deep oaths of thy deep kindness, oaths of thy love, thy truth, thy constancy, and, to enlighten thee, gave eyes to blindness, or made them swear against the thing they see. for i have sworn thee fair: more perjured eye, to swear against the truth so foul a lie.
thou teachest like a fool the way to lose him.
the moon shines fair. you may away by night. i'll haste the writer, and withal break with your wives of your departure hence. so much she doteth on her mortimer.
cupid laid by his brand and fell asleep. a maid of dian's this advantage found, and his love-kindling fire did quickly steep in a cold valley-fountain of that ground, which borrowed from this holy fire of love a dateless lively heat, still to endure, and grew a seething bath, which yet men prove against strange maladies a sovereign cure. but at my mistress' eye love's brand new fired, the boy for trial needs would touch my breast; i, sick withal, the help of bath desired, and thither hied, a sad distempered guest, but found no cure; the bath for my help lies where cupid got new fire, my mistress' eye.
tempt him not so too far. i wish, forbear. in time we hate that which we often fear.
fie, cousin percy, how you cross my father!
the little love-god lying once asleep laid by his side his heart-inflaming brand, whilst many nymphs that vowed chaste life to keep came tripping by; but in her maiden hand the fairest votary took up that fire, which many legions of true hearts had warmed; and so the general of hot desire was, sleeping, by a virgin hand disarmed. this brand she quenchèd in a cool well by, which from love's fire took heat perpetual, growing a bath and healthful remedy for men diseased; but i, my mistress' thrall, came there for cure, and this by that i prove: love's fire heats water; water cools not love.
but here comes antony.
i cannot choose. sometime he angers me with telling me of the moldwarp and the ant, and of a dragon and a finless fish, a clip-winged griffin and a moulten raven, a couching lion and a ramping cat, and such a deal of skimble-skamble stuff he held me last night at least nine hours in reckoning up the several devils' names that were his lackeys. i cried "hum," and "well, go to," but marked him not a word. o, he is as tedious
i am sick and sullen.
worse than a smoky house: i had rather live with cheese and garlic in a windmill, far, than feed on cates and have him talk to me in any summerhouse in christendom.
in sooth, i know not why i am so sad. it wearies me; you say it wearies you. but how i caught it, found it, or came by it, what stuff 'tis made of, whereof it is born, and such a want-wit sadness makes of me, that i have much ado to know myself.
i am sorry to give breathing to my purpose, 
exceedingly well read and profited in strange concealments, valiant as a lion, and as wondrous affable, and as bountiful as mines of india. shall i tell you, cousin? and curbs himself even of his natural scope when you come cross his humor. faith, he does. i warrant you that man is not alive might so have tempted him as you have done but do not use it oft, let me entreat you.
your mind is tossing on the ocean, there, where your argosies with portly sail, or, as it were, the pageants of the sea, do overpeer the petty traffickers that curtsy to them, do them reverence as they fly by them with their woven wings.
it cannot be thus long. the sides of nature will not sustain it.
(to hotspur) in faith, my lord, you are too willful-blame, and, since your coming hither, have done enough to put him quite beside his patience. though sometimes it show greatness, courage, blood, and that's the dearest grace it renders you, yet oftentimes it doth present harsh rage, defect of manners, want of government, the least of which, haunting a nobleman, loseth men's hearts and leaves behind a stain upon the beauty of all parts besides, beguiling them of commendation.
the better part of my affections would be with my hopes abroad. i should be still plucking the grass to know where sits the wind, peering in maps for ports and piers and roads. misfortune to my ventures out of doubt would make me sad.
now, my dearest queen, 
here come our wives, and let us take our leave.
my wind cooling my broth would blow me to an ague when i thought what harm a wind too great at sea might do. but i should think of shallows and of flats and see my wealthy andrew docked in sand, vailing her high top lower than her ribs to kiss her burial. should i go to church and not bethink me straight of dangerous rocks, which, touching but my gentle vessel's side, would scatter all her spices on the stream, enrobe the roaring waters with my silks, and now worth nothing? shall i have the thought to think on this, and shall i lack the thought that such a thing bechanced would make me sad? but tell not me. i know antonio
pray you, stand farther from me.
this is the deadly spite that angers me: my wife can speak no english, i no welsh.
believe me, no. i thank my fortune for it, my ventures are not in one bottom trusted, nor to one place, nor is my whole estate upon the fortune of this present year.
what's the matter?
my daughter weeps; she'll not part with you.
why then, you are in love.
i know by that same eye there's some good news. would she had never given you leave to come! let her not say 'tis i that keep you here. i have no power upon you. hers you are.
good father, tell her that she and my aunt percy shall follow in your conduct speedily.
fie, fie!
the gods best know, 
she is desperate here, a peevish self-willed harlotry, one that no persuasion can do good upon.
not in love neither? then let us say you are sad because you are not merry, and 'twere as easy for you to laugh and leap and say you are merry nature hath framed strange fellows in her time.
oh never was there queen i saw the treasons planted.
which thou pourest down from these swelling heavens i am too perfect in, and but for shame in such a parley should i answer thee.
some that will evermore peep through their eyes and laugh like parrots at a bagpiper, and other of such vinegar aspect though nestor swear the jest be laughable.
cleopatra, 
i understand thy kisses and thou mine, but i will never be a truant, love, till i have learned thy language; for thy tongue makes welsh as sweet as ditties highly penned, sung by a fair queen in a summer's bower,
here comes bassanio, your most noble kinsman, gratiano, and lorenzo. fare ye well. we leave you now with better company.
why should i think you can be mine, and true, though you in swearing shake the thronèd gods, who have been false to fulvia? riotous madness, which break themselves in swearing!
nay, if you melt, then will she run mad.
if worthier friends had not prevented me.
most sweet queen, 
o, i am ignorance itself in this!
your worth is very dear in my regard. i take it your own business calls on you and you embrace th' occasion to depart.
nay, pray you, seek no color for your going, but bid farewell and go. when you sued staying, then was the time for words. no going then! bliss in our brows' bent, none our parts so poor but was a race of heaven. they are so still, or thou, the greatest soldier of the world, art turned the greatest liar.
she bids you on the wanton rushes lay you down and rest your gentle head upon her lap, and on your eyelids crown the god of sleep, charming your blood with pleasing heaviness, making such difference 'twixt wake and sleep as is the difference betwixt day and night begins his golden progress in the east.
good morrow, my good lords.
how now, lady?
with all my heart i'll sit and hear her sing. by that time will our book, i think, be drawn
(to salarino and solanio) good signors both, when shall we laugh? say, when? you grow exceeding strange. must it be so?
there were a heart in egypt.
do so and those musicians that shall play to you and straight they shall be here. sit, and attend.
we'll make our leisures to attend on yours.
hear me, queen: the strong necessity of time commands our services awhile, but my full heart remains in use with you. our italy makes his approaches to the port of rome. equality of two domestic powers breed scrupulous faction. the hated, grown to strength, are newly grown to love. the condemned pompey, into the hearts of such as have not thrived upon the present state, whose numbers threaten; and quietness, grown sick of rest, would purge by any desperate change. my more particular, is fulvia's death.
come, kate, thou art perfect in lying down. come, quick, quick, that i may lay my head in thy lap.
my lord bassanio, since you have found antonio, we two will leave you. but at dinnertime i pray you have in mind where we must meet.
though age from folly could not give me freedom, it does from childishness. can fulvia die?
go, you giddy goose.
i will not fail you.
she's dead, my queen.
and 'tis no marvel he is so humorous. by 'r lady, he is a good musician.
you have too much respect upon the world. they lose it that do buy it with much care. believe me, you are marvelously changed.
the garboils she awaked, at the last, best, see when and where she died.
then should you be nothing but musical, for you are altogether governed by humors. lie still, you thief, and hear the lady sing in welsh.
i hold the world but as the world, gratiano, and mine a sad one.
o most false love! where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill with sorrowful water? now i see, i see,
i had rather hear lady, my brach, howl in irish.
let me play the fool. with mirth and laughter let old wrinkles come. and let my liver rather heat with wine than my heart cool with mortifying groans. sit like his grandsire cut in alabaster, sleep when he wakes, and creep into the jaundice by being peevish? i tell thee what, antonio, i love thee, and 'tis my love that speaks, do cream and mantle like a standing pond, and do a willful stillness entertain with purpose to be dressed in an opinion of wisdom, gravity, profound conceit, and when i ope my lips, let no dog bark!" o my antonio, i do know of these that therefore only are reputed wise for saying nothing, when i am very sure which, hearing them, would call their brothers fools. i'll tell thee more of this another time. but fish not with this melancholy bait for this fool gudgeon, this opinion., i'll end my exhortation after dinner.
quarrel no more, but be prepared to know the purposes i bear, which are or cease as you shall give th' advice. by the fire that quickens nilus' slime, i go from hence as thou affects.
wouldst thou have thy head broken?
well, we will leave you then till dinnertime. i must be one of these same dumb wise men, for gratiano never lets me speak.
cut my lace, charmian, come! but let it be. i am quickly ill, and well, so antony loves.
no.
thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue.
and give true evidence to his love which stands an honorable trial.
then be still.
farewell. i'll grow a talker for this gear.
so fulvia told me. i prithee, turn aside and weep for her. belong to egypt. good now, play one scene of excellent dissembling, and let it look like perfect honor.
neither;'tis a woman's fault.
thanks, i' faith, for silence is only commendable in a neat's tongue dried and a maid not vendible.
you'll heat my blood. no more.
now god help thee!
is that any thing now?
you can do better yet, but this is meetly.
to the welsh lady's bed.
gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more than any man in all venice. his reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff, you shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you have them they are not worth the search.
now, by my sword, 
what's that?
well, tell me now what lady is the same to whom you swore a secret pilgrimage, that you today promised to tell me of?
and target. still he mends. (to charmian ) but this is not the best. look, prithee, charmian, how this herculean roman does become the carriage of his chafe.
peace, she sings.
'tis not unknown to you, antonio, by something showing a more swelling port than my faint means would grant continuance. nor do i now make moan to be abridged from such a noble rate. but my chief care
i'll leave you, lady.
come, kate, i'll have your song too.
wherein my time something too prodigal hath left me gaged. to you, antonio, i owe the most in money and in love, and from your love i have a warranty how to get clear of all the debts i owe.
sir, you and i must part, but that's not it. sir, you and i have loved, but there's not it, that you know well. something it is i would, oh, my oblivion is a very antony,
not mine, in good sooth.
i pray you, good bassanio, let me know it. and if it stand, as you yourself still do, within the eye of honor, be assured lie all unlocked to your occasions.
but that your royalty holds idleness your subject, i should take you for idleness itself.
not yours, in good sooth! heart, you swear like a comfit-maker's wife! "not you, in good sooth," and "as true as i live," and "as god shall mend me," and "as sure as day", as if thou never walk'st further than finsbury. swear me, kate, like a lady as thou art, a good mouth-filling oath, and leave "in sooth," and such protest of pepper-gingerbread, come, sing.
in my school days, when i had lost one shaft, i shot his fellow of the selfsame flight the selfsame way with more advisèd watch i oft found both. i urge this childhood proof because what follows is pure innocence. i owe you much, and, like a willful youth, that which i owe is lost. but if you please which you did shoot the first, i do not doubt, as i will watch the aim, or to find both or bring your latter hazard back again and thankfully rest debtor for the first.
'tis sweating labor to bear such idleness so near the heart as cleopatra this. but, sir, forgive me, eye well to you. your honor calls you hence. therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly, and all the gods go with you! upon your sword sit laurel victory, and smooth success
i will not sing.
to wind about my love with circumstance. and out of doubt you do me now more wrong in making question of my uttermost than if you had made waste of all i have. that in your knowledge may by me be done, and i am pressed unto it. therefore speak.
let us go. come. our separation so abides and flies that thou, residing here, goes yet with me, and i, hence fleeting, here remain with thee. away!
'tis the next way to turn tailor, or be red-breast teacher. an the indentures be drawn, i'll away within these two hours, and so come in when ye will.
in belmont is a lady richly left, and she is fair and, fairer than that word, i did receive fair speechless messages. her name is portia, nothing undervalued to cato's daughter, brutus' portia. nor is the wide world ignorant of her worth, renownèd suitors, and her sunny locks hang on her temples like a golden fleece, which makes her seat of belmont colchos' strand, and many jasons come in quest of her. to hold a rival place with one of them, i have a mind presages me such thrift that i should questionless be fortunate!
you may see, lepidus, and henceforth know, it is not caesar's natural vice to hate our great competitor. from alexandria this is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes than cleopatra, nor the queen of ptolemy more womanly than he; hardly gave audience, or vouchsafed to think he had partners. you shall find there a man who is th' abstract of all faults
come, come, lord mortimer; you are as slow as hot lord percy is on fire to go. by this our book is drawn. we'll but seal, and then to horse immediately.
thou know'st that all my fortunes are at sea. to raise a present sum. therefore go forth, try what my credit can in venice do, that shall be racked even to the uttermost to furnish thee to belmont, to fair portia. where money is, and i no question make to have it of my trust or for my sake.
i must not think there are evils enough to darken all his goodness. his faults in him seem as the spots of heaven, more fiery by night's blackness, hereditary rather than purchased, what he cannot change
with all my heart.
by my troth, nerissa, my little body is aweary of this great world.
you are too indulgent. let's grant, it is not amiss to tumble on the bed of ptolemy, to give a kingdom for a mirth, to sit and keep the turn of tippling with a slave, with knaves that smell of sweat. say this becomes him, as his composure must be rare indeed whom these things cannot blemish, yet must antony no way excuse his foils when we do bear his vacancy with his voluptuousness, full surfeits and the dryness of his bones call on him for 't. but to confound such time that drums him from his sport and speaks as loud as we rate boys who, being mature in knowledge, pawn their experience to their present pleasure and so rebel to judgment.
lords, give us leave; the prince of wales and i must have some private conference, but be near at hand, for we shall presently have need of you.
you would be, sweet madam, if your miseries were in the same abundance as your good fortunes are. and yet for aught i see, they are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that starve with nothing. it is no mean happiness, therefore, to be seated in the mean. superfluity comes sooner by white hairs, but competency lives longer.
here's more news.
i know not whether god will have it so that, in his secret doom, out of my blood he'll breed revengement and a scourge for me. but thou dost in thy passages of life make me believe that thou art only marked to punish my mistreadings. tell me else, could such inordinate and low desires, such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts, such barren pleasures, rude society accompany the greatness of thy blood, and hold their level with thy princely heart?
good sentences, and well pronounced.
thy biddings have been done, and every hour, how 'tis abroad. pompey is strong at sea, and it appears he is beloved of those that only have feared caesar. to the ports the discontents repair, and men's reports
so please your majesty, i would i could quit all offenses with as clear excuse myself of many i am charged withal. yet such extenuation let me beg as, in reproof of many tales devised, which oft the ear of greatness needs must hear, i may for some things true, wherein my youth hath faulty wandered and irregular, find pardon on my true submission.
they would be better if well followed.
i should have known no less. it hath been taught us from the primal state that he which is was wished until he were, and the ebbed man, ne'er loved till ne'er worth love, comes deared by being lacked. this common body, goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide to rot itself with motion.
god pardon thee. yet let me wonder, harry, quite from the flight of all thy ancestors. thy place in council thou hast rudely lost, which by thy younger brother is supplied, and art almost an alien to the hearts the hope and expectation of thy time is ruined, and the soul of every man prophetically doth forethink thy fall. had i so lavish of my presence been, so stale and cheap to vulgar company, opinion, that did help me to the crown, had still kept loyal to possession and left me in reputeless banishment, by being seldom seen, i could not stir but like a comet i was wondered at; that men would tell their children "this is he." others would say "where? which is bolingbroke?" and dressed myself in such humility that i did pluck allegiance from men's hearts, loud shouts and salutations from their mouths, even in the presence of the crownèd king. my presence, like a robe pontifical, ne'er seen but wondered at, and so my state, seldom but sumptuous, showed like a feast and won by rareness such solemnity. with shallow jesters and rash bavin wits, soon kindled and soon burnt; carded his state, mingled his royalty with cap'ring fools,
if to do were as easy as to know what were good to do, chapels had been churches and poor men's cottages princes' palaces. it is a good divine that follows his own instructions. i can easier teach twenty what were good to be done than be one of the twenty to follow mine own teaching. the brain may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper leaps o'er a cold decree. such a hare is madness the youth, to skip o'er the meshes of good counsel the cripple. but this reasoning is not in the fashion to choose me a husband. o me, the word "choose!" i may neither choose whom i would nor refuse whom i dislike, so is the will of a living daughter curbed by the will of a dead father. is it not hard, nerissa, that i cannot choose one nor refuse none?
caesar, i bring thee word menecrates and menas, famous pirates, with keels of every kind. many hot inroads they make in italy, the borders maritime lack blood to think on 't, and flush youth revolt. no vessel can peep forth, but 'tis as soon than could his war resisted.
had his great name profanèd with their scorns, to laugh at gibing boys and stand the push of every beardless vain comparative; grew a companion to the common streets, enfeoffed himself to popularity, they surfeited with honey and began to loathe the taste of sweetness, whereof a little more than a little is by much too much. so, when he had occasion to be seen, heard, not regarded; seen, but with such eyes as, sick and blunted with community, afford no extraordinary gaze such as is bent on sunlike majesty but rather drowsed and hung their eyelids down, slept in his face, and rendered such aspect as cloudy men use to their adversaries, being with his presence glutted, gorged, and full. for thou has lost thy princely privilege with vile participation. not an eye but is aweary of thy common sight, save mine, which hath desired to see thee more, make blind itself with foolish tenderness.
your father was ever virtuous, and holy men at their death have good inspirations. therefore the lottery that he hath devised in these three chests of gold, silver, and lead, whereof who chooses his meaning chooses you, will no doubt never be chosen by any rightly but one who shall rightly love. but what warmth is there in your affection towards any of these princely suitors that are already come?
antony, leave thy lascivious wassails. when thou once wast beaten from modena, where thou slew'st hirtius and pansa, consuls, at thy heel though daintily brought up, with patience more than savages could suffer. thou didst drink the stale of horses and the gilded puddle which beasts would cough at. thy palate then did deign yea, like the stag, when snow the pasture sheets, the barks of trees thou browsèd. on the alps it is reported thou didst eat strange flesh, which some did die to look on. and all this, was borne so like a soldier, that thy cheek so much as lanked not.
i shall hereafter, my thrice gracious lord, be more myself.
i pray thee, overname them. and as thou namest them, i will describe them. and according to my description, level at my affection.
'tis pity of him.
for all the world as thou art to this hour was richard then and even as i was then is percy now.
first, there is the neapolitan prince.
let his shames quickly did show ourselves i' th' field, and to that end assemble we immediate council. pompey thrives in our idleness.
now, by my scepter, and my soul to boot, he hath more worthy interest to the state than thou, the shadow of succession. he doth fill fields with harness in the realm, turns head against the lion's armèd jaws, and, being no more in debt to years than thou, leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on what never-dying honor hath he got against renownèd douglas, whose high deeds, whose hot incursions and great name in arms, holds from all soldiers chief majority through all the kingdoms that acknowledge christ. thrice hath this hotspur, mars in swathling clothes, this infant warrior, in his enterprises discomfited great douglas, ta'en him once, to fill the mouth of deep defiance up and shake the peace and safety of our throne. and what say you to this? percy, northumberland, the archbishop's grace of york, douglas, mortimer, but wherefore do i tell these news to thee? why, harry, do i tell thee of my foes, which art my nearest and dearest enemy? thou that art like enough, through vassal fear, to fight against me under percy's pay, to dog his heels, and curtsy at his frowns, to show how much thou art degenerate.
ay, that's a colt indeed, for he doth nothing but talk of his horse, and he makes it a great appropriation to his own good parts that he can shoe him himself. i am much afeard my lady his mother played false with a smith.
tomorrow, caesar, i shall be furnished to inform you rightly to front this present time.
do not think so. you shall not find it so. your majesty's good thoughts away from me.
then there is the county palatine.
till which encounter it is my business too. farewell.
i will redeem all this on percy's head, and, in the closing of some glorious day, be bold to tell you that i am your son, and stain my favors in a bloody mask, which, washed away, shall scour my shame with it. and that shall be the day, whene'er it lights, that this same child of honor and renown, and your unthought-of harry chance to meet. for every honor sitting on his helm, would they were multitudes, and on my head my shames redoubled! for the time will come his glorious deeds for my indignities. percy is but my factor, good my lord, to engross up glorious deeds on my behalf. and i will call him to so strict account yea, even the slightest worship of his time, or i will tear the reckoning from his heart. this in the name of god i promise here, the which if he be pleased i shall perform, the long-grown wounds of my intemperance. if not, the end of life cancels all bands, and i will die a hundred thousand deaths ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.
he doth nothing but frown, as who should say, "an you will not have me, choose." he hears merry tales and smiles not. i fear he will prove the weeping philosopher when he grows old, being so full of unmannerly sadness in his youth. i had rather be married to a death's-head with a bone in his mouth than to either of these. god defend me from these two!
farewell, my lord. what you shall know meantime of stirs abroad, i shall beseech you, sir,
thou shalt have charge and sovereign trust herein.
how say you by the french lord, monsieur le bon?
doubt not, sir. i knew it for my bond.
how now, good blunt? thy looks are full of speed.
god made him and therefore let him pass for a man. in truth, i know it is a sin to be a mocker, but he!, why, he hath a horse better than the neapolitan's, a better bad habit of frowning than the count palatine. he is every man in no man. if a throstle sing, he falls straight a- capering. he will fence with his own shadow. if i should marry him, i should marry twenty husbands. if he would despise me i would forgive him, for if he love me to madness i shall never requite him.
charmian!
so hath the business that i come to speak of. lord mortimer of scotland hath sent word the eleventh of this month at shrewsbury. a mighty and a fearful head they are, if promises be kept on every hand, as ever offered foul play in the state.
what say you then to falconbridge, the young baron of
madam?
with him my son, lord john of lancaster, for this advertisement is five days old., on wednesday next, harry, you shall set forward. on thursday we ourselves will march. our meeting through gloucestershire; by which account, our business valuèd, some twelve days hence our general forces at bridgenorth shall meet. our hands are full of business. let's away.
you know i say nothing to him, for he understands not me, nor i him. he hath neither latin, french, nor italian, and you will come into the court and swear that i have a poor pennyworth in the english. he is a proper man's picture, but alas, who can converse with a dumb show? how oddly he is suited! i think he bought his doublet in italy, his round hose in france, his bonnet in germany, and his behavior everywhere.
ha, ha! give me to drink mandragora.
bardolph, am i not fallen away vilely since this last action? do i not bate? do i not dwindle? why, my skin hangs about me like an like an old lady's loose gown. i am withered like an old applejohn. well, i'll repent, and that suddenly, while i am in some liking. i shall be out of heart shortly, and then i shall have no strength to repent. an i have not forgotten what the inside of a church is made of, i am a peppercorn, a brewer's horse. the inside of a church! company, villanous company, hath been the spoil of me.
what think you of the scottish lord, his neighbor?
why, madam?
sir john, you are so fretful you cannot live long.
that he hath a neighborly charity in him, for he borrowed a box of the ear of the englishman and swore he would pay him again when he was able. i think the frenchman became his surety and sealed under for another.
my antony is away.
why, there is it. come sing me a bawdy song, make me merry. i was as virtuously given as a gentleman need to be, virtuous enough: swore little; diced not above seven times, a week; went to a bawdy house once in a quarter, of an hour; paid money that i borrowed, three or four times; lived well and in good compass; and now i live out of all order, out of all compass.
how like you the young german, the duke of saxony's nephew?
you think of him too much.
why, you are so fat, sir john, that you must needs be out of all compass, out of all reasonable compass, sir john.
very vilely in the morning, when he is sober, and most vilely in the afternoon, when he is drunk. when he is best he is a little worse than a man, and when he is worst he is little better than a beast. and the worst fall that ever fell, i hope i shall make shift to go without him.
oh, 'tis treason!
do thou amend thy face, and i'll amend my life. thou art our admiral, thou bearest the lantern in the poop, but 'tis in the nose of thee. thou art the knight of the burning lamp.
if he should offer to choose and choose the right casket, you should refuse to perform your father's will if you should refuse to accept him.
madam, i trust, not so.
why, sir john, my face does you no harm.
therefore, for fear of the worst, i pray thee, set a deep glass of rhenish wine on the contrary casket, for if the devil be within and that temptation without, i know he will choose it. i will do any thing, nerissa, ere i'll be married to a sponge.
thou, eunuch mardian!
no, i'll be sworn, i make as good use of it as many a man doth of a death's-head or a memento mori. i never see thy face but i think upon hellfire and dives that lived in purple, for there he is in his robes, burning, burning. if thou wert any way given to virtue, i would swear by thy face. my oath should be "by this fire, that's god's angel." but thou art altogether given over, and wert indeed, but for the light in thy face, the son of utter darkness. when thou rannest up gadshill in the night to catch my horse, if i did not think thou hadst been an ignis fatuus, or a ball of wildfire, there's no purchase in money. o, thou art a perpetual triumph, an everlasting bonfire-light! thou hast saved me a thousand marks in links and torches, walking with thee in the night betwixt tavern and tavern: but the sack that thou hast drunk me would have bought me lights as good cheap at the dearest chandler's in europe. i have maintained that salamander of yours with fire any time this two and thirty years, god reward me for it.
you need not fear, lady, the having any of these lords. they have acquainted me with their determinations, which is indeed to return to their home and to trouble you with no more suit unless you may be won by some other sort than your father's imposition depending on the caskets.
what's your highness' pleasure?
'sblood, i would my face were in your belly!
if i live to be as old as sibylla, i will die as chaste as diana unless i be obtained by the manner of my father's will. i am glad this parcel of wooers are so reasonable, for there is not one among them but i dote on his very absence. and i pray god grant them a fair departure.
in aught an eunuch has. 'tis well for thee that, being unseminared, thy freer thoughts may not fly forth of egypt. hast thou affections?
godamercy, so should i be sure to be heart-burned!
do you not remember, lady, in your father's time a venetian, a scholar and a soldier, that came hither in company of the marquess of montferrat?
yes, gracious madam.
how now, dame partlet the hen, have you enquired yet who picked my pocket?
yes, yes, it was bassanio, as i think he was so called.
indeed?
why, sir john, what do you think, sir john, do you think i keep thieves in my house? i have searched, i have enquired, so has my husband, man by man, boy by boy, servant by servant. the tithe of a hair was never lost in my house before.
true, madam. he, of all the men that ever my foolish eyes looked upon, was the best deserving a fair lady.
not in deed, madam, for i can do nothing but what indeed is honest to be done. yet have i fierce affections, and think what venus did with mars.
you lie, hostess. bardolph was shaved and lost many a hair; and i'll be sworn my pocket was picked. go to, you are a woman, go.
i remember him well, and i remember him worthy of thy praise.
o charmian, or does he walk? or is he on his horse? o happy horse, to bear the weight of antony! do bravely, horse, for wott'st thou whom thou mov'st? the demi-atlas of this earth, the arm or murmuring "where's my serpent of old nile?" for so he calls me. now i feed myself with most delicious poison. think on me, that am with phoebus' amorous pinches black when thou wast here above the ground, i was a morsel for a monarch. and great pompey would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow. there would he anchor his aspect, and die
who, i? no; i defy thee! god's light, i was never called so in mine own house before.
how now, what news?
sovereign of egypt, hail!
go to, i know you well enough.
the four strangers seek for you, madam, to take their leave. and there is a forerunner come from a fifth, the prince of morocco, who brings word the prince his master will be here tonight.
how much unlike art thou mark antony! yet, coming from him, that great med'cine hath with his tinct gilded thee.
no, sir john, you do not know me, sir john. i know you, sir john. you owe me money, sir john, and now you pick a quarrel to beguile me of it. i bought you a dozen of shirts to your back.
if i could bid the fifth welcome with so good a heart as i can bid the other four farewell, i should be glad of his approach. if he have the condition of a saint and the complexion of a devil, i had rather he should shrive me than wive me. come, nerissa., (to servant) sirrah, go before. whiles we shut the gates upon one wooer another knocks at the door.
last thing he did, dear queen, he kissed, the last of many doubled kisses, this orient pearl.
dowlas, filthy dowlas. i have given them away to bakers' wives; they have made bolters of them.
three thousand ducats, well.
his speech sticks in my heart.
now, as i am a true woman, holland of eight shillings an ell. you owe money here besides, sir john, for your diet and by- drinkings, and money lent you, four and twenty pound.
ay, sir, for three months.
mine ear must pluck it thence.
(points at bardolph) he had his part of it. let him pay.
for three months, well.
"good friend," quoth he, this treasure of an oyster, at whose foot, to mend the petty present, i will piece her opulent throne with kingdoms. all the east, say thou, shall call her mistress." so he nodded, who neighed so high that what i would have spoke was beastly dumbed by him.
he? alas, he is poor. he hath nothing.
for the which, as i told you, antonio shall be bound.
what was he, sad or merry?
how, poor? look upon his face. what call you rich? let them coin his nose. let them coin his cheeks. i'll not pay a denier. what, will you make a younker of me? shall i not take mine case in mine inn but i shall have my pocket picked? i have lost a seal ring of my grandfather's worth forty mark.
antonio shall become bound, well.
like to the time o' th' year between the extremes
o jesu, i have heard the prince tell him, i know not how oft, that that ring was copper!
may you stead me? will you pleasure me? shall i know your answer?
o well-divided disposition! note him, note him, good charmian, 'tis the man, but note him. he was not sad, for he would shine on those that make their looks by his. he was not merry, in egypt with his joy, but between both. o heavenly mingle! be'st thou sad or merry, the violence of either thee becomes, so does it no man else., mett'st thou my posts?
how? the prince is a jack, a sneak-up. 'sblood, an he were here, i would cudgel him like a dog if he would say so.
three thousand ducats for three months, and antonio bound.
why do you send so thick?
how now, lad, is the wind in that door, i' faith? must we all march?
your answer to that?
who's born that day when i forget to send to antony shall die a beggar. ink and paper, charmian. welcome, my good alexas. did i, charmian,
yea, two and two, newgate fashion.
antonio is a good man.
oh, that brave caesar!
my lord, i pray you, hear me.
have you heard any imputation to the contrary?
be choked with such another emphasis! say, "the brave antony."
what sayest thou, mistress quickly? how doth thy husband? i love him well; he is an honest man.
ho, no, no, no, no. my meaning in saying he is a good man is to have you understand me that he is sufficient. yet his means are in supposition. he hath an argosy bound to tripolis, another to the indies. i understand moreover, upon the rialto, he hath a third at mexico, a fourth for england, and other ventures he hath squandered abroad.
the valiant caesar!
good my lord, hear me.
but ships are but boards, sailors but men. there be land rats and water rats, water thieves and land thieves, i mean pirates, and then there is the peril of waters, winds, and rocks. the man is notwithstanding sufficient.
by isis, i will give thee bloody teeth if thou with caesar paragon again
prithee, let her alone, and list to me.
be assured you may.
by your most gracious pardon, i sing but after you.
what say'st thou, jack?
i will be assured i may, and that i may be assured,
my salad days, when i was green in judgment, cold in blood, to say as i said then. (to everyone) but, come, away. (to charmian ) get me ink and paper. or i'll unpeople egypt.
the other night i fell asleep here behind the arras, and had my pocket picked. this house is turned bawdy house; they pick pockets.
if it please you to dine with us.
if the great gods be just, they shall assist the deeds of justest men.
what didst thou lose, jack?
yes, to smell pork, to eat of the habitation which your prophet the nazarite conjured the devil into. i will buy with you, sell with you, talk with you, walk with you, and so following, but i will not eat with you, drink with you, nor pray with you. what news on the rialto? who is he comes here?
know, worthy pompey, that what they do delay, they not deny.
wilt thou believe me, hal, three or four bonds of forty pound apiece, and a seal ring of my grandfather's.
this is signor antonio.
whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays
a trifle, some eightpenny matter.
(aside) how like a fawning publican he looks! i hate him for he is a christian, he lends out money gratis and brings down the rate of usance here with us in venice. if i can catch him once upon the hip, i will feed fat the ancient grudge i bear him. even there where merchants most do congregate, on me, my bargains and my well-won thrift,
we, ignorant of ourselves, beg often our own harms, which the wise powers deny us for our good, so find we profit by losing of our prayers.
so i told him, my lord, and i said i heard your grace say so. and, my lord, he speaks most vilely of you, like a foul- mouthed man as he is;,and said he would cudgel you.
which he calls "interest." cursèd be my tribe if i forgive him!
i shall do well. the people love me, and the sea is mine. says it will come to th' full. mark antony in egypt sits at dinner, and will make no wars without doors. caesar gets money where he loses hearts. lepidus flatters both, nor either cares for him.
what, he did not!
shylock, do you hear?
caesar and lepidus are in the field. a mighty strength they carry.
there's neither faith, truth, nor womanhood in me else.
i am debating of my present store, and by the near guess of my memory i cannot instantly raise up the gross of full three thousand ducats. what of that? will furnish me. but soft! how many months do you desire? (to antonio) rest you fair, good signor. your worship was the last man in our mouths.
where have you this? 'tis false.
there's no more faith in thee than in a stewed prune, nor no more truth in thee than in a drawn fox, and for womanhood, maid marian may be the deputy's wife of the ward to thee. go, you thing, go.
by taking nor by giving of excess, yet to supply the ripe wants of my friend, i'll break a custom. (to bassanio) is he yet possessed
from silvius, sir.
say, what thing, what thing?
ay, ay, three thousand ducats.
he dreams. i know they are in rome together salt cleopatra, soften thy wanned lip! let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both. tie up the libertine in a field of feasts, keep his brain fuming. epicurean cooks, that sleep and feeding may prorogue his honor even till a lethe'd dulness, 
what thing! why, a thing to thank god on.
and for three months.
how now, varrius?
i am no thing to thank god on, i would thou shouldst know it! i am an honest man's wife, and, setting thy knighthood aside, thou art a knave to call me so.
i had forgot, three months. (to bassanio) you told me so. well then, your bond, and let me see, but hear you, methought you said you neither lend nor borrow upon advantage.
this is most certain that i shall deliver: mark antony is every hour in rome a space for farther travel.
setting thy womanhood aside, thou art a beast to say otherwise.
i do never use it.
i could have given less matter a better ear., menas, i did not think this amorous surfeiter would have donned his helm is twice the other twain. but let us rear the higher our opinion, that our stirring can from the lap of egypt's widow pluck the ne'er lust-wearied antony.
say, what beast, thou knave, thou?
when jacob grazed his uncle laban's sheep, as his wise mother wrought in his behalf, the third possessor, ay, he was the third, 
i cannot hope his wife that's dead did trespasses to caesar. his brother warred upon him, although, i think, not moved by antony.
what beast? why, an otter.
and what of him? did he take interest?
i know not, menas, how lesser enmities may give way to greater. 'twere pregnant they should square between themselves, for they have entertainèd cause enough to draw their swords. but how the fear of us may cement their divisions and bind up be 't as our gods will have 't. it only stands our lives upon to use our strongest hands. come, menas.
an otter, sir john. why an otter?
no, not take interest, not as you would say when laban and himself were compromised that all the eanlings which were streaked and pied should fall as jacob's hire, the ewes, being rank, in the end of autumn turnèd to the rams. between these woolly breeders in the act, the skillful shepherd peeled me certain wands. and in the doing of the deed of kind he stuck them up before the fulsome ewes, fall parti-colored lambs, and those were jacob's. this was a way to thrive, and he was blessed. and thrift is blessing, if men steal it not.
good enobarbus, 'tis a worthy deed, and shall become you well, to entreat your captain to soft and gentle speech.
why, she's neither fish nor flesh; a man knows not where to have her.
this was a venture, sir, that jacob served for, but swayed and fashioned by the hand of heaven. was this inserted to make interest good? or is your gold and silver ewes and rams?
i shall entreat him to answer like himself. if caesar move him, and speak as loud as mars. by jupiter, were i the wearer of antonio's beard, i would not shave 't today.
thou art an unjust man in saying so. thou or any man knows where to have me, thou knave, thou.
i cannot tell: i make it breed as fast.
'tis not a time for private stomaching.
thou sayest true, hostess, and he slanders thee most grossly.
mark you this, bassanio, the devil can cite scripture for his purpose. an evil soul producing holy witness is like a villain with a smiling cheek, a goodly apple rotten at the heart.
every time serves for the matter that is then born in 't.
so he doth you, my lord, and said this other day you owed him a thousand pound.
three thousand ducats, 'tis a good round sum. three months from twelve, then. let me see. the rate, 
but small to greater matters must give way.
sirrah, do i owe you a thousand pound?
well, shylock, shall we be beholding to you?
not if the small come first.
a thousand pound, hal? a million. thy love is worth a million; thou owest me thy love.
signor antonio, many a time and oft about my moneys and my usances. still have i borne it with a patient shrug, for sufferance is the badge of all our tribe. you call me misbeliever, cutthroat dog, and all for use of that which is mine own. well then, it now appears you need my help. go to, then! you come to me and you say, "shylock, we would have moneys." you say so!, and foot me as you spurn a stranger cur over your threshold! moneys is your suit. what should i say to you? should i not say, "hath a dog money? is it possible shall i bend low and in a bondman's key with bated breath and whispering humbleness say this:
your speech is passion. but pray you stir no embers up. here comes the noble antony.
nay, my lord, he called you "jack," and said he would cudgel you.
"fair sir, you spet on me on wednesday last; you called me 'dog', and for these courtesies i'll lend you thus much moneys?"
and yonder, caesar.
did i, bardolph?
i am as like to call thee so again, to spet on thee again, to spurn thee too. as to thy friends, for when did friendship take a breed for barren metal of his friend? but lend it rather to thine enemy, who, if he break, thou mayst with better face
(to ventidius ) if we compose well here, to parthia. hark, ventidius.
indeed, sir john, you said so.
why, look you how you storm! i would be friends with you and have your love, forget the shames that you have stained me with, supply your present wants and take no doit of usance for my moneys, and you'll not hear me!
(to mecaenas ) i do not know, maecenas. ask agrippa.
yea, if he said my ring was copper.
this were kindness.
(to caesar and antony ) noble friends, a leaner action rend us. what's amiss, may it be gently heard. when we debate our trivial difference loud, we do commit murder in healing wounds. then, noble partners, touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms, nor curstness grow to th' matter.
i say 'tis copper. darest thou be as good as thy word now?
this kindness will i show. go with me to a notary, seal me there your single bond, and, in a merry sport, if you repay me not on such a day, expressed in the condition, let the forfeit be nominated for an equal pound of your fair flesh, to be cut off and taken in what part of your body pleaseth me.
'tis spoken well. were we before our armies, and to fight, i should do thus.
why, hal, thou knowest, as thou art but man, i dare, but as thou art prince, i fear thee as i fear the roaring of a lion's whelp.
and say there is much kindness in the jew.
welcome to rome.
and why not as the lion?
you shall not seal to such a bond for me! i'll rather dwell in my necessity.
thank you.
the king is to be feared as the lion. dost thou think i'll fear thee as i fear thy father? nay, an i do, i pray god my girdle break.
why, fear not, man. i will not forfeit it. this bond expires, i do expect return of thrice three times the value of this bond.
sit.
o, if it should, how would thy guts fall about thy knees! but, sirrah, there's no room for faith, truth, nor honesty in this bosom of thine. it is all filled up with guts and midriff. charge an honest woman with picking thy pocket? why, thou whoreson, impudent, embossed rascal, if there were anything in thy pocket but tavern reckonings, memorandums of bawdy houses, and one poor pennyworth, of sugar candy to make thee long-winded, if thy pocket were enriched with any other injuries but these, i am a villain. and, yet you will stand to it! you will not pocket up wrong! art thou not ashamed?
o father abram, what these christians are, whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect if he should break his day, what should i gain by the exaction of the forfeiture? a pound of man's flesh taken from a man is not so estimable, profitable neither, to buy his favor i extend this friendship. if he will take it, so. if not, adieu. and for my love i pray you wrong me not.
sit, sir.
dost thou hear, hal? thou knowest in the state of innocency adam fell, and what should poor jack falstaff do in the days of villany? thou seest i have more flesh than another man and therefore more frailty. you confess, then, you picked my pocket?
yes, shylock, i will seal unto this bond.
nay, then.
it appears so by the story.
give him direction for this merry bond, and i will go and purse the ducats straight, see to my house left in the fearful guard of an unthrifty knave, and presently
or being, concern you not.
hostess, i forgive thee. go make ready breakfast, love thy, husband, look to thy servants, cherish thy guests. thou shalt find me tractable to any honest reason. thou seest i am pacified still. nay, prithee, be gone.
hie thee, gentle jew.
i must be laughed at if or for nothing or a little, i should say myself offended, and with you chiefly i' th' world; more laughed at, that i should it not concerned me.
now, hal, to the news at court. for the robbery, lad, how is that answered?
the hebrew will turn christian. he grows kind.
my being in egypt, caesar, what was 't to you?
o, my sweet beef, i must still be good angel to thee. the money is paid back again.
i like not fair terms and a villain's mind.
no more than my residing here at rome might be to you in egypt. yet if you there might be my question.
o, i do not like that paying back. 'tis a double labor.
come on. in this there can be no dismay.
how intend you, "practiced"?
i am good friends with my father and may do anything.
mislike me not for my complexion, the shadowed livery of the burnished sun, to whom i am a neighbor and near bred. bring me the fairest creature northward born, and let us make incision for your love to prove whose blood is reddest, his or mine. i tell thee, lady, this aspect of mine hath feared the valiant. by my love i swear have loved it too. i would not change this hue except to steal your thoughts, my gentle queen.
you may be pleased to catch at mine intent by what did here befall me. your wife and brother made wars upon me, and their contestation
rob me the exchequer the first thing thou dost, and do it with unwashed hands too.
in terms of choice i am not solely led by nice direction of a maiden's eyes. bars me the right of voluntary choosing. but if my father had not scanted me and hedged me by his wit to yield myself his wife who wins me by that means i told you, as any comer i have looked on yet for my affection.
you do mistake your business. my brother never did urge me in his act. i did inquire it, and have my learning from some true reports that drew their swords with you. did he not rather and make the wars alike against my stomach, having alike your cause? of this my letters before did satisfy you. if you'll patch a quarrel, as matter whole you have to make it with,
do, my lord.
even for that i thank you. therefore i pray you lead me to the caskets to try my fortune. by this scimitar that won three fields of sultan solyman, i would o'erstare the sternest eyes that look, outbrave the heart most daring on the earth, pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear, to win the lady. but, alas the while! if hercules and lychas play at dice which is the better man, the greater throw may turn by fortune from the weaker hand. and so may i, blind fortune leading me, miss that which one unworthier may attain and die with grieving.
you praise yourself by laying defects of judgment to me, but you patched up your excuses.
i have procured thee, jack, a charge of foot.
you must take your chance, and either not attempt to choose at all never to speak to lady afterward in way of marriage. therefore be advised.
not so, not so. i know you could not lack, i am certain on 't, very necessity of this thought, that i, could not with graceful eyes attend those wars which fronted mine own peace. as for my wife, i would you had her spirit in such another. the third o' th' world is yours, which with a snaffle
i would it had been of horse. where shall i find one that can steal well? o, for a fine thief of the age of two and twenty or thereabouts! i am heinously unprovided. well, god be thanked for these rebels. they offend none but the virtuous. i laud them; i praise them.
nor will not. come, bring me unto my chance.
would we had all such wives, that the men might go to wars with the women!
bardolph!
first, forward to the temple. after dinner
so much uncurbable, her garboils, caesar, made out of her impatience, which not wanted did you too much disquiet. for that you must but say i could not help it.
my lord.
good fortune then!, to make me blessed or cursed'st among men.
i wrote to you when rioting in alexandria. you did pocket up my letters and with taunts
go bear this letter to lord john of lancaster,
certainly my conscience will serve me to run from this jew, my master. the fiend is at mine elbow and tempts me, saying to me, "gobbo," "launcelot gobbo," "good launcelot," or "good gobbo," or "good launcelot gobbo" , "use your legs, take the start, run away." my conscience says, "no. take heed, honest launcelot. take heed, honest gobbo," or as aforesaid, "honest launcelot gobbo, do not run. scorn running with thy heels." well, the most courageous fiend bids me pack. "fia!" says the fiend. "away!" says the fiend. "for the heavens, rouse up a brave mind," says the fiend, "and run." well, my conscience, hanging about the neck of my heart, says very wisely to me, "my honest friend launcelot, being an honest man's son", or rather an honest woman's son, for indeed my father did something smack, something grow to. he had a kind of taste., well, my conscience says, "launcelot, budge not." "budge!" says the fiend. "budge not," says my conscience. "conscience," say i, "you counsel well." "fiend," say i, "you counsel well." to be ruled by my conscience i should stay with the jew my master, who, god bless the mark, is a kind of devil. and to run away from the jew i should be ruled by the fiend, who, saving your reverence, is the devil himself. certainly the jew is the very devil incarnation. and in my conscience, my conscience is but a kind of hard conscience, to offer to counsel me to stay with the jew. the fiend gives the more friendly counsel. i will run, fiend. my heels are at your command. i will run.
sir, he fell upon me ere admitted, then. three kings i had newly feasted, and did want of what i was i' th' morning. but next day i told him of myself, which was as much be nothing of our strife. if we contend, out of our question wipe him.
go, peto, to horse, to horse, for thou and i have thirty miles to ride yet ere dinner time.
master young man, you, i pray you, which is the way to
you have broken the article of your oath, which you shall never have tongue to charge me with.
jack, meet me tomorrow in the temple hall at two o'clock in the afternoon; money and order for their furniture. the land is burning. percy stands on high, and either we or they must lower lie.
(aside) o heavens, this is my true-begotten father, who, being more than sand-blind, high-gravel blind, knows me not. i will try confusions with him.
soft, caesar.
rare words, brave world!, hostess, my breakfast, come., 
master young gentleman, i pray you, which is the way to
no, lepidus, let him speak. the honor is sacred which he talks on now, supposing that i lacked it., but, on, caesar. the article of my oath?
well said, my noble scot. if speaking truth in this fine age were not thought flattery, such attribution should the douglas have as not a soldier of this season's stamp by god, i cannot flatter. i do defy the tongues of soothers. but a braver place in my heart's love hath no man than yourself. nay, task me to my word; approve me, lord.
turn up on your right hand at the next turning, but at the next turning of all on your left. marry, at the very next turning turn of no hand, but turn down indirectly to the jew's house.
the which you both denied.
no man so potent breathes upon the ground but i will beard him.
by god's sonties, 'twill be a hard way to hit. can you tell me whether one launcelot that dwells with him, dwell with him or no?
neglected, rather, and then when poisoned hours had bound me up from mine own knowledge. as nearly as i may i'll play the penitent to you, but mine honesty work without it. truth is that fulvia, to have me out of egypt, made wars here, for which myself, the ignorant motive, do so far ask pardon as befits mine honor
do so, and 'tis well.
talk you of young master launcelot? (aside) mark me now. now will i raise the waters., talk you of young master launcelot?
'tis noble spoken.
what letters hast thou there? (to douglas) i can but thank you.
no "master," sir, but a poor man's son. his father, though i say 't, is an honest exceeding poor man and, god be thanked, well to live.
if it might please you to enforce no further the griefs between ye, to forget them quite were to remember that the present need speaks to atone you.
these letters come from your father.
well, let his father be what he will, we talk of young
worthily spoken, maecenas.
letters from him! why comes he not himself?
your worship's friend and launcelot, sir.
or, if you borrow one another's love for the instant, you may, when you hear no more words of pompey, return it again. you shall have time to wrangle in when you have nothing else to do.
he cannot come, my lord. he is grievous sick.
but i pray you, ergo, old man, ergo, i beseech you, talk you of young master launcelot?
thou art a soldier only. speak no more.
zounds, how has he the leisure to be sick in such a justling time? who leads his power? under whose government come they along?
of launcelot, an 't please your mastership.
that truth should be silent i had almost forgot.
his letters bear his mind, not i, my lord.
ergo, master launcelot. talk not of master launcelot, father, for the young gentleman, according to fates and destinies and such odd sayings, the sisters three and such branches of learning, is indeed deceased, or as you would say in plain terms, gone to heaven.
you wrong this presence. therefore speak no more.
i prithee, tell me, doth he keep his bed?
marry, god forbid! the boy was the very staff of my age, my very prop.
go to, then. your considerate stone.
he did, my lord, four days ere i set forth, and, at the time of my departure thence, he was much feared by his physicians.
do i look like a cudgel or a hovel-post, a staff or a prop? do you know me, father?
i do not much dislike the matter, but the manner of his speech, for 't cannot be so diff'ring in their acts. yet if i knew what hoop should hold us stanch, from edge to edge o' th' world i would pursue it.
ere he by sickness had been visited. his health was never better worth than now.
alack the day, i know you not, young gentleman. but i pray you, tell me, is my boy, god rest his soul, alive or dead?
give me leave, caesar.
sick now? droop now? this sickness doth infect the very lifeblood of our enterprise. he writes me here that inward sickness, and that his friends by deputation could not so soon be drawn, nor did he think it meet to lay so dangerous and dear a trust yet doth he give us bold advertisement that with our small conjunction we should on to see how fortune is disposed to us, for, as he writes, there is no quailing now, of all our purposes. what say you to it?
do you not know me, father?
speak, agrippa.
your father's sickness is a maim to us.
alack, sir, i am sand-blind. i know you not.
thou hast a sister by the mother's side, admired octavia. great mark antony is now a widower.
a perilous gash, a very limb lopped off! and yet, in faith, it is not. his present want to set the exact wealth of all our states all at one cast? to set so rich a main on the nice hazard of one doubtful hour? it were not good, for therein should we read the very list, the very utmost bound of all our fortunes.
nay, indeed if you had your eyes, you might fail of the knowing me. it is a wise father that knows his own child. well, old man, i will tell you news of your son. give me your blessing. truth will come to light. murder cannot be hid long, a man's son may, but in the end truth will out.
say not so, agrippa. if cleopatra heard you, your reproof
faith, and so we should, where now remains a sweet reversion. we may boldly spend a comfort of retirement lives in this.
pray you, sir, stand up. i am sure you are not launcelot, my boy.
i am not married, caesar. let me hear agrippa further speak.
a rendezvous, a home to fly unto, if that the devil and mischance look big upon the maidenhead of our affairs.
pray you, let's have no more fooling about it, but give me your blessing. i am launcelot, your boy that was, your son that is, your child that shall be.
to hold you in perpetual amity, to make you brothers, and to knit your hearts octavia to his wife, whose beauty claims no worse a husband than the best of men, whose virtue and whose general graces speak that which none else can utter. by this marriage, and all great fears, which now import their dangers, would then be nothing. truths would be tales, where now half-tales be truths. her love to both would each to other and all loves to both for 'tis a studied, not a present thought, by duty ruminated.
the quality and hair of our attempt brooks no division. it will be thought by some that know not why he is away that wisdom, loyalty, and mere dislike and think how such an apprehension may turn the tide of fearful faction and breed a kind of question in our cause. for well you know, we of the off'ring side and stop all sight-holes, every loop from whence the eye of reason may pry in upon us. this absence of your father's draws a curtain that shows the ignorant a kind of fear
i cannot think you are my son.
will caesar speak?
you strain too far. i rather of his absence make this use: it lends a luster and more great opinion, a larger dare, to our great enterprise than if the earl were here, for men must think to push against a kingdom, with his help we shall o'erturn it topsy-turvy down. yet all goes well, yet all our joints are whole.
i know not what i shall think of that. but i am launcelot, the jew's man, and i am sure margery your wife is my mother.
not till he hears how antony is touched with what is spoke already.
as heart can think. there is not such a word
her name is margery, indeed. i'll be sworn, if thou be launcelot, thou art mine own flesh and blood. (feels the back of launcelot's head) lord worshipped might he be, what a beard hast thou got! thou hast got more hair on thy chin than dobbin my fill-horse has on his tail.
if i would say, "agrippa, be it so," to make this good?
my cousin vernon, welcome, by my soul.
it should seem then that dobbin's tail grows backward. i am sure he had more hair of his tail than i have of my face when i last saw him.
the power of caesar, and his power unto octavia.
pray god my news be worth a welcome, lord. the earl of westmoreland, seven thousand strong, is marching hitherwards, with him prince john.
lord, how art thou changed! how dost thou and thy master agree? i have brought him a present. how 'gree you now?
may i never to this good purpose, that so fairly shows, further this act of grace, and from this hour the heart of brothers govern in our loves and sway our great designs!
no harm, what more?
well, well, but for mine own part, as i have set up my rest to run away, so i will not rest till i have run some ground. my master's a very jew. give him a present. give him a halter. i am famished in his service. you may tell every finger i have with my ribs. father, i am glad you are come. give me your present to one master bassanio, who indeed gives rare new liveries.
there's my hand.
and further i have learned, the king himself in person is set forth, or hitherwards intended speedily, with strong and mighty preparation.
if i serve not him, i will run as far as god has any ground., o rare fortune! here comes the man., to him, father, for i am a jew if i serve the jew any longer.
a sister i bequeath you whom no brother to join our kingdoms and our hearts, and never fly off our loves again!
he shall be welcome too. where is his son, and his comrades, that daffed the world aside and bid it pass?
(to a follower) you may do so, but let it be so hasted that supper be ready at the farthest by five of the clock. see these letters delivered, put the liveries to making, and desire gratiano to come anon to my lodging.
happily, amen!
all furnished, all in arms, all plumed like estridges that with the wind baited like eagles having lately bathed, as full of spirit as the month of may, and gorgeous as the sun at midsummer, wanton as youthful goats, wild as young bulls. i saw young harry with his beaver on, rise from the ground like feathered mercury and vaulted with such ease into his seat as if an angel dropped down from the clouds, to turn and wind a fiery pegasus
to him, father.
i did not think to draw my sword 'gainst pompey, for he hath laid strange courtesies and great lest my remembrance suffer ill report; at heel of that, defy him.
no more, no more! worse than the sun in march this praise doth nourish agues. let them come. they come like sacrifices in their trim, and to the fire-eyed maid of smoky war the mailèd mars shall on his altar sit up to the ears in blood. i am on fire to hear this rich reprisal is so nigh and yet not ours. come, let me taste my horse, against the bosom of the prince of wales. harry to harry shall, hot horse to horse, meet and ne'er part till one drop down a corse. o, that glendower were come!
(to bassanio) god bless your worship!
time calls upon 's. of us must pompey presently be sought, or else he seeks out us.
there is more news. he cannot draw his power this fourteen days.
gramercy! wouldst thou aught with me?
where lies he?
that's the worst tidings that i hear of yet.
here's my son, sir, a poor boy, 
about the mount misena.
ay, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.
not a poor boy, sir, but the rich jew's man that would, sir, as my father shall specify, 
what is his strength by land?
what may the king's whole battle reach unto?
he hath a great infection, sir, as one would say, to serve, 
great and increasing. but by sea he is an absolute master.
to thirty thousand.
indeed the short and the long is, i serve the jew and have a desire, as my father shall specify, 
would we had spoke together! haste we for it. yet, ere we put ourselves in arms, dispatch we the business we have talked of.
forty let it be. my father and glendower being both away, the powers of us may serve so great a day. come, let us take a muster speedily. doomsday is near. die all, die merrily.
his master and he, saving your worship's reverence, are scarce cater-cousins, 
with most gladness, and do invite you to my sister's view,
of death or death's hand for this one half year.
to be brief, the very truth is that the jew, having done me wrong, doth cause me, as my father, being, i hope, an old man, shall frutify unto you, 
let us, lepidus, not lack your company.
bardolph, get thee before to coventry. fill me a bottle of sack. our soldiers shall march through. we'll to sutton coldfield tonight.
i have here a dish of doves that i would bestow upon your worship, and my suit is, 
noble antony, not sickness should detain me.
will you give me money, captain?
in very brief, the suit is impertinent to myself, as your worship shall know by this honest old man, and though i say it, though old man, yet poor man, my father, 
(to enobarbus ) welcome from egypt, sir.
lay out, lay out.
one speak for both. what would you?
half the heart of caesar, worthy maecenas! my honorable friend, agrippa.
this bottle makes an angel.
serve you, sir.
good enobarbus!
an if it do, take it for thy labor. an if it make twenty, take them all. i'll answer the coinage. bid my lieutenant peto meet me at town's end.
that is the very defect of the matter, sir.
we have cause to be glad that matters are so well digested. you stayed well by 't in egypt.
i will, captain. farewell.
i know thee well. thou hast obtained thy suit. and hath preferred thee, if it be preferment to leave a rich jew's service, to become the follower of so poor a gentleman.
ay, sir, we did sleep day out of countenance and made the night light with drinking.
if i be not ashamed of my soldiers, i am a soused gurnet. i have misused the king's press damnably. i have got, in exchange of a hundred and fifty soldiers, three hundred and odd pounds. i press me none but good householders, yeomen's sons; inquire me out contracted bachelors, such as had been asked twice on the banns; such a commodity of warm slaves, as had as lief hear the devil as a drum, such as fear the report of a caliver worse than a struck fowl or a hurt wild duck. i pressed me none but such toasts-and-butter, with hearts in their bellies no bigger than pins' heads, and
the old proverb is very well parted between my master shylock and you, sir, you have "the grace of god," sir, and he hath "enough."
eight wild boars roasted whole at a breakfast, and but twelve persons there! is this true?
they have bought out their services, and now my whole charge consists of ancients, corporals, lieutenants, gentlemen of companies, slaves as ragged as lazarus in the painted cloth, where the glutton's dogs licked his sores; and such as indeed were never soldiers, but discarded, unjust servingmen, younger sons to younger brothers, revolted tapsters, and ostlers tradefallen, the cankers of a calm world and a long peace, ten times more dishonorable-ragged than an old feazed ancient; and such have i to fill up the rooms of them that have bought out their services, that you would think that i had a hundred and fifty tattered prodigals lately come from swine-keeping, from eating draff and husks. a mad fellow met me on the way and told me i had unloaded all the gibbets and pressed the dead bodies. no eye hath seen such scarecrows. i'll not march through coventry with them, that's flat. nay, and the villains march wide betwixt the legs as if they had gyves on, for indeed i had the most of them out of prison. there's not a shirt and a half in all my company, and the half shirt is two napkins tacked together and thrown over the shoulders like a herald's coat without sleeves; and the shirt, to say the truth, stolen from my host at saint albans or the red-nose innkeeper of daventry. but that's all one; they'll find linen enough on every hedge.
thou speak'st it well., go, father, with thy son., take leave of thy old master and inquire my lodging out., give him a livery more guarded than his fellows'. see it done.
this was but as a fly by an eagle. we had much more monstrous matter of feast, which worthily deserved noting.
how now, blown jack? how now, quilt?
father, in. i cannot get a service, no. i have ne'er a tongue in my head. (reading his own palm) well, if any man in italy have a fairer table which doth offer to swear upon a book, i shall have good fortune. go to, here's a simple line of life. here's a small trifle of wives. alas, fifteen wives is nothing! eleven widows and nine maids is a simple coming-in for one man. and then to 'scape drowning thrice and to be in peril of my life with the edge of a feather-bed, here are simple 'scapes. well, if fortune be a woman, she's a good wench for this gear., father, come. i'll take my leave of the jew in the twinkling.
she's a most triumphant lady, if report be square to her.
what, hal, how now, mad wag? what a devil dost thou in warwickshire?, my good lord of westmoreland, i cry you mercy: i thought your honor had already been at shrewsbury.
i pray thee, good leonardo, think on this. these things being bought and orderly bestowed, my best esteemed acquaintance. hie thee, go.
when she first met mark antony, she pursed up his heart upon the river of cydnus.
faith, sir john,'tis more than time that i were there and you too, but my powers are there already. the king, i can tell you, looks for us all. we must away all night.
my best endeavours shall be done herein.
there she appeared indeed, or my reporter devised well for her.
tut, never fear me. i am as vigilant as a cat to steal cream.
(to leonardo) where is your master?
i will tell you. the barge she sat in, like a burnished throne, burned on the water. the poop was beaten gold, purple the sails, and so perfumèd that which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made the water which they beat to follow faster, as amorous of their strokes. for her own person, it beggared all description: she did lie o'erpicturing that venus where we see the fancy outwork nature. on each side her stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling cupids, with divers-colored fans, whose wind did seem and what they undid did.
i think to steal cream indeed, for thy theft hath already made thee butter. but tell me, jack, whose fellows are these that come after?
yonder, sir, he walks.
oh, rare for antony!
mine, hal, mine.
signor bassanio!
her gentlewomen, like the nereides, so many mermaids, tended her i' th' eyes, and made their bends adornings. at the helm swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands that yarely frame the office. from the barge a strange invisible perfume hits the sense of the adjacent wharfs. the city cast enthroned i' th' marketplace, did sit alone, whistling to th' air, which, but for vacancy, had gone to gaze on cleopatra too and made a gap in nature.
i did never see such pitiful rascals.
gratiano!
rare egyptian!
tut, tut, good enough to toss; food for powder, food for powder. they'll fill a pit as well as better. tush, man, mortal men, mortal men.
i have a suit to you.
invited her to supper. she replied it should be better he became her guest, which she entreated. our courteous antony, whom ne'er the word of "no" woman heard speak, and for his ordinary pays his heart for what his eyes eat only.
ay, but, sir john, methinks they are exceeding poor and bare, too beggarly.
you have obtained it.
royal wench! she made great caesar lay his sword to bed. he plowed her, and she cropped.
faith, for their poverty, i know not where they had that, and for their bareness, i am sure they never learned that of me.
you must not deny me. i must go with you to belmont.
i saw her once and having lost her breath, she spoke, and panted, that she did make defect perfection, and, breathless, pour breathe forth.
no, i'll be sworn, unless you call three fingers in the ribs bare. but, sirrah, make haste. percy is already in the field.
why, then you must. but hear thee, gratiano. thou art too wild, too rude and bold of voice, parts that become thee happily enough but where thou art not known, why, there they show something too liberal. pray thee, take pain to allay with some cold drops of modesty thy skipping spirit, lest through thy wild behavior and lose my hopes.
now antony must leave her utterly.
what, is the king encamped?
signor bassanio, hear me. if i do not put on a sober habit, talk with respect and swear but now and then, wear prayer books in my pocket, look demurely, thus with my hat, and sigh and say, "amen", use all the observance of civility like one well studied in a sad ostent to please his grandam, never trust me more.
age cannot wither her, nor custom stale her infinite variety. other women cloy the appetites they feed, but she makes hungry where most she satisfies, for vilest things bless her when she is riggish.
he is, sir john. i fear we shall stay too long.
well, we shall see your bearing.
if beauty, wisdom, modesty, can settle the heart of antony, octavia is a blessèd lottery to him.
well, to the latter end of a fray and the beginning of a feast
nay, but i bar tonight. you shall not gauge me by what we do tonight.
let us go. whilst you abide here.
we'll fight with him tonight.
no, that were pity. i would entreat you rather to put on your boldest suit of mirth, for we have friends i have some business.
humbly, sir, i thank you.
it may not be.
and i must to lorenzo and the rest. but we will visit you at supper time.
(to octavia ) the world and my great office will sometimes divide me from your bosom.
you give him then advantage.
i am sorry thou wilt leave my father so. our house is hell, and thou, a merry devil, didst rob it of some taste of tediousness. but fare thee well, there is a ducat for thee. lorenzo, who is thy new master's guest. give him this letter. (gives launcelot a letter) do it secretly. and so farewell. i would not have my father
all which time before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers to them for you.
not a whit.
adieu! tears exhibit my tongue. most beautiful pagan, most sweet jew! if a christian do not play the knave and get thee, i am much deceived. but adieu. these foolish drops do something drown my manly spirit. adieu.
(to caesar ) good night, sir., my octavia, i have not kept my square, but that to come shall all be done by th' rule. good night, dear lady. (to caesar ) good night, sir.
why say you so? looks he not for supply?
farewell, good launcelot.
good night.
so do we.
alack, what heinous sin is it in me to be ashamed to be my father's child! but though i am a daughter to his blood, i am not to his manners. o lorenzo, become a christian and thy loving wife.
now, sirrah, you do wish yourself in egypt?
his is certain; ours is doubtful.
nay, we will slink away in supper time, disguise us at my lodging, and return, all in an hour.
would i had never come from thence, nor you thither.
good cousin, be advised. stir not tonight.
we have not made good preparation.
if you can, your reason?
(to hotspur ) do not, my lord.
we have not spoke us yet of torchbearers.
i see it in my motion, have it not in my tongue. but yet hie you to egypt again.
you do not counsel well. you speak it out of fear and cold heart.
'tis vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered, and better in my mind not undertook.
caesar's or mine?
do me no slander, douglas. by my life if well-respected honor bid me on, i hold as little counsel with weak fear as you, my lord, or any scot that this day lives. let it be seen tomorrow in the battle
'tis now but four o'clock. we have two hours to furnish us.
caesar's. therefore, o antony, stay not by his side. thy dæmon, that thy spirit which keeps thee, is where caesar's is not. but near him thy angel becomes afeard, as being o'erpowered. therefore make space enough between you.
yea, or tonight.
friend launcelot, what's the news?
speak this no more.
content.
(giving lorenzo the letter) an it shall please you to break up this, it shall seem to signify.
to none but thee, no more but when to thee. thou art sure to lose, and of that natural luck he beats thee 'gainst the odds. thy luster thickens when he shines by. i say again, thy spirit is all afraid to govern thee near him,
tonight, say i.
i know the hand. in faith, 'tis a fair hand, and whiter than the paper it writ on
get thee gone. say to ventidius i would speak with him.
come, come it nay not be. i wonder much, being men of such great leading as you are, drag back our expedition. certain horse of my cousin vernon's are not yet come up. your uncle worcester's horse came but today, and now their pride and mettle is asleep, that not a horse is half the half of himself.
love news, in faith?
(to himself) he shall to parthia. be it art or hap, he hath spoken true. the very dice obey him, and in our sports my better cunning faints his cocks do win the battle still of mine when it is all to naught, and his quails ever beat mine, inhooped, at odds. i will to egypt. and though i make this marriage for my peace,
so are the horses of the enemy in general journey-bated and brought low. the better part of ours are full of rest.
(to lorenzo) by your leave, sir.
o come, ventidius. you must to parthia. your commission's ready. follow me and receive 't.
for god's sake, cousin, stay till all come in.
whither goest thou?
trouble yourselves no further. pray you, hasten your generals after.
i come with gracious offers from the king, if you vouchsafe me hearing and respect.
marry, sir, to bid my old master the jew to sup tonight with my new master the christian.
sir, mark antony will e'en but kiss octavia, and we'll follow.
welcome, sir walter blunt, and would to god some of us love you well, and even those some envy your great deservings and good name because you are not of our quality but stand against us like an enemy.
hold here, take this. tell gentle jessica i will not fail her. speak it privately., go, gentlemen, will you prepare you for this masque tonight?
till i shall see you in your soldiers' dress,
so long as out of limit and true rule you stand against anointed majesty. but to my charge. the king hath sent to know the nature of your griefs, and whereupon such bold hostility, teaching his duteous land audacious cruelty. if that the king have any way your good deserts forgot, which he confesseth to be manifold, you shall have your desires with interest and pardon absolute for yourself and these herein misled by your suggestion.
ay, marry, i'll be gone about it straight.
we shall, as i conceive the journey, be at the mount before you, lepidus.
the king is kind, and well we know the king my father and my uncle and myself did give him that same royalty he wears, and when he was not six-and-twenty strong, sick in the world's regard, wretched and low, my father gave him welcome to the shore; and when he heard him swear and vow to god he came but to be duke of lancaster, to sue his livery, and beg his peace, my father, in kind heart and pity moved, swore him assistance and performed it too. now when the lords and barons of the realm perceived northumberland did lean to him, met him in boroughs, cities, villages, attended him on bridges, stood in lanes, laid gifts before him, proffered him their oaths, gave him their heirs as pages, followed him he presently, as greatness knows itself, steps me a little higher than his vow made to my father while his blood was poor upon the naked shore at ravenspurgh, some certain edicts and some strait decrees that lie too heavy on the commonwealth, cries out upon abuses, seems to weep over his country's wrongs, and by this face, the hearts of all that he did angle for, proceeded further, cut me off the heads of all the favourites that the absent king in deputation left behind him here
and so will i.
your way is shorter. my purposes do draw me much about. you'll win two days upon me.
tut, i came not to hear this.
meet me and gratiano at gratiano's lodging some hour hence.
sir, good success.
then to the point. in short time after, he deposed the king, soon after that deprived him of his life and, in the neck of that, tasked the whole state. (who is, if every owner were well placed, indeed his king) to be engaged in wales, there without ransom to lie forfeited, disgraced me in my happy victories, rated mine uncle from the council board, in rage dismissed my father from the court, broke oath on oath, committed wrong on wrong, and in conclusion drove us to seek out into his title, the which we find too indirect for long continuance.
'tis good we do so.
farewell.
shall i return this answer to the king?
was not that letter from fair jessica?
give me some music. music, moody food of us that trade in love.
not so, sir walter. we'll withdraw awhile. some surety for a safe return again, and in the morning early shall my uncle bring him our purposes. and so farewell.
i must needs tell thee all. she hath directed how i shall take her from her father's house, what gold and jewels she is furnished with, what page's suit she hath in readiness. it will be for his gentle daughter's sake. and never dare misfortune cross her foot unless she do it under this excuse: that she is issue to a faithless jew. (gives gratiano the letter) peruse this as thou goest. fair jessica shall be my torchbearer.
the music, ho!
i would you would accept of grace and love.
well, thou shalt see, thy eyes shall be thy judge, the difference of old shylock and bassanio., what, jessica!, thou shalt not gormandize as thou hast done with me., what, jessica!, why, jessica, i say!
let it alone. let's to billiards. come, charmian.
and maybe so we shall.
why, jessica!
my arm is sore. best play with mardian.
pray god you do.
who bids thee call? i do not bid thee call.
as with a woman., come, you'll play with me, sir?
hie, good sir michael, bear this sealèd brief with winged haste to the lord marshal, this to my cousin scroop, and all the rest to whom they are directed. if you knew
your worship was wont to tell me that i could do nothing without bidding.
as well as i can, madam.
my good lord, i guess their tenor.
call you? what is your will?
and when good will is showed, though 't come too short, the actor may plead pardon. i'll none now. my music playing far off, i will betray tawny-finned fishes. my bended hook shall pierce their slimy jaws, and as i draw them up i'll think them every one an antony
like enough you do. tomorrow, good sir michael, is a day wherein the fortune of ten thousand men as i am truly given to understand, the king with mighty and quick-raisèd power meets with lord harry. and i fear, sir michael, what with the sickness of northumberland, and what with owen glendower's absence thence, who with them was a rated sinew too and comes not in, o'er-ruled by prophecies, i fear the power of percy is too weak
i am bid forth to supper, jessica. there are my keys., but wherefore should i go? i am not bid for love. they flatter me. but yet i'll go in hate to feed upon look to my house. i am right loath to go. there is some ill a-brewing towards my rest, for i did dream of money bags tonight.
'twas merry when you wagered on your angling, when your diver did hang a salt fish on his hook, which he with fervency drew up.
why, my good lord, you need not fear. there is douglas and lord mortimer.
i beseech you, sir, go. my young master doth expect your reproach.
that time, oh, times!, i laughed him out of patience, and that night ere the ninth hour, i drunk him to his bed, then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst i wore his sword philippan.
no, mortimer is not there.
so do i his.
oh, from italy! ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,
but there is mordake, vernon, lord harry percy, of gallant warriors, noble gentlemen.
and they have conspired together. i will not say you shall see a masque, but if you do then it was not for nothing that my nose fell a-bleeding on black monday last at six o'clock i' th' morning falling out that year on ash wednesday was four year in th' afternoon.
madam, madam, 
and so there is. but yet the king hath drawn the special head of all the land together: the prince of wales, lord john of lancaster, and many more corrivals and dear men of estimation and command in arms.
what, are there masques? hear you me, jessica. lock up my doors, and when you hear the drum and the vile squealing of the wry-necked fife, nor thrust your head into the public street to gaze on christian fools with varnished faces. but stop my house's ears, i mean my casements, let not the sound of shallow foppery enter i have no mind of feasting forth tonight. but i will go., go you before me, sirrah. say i will come.
antonio's dead! if thou say so, villain, thou kill'st thy mistress. but well and free, if thou so yield him, there is gold, and here my bluest veins to kiss, a hand that kings
doubt not, my lord, they shall be well opposed.
i will go before, sir., mistress, look out at window, for all this. will be worth a jewess' eye.
first, madam, he is well.
i hope no less, yet needful 'tis to fear; for if lord percy thrive not, ere the king dismiss his power, he means to visit us, for he hath heard of our confederacy, and 'tis but wisdom to make strong against him: to other friends. and so farewell, sir michael.
what says that fool of hagar's offspring, ha?
why, there's more gold. but, sirrah, mark, we use to say the dead are well. bring it to that, the gold i give thee will i melt and pour
how bloodily the sun begins to peer above yon busky hill. the day looks pale at his distemp'rature.
his words were, "farewell, mistress." nothing else.
good madam, hear me.
the southern wind doth play the trumpet to his purposes, foretells a tempest and a blust'ring day.
the patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder, more than the wildcat. drones hive not with me. therefore i part with him, and part with him to one that would have him help to waste his borrowed purse. well, jessica, go in. do as i bid you. shut doors after you. fast bind, fast find. a proverb never stale in thrifty mind.
well, go to, i will. but there's no goodness in thy face, if antony be free and healthful, so tart a favor thou shouldst come like a fury crowned with snakes, not like a formal man.
then with the losers let it sympathize, for nothing can seem foul to those that win.
farewell, and if my fortune be not crost,
will 't please you hear me?
how now, my lord of worcester? 'tis not well as now we meet. you have deceived our trust and made us doff our easy robes of peace to crush our old limbs in ungentle steel. this is not well, my lord; this is not well. this curlish knot of all-abhorrèd war and move in that obedient orb again where you did give a fair and natural light, and be no more an exhaled meteor, of broachèd mischief to the unborn times?
this is the penthouse under which lorenzo desired us to make stand.
i have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st. yet if thou say antony lives, is well, i'll set thee in a shower of gold and hail rich pearls upon thee.
hear me, my liege: for mine own part i could be well content to entertain the lag end of my life i have not sought the day of this dislike.
his hour is almost past.
madam, he's well.
you have not sought it. how comes it then?
and it is marvel he outdwells his hour, for lovers ever run before the clock.
well said.
rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.
to seal love's bonds new made than they are wont to keep obligèd faith unforfeited.
and friends with caesar.
peace, chewet, peace.
that ever holds. who riseth from a feast with that keen appetite that he sits down? his tedious measures with the unbated fire that he did pace them first? all things that are, are with more spirit chasèd than enjoyed. how like a younger or a prodigal hugged and embraèd by the strumpet wind! how like the prodigal doth she return, with overweathered ribs and ragged sails lean, rent, and beggared by the strumpet wind!
th' art an honest man.
of favour from myself and all our house; and yet i must remember you, my lord, we were the first and dearest of your friends. for you my staff of office did i break to meet you on the way, and kiss your hand when yet you were in place and in account nothing so strong and fortunate as i. it was myself, my brother, and his son the dangers of the time. you swore to us, and you did swear that oath at doncaster, that you did nothing purpose 'gainst the state, nor claim no further than your new-fall'n right, to this we swore our aid. but in short space it rained down fortune show'ring on your head, and such a flood of greatness fell on you, what with our help, what with the absent king, the seeming sufferances that you had borne,
here comes lorenzo. more of this hereafter.
caesar and he are greater friends than ever.
and the contrarious winds that held the king so long in his unlucky irish wars that all in england did repute him dead, you took occasion to be quickly wooed to gripe the general sway into your hand, forget your oath to us at doncaster; and being fed by us, you used us so useth the sparrow, did oppress our nest, grew by our feeding to so great a bulk that even our love durst not come near your sight for fear of swallowing; but with nimble wing out of sight and raise this present head, whereby we stand opposèd by such means as you yourself have forged against yourself by unkind usage, dangerous countenance, sworn to us in your younger enterprise.
sweet friends, your patience for my long abode. not i but my affairs have made you wait. when you shall please to play the thieves for wives, i'll watch as long for you then. approach.
make thee a fortune from me.
these things indeed you have articulate, proclaimed at market crosses, read in churches, to face the garment of rebellion of fickle changelings and poor discontents, which gape and rub the elbow at the news of hurlyburly innovation. and never yet did insurrection want nor moody beggars starving for a time of pellmell havoc and confusion.
who are you? tell me for more certainty, albeit i'll swear that i do know your tongue.
but yet, madam, 
in both your armies there is many a soul shall pay full dearly for this encounter
lorenzo, and thy love.
i do not like "but yet." it does allay the good precedence. fie upon "but yet." "but yet" is as a jailer to bring forth some monstrous malefactor. prithee, friend, the good and bad together. he's friends with caesar, in state of health, thou say'st, and, thou say'st, free.
the prince of wales doth join with all the world in praise of henry percy. by my hopes, this present enterprise set off his head, i do not think a braver gentleman, more daring or more bold, is now alive to grace this latter age with noble deeds. for my part, i may speak it to my shame, i have a truant been to chivalry, yet this before my father's majesty: i am content that he shall take the odds of his great name and estimation, and will, to save the blood on either side,
lorenzo certain, and my love indeed, but you, lorenzo, whether i am yours?
free, madam, no. i made no such report. he's bound unto octavia.
and, prince of wales, so dare we venture thee, albeit considerations infinite do make against it., no, good worcester, no, we love our people well, even those we love and, will they take the offer of our grace, both he and they and you, yea, every man shall be my friend again, and i'll be his. so tell your cousin, and bring me word rebuke and dread correction wait on us, and they shall do their office. so begone. we will not now be troubled with reply. we offer fair. take it advisedly.
heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art.
for what good turn?
the douglas and the hotspur both together are confident against the world in arms.
here, catch this casket. it is worth the pains. i am glad 'tis night, you do not look on me, but love is blind, and lovers cannot see the pretty follies that themselves commit, for if they could cupid himself would blush to see me thus transformèd to a boy.
for the best turn i' th' bed.
hence, therefore, every leader to his charge, for on their answer will we set on them,
descend, for you must be my torchbearer.
i am pale, charmian.
hal, if thou see me down in the battle and bestride me, so; 'tis a point of friendship.
what, must i hold a candle to my shames? they in themselves, good sooth, are too too light. why, 'tis an office of discovery, love. and i should be obscured.
madam, he's married to octavia.
nothing but a colossus can do thee that friendship. say thy prayers, and farewell.
so are you, sweet, but come at once, for the close night doth play the runaway, and we are stayed for at bassanio's feast.
the most infectious pestilence upon thee!
i would 'twere bedtime, hal, and all well.
i will make fast the doors and gild myself
good madam, patience.
why, thou owest god a death.
now, by my hood, a gentle and no jew.
what say you?
'tis not due yet. i would be loath to pay him before his day. what need i be so forward with him that calls not on me? well, 'tis no matter. honour pricks me on. yea, but how if honor prick me off when i come on? how then? can honor set to a leg? no. or an arm? no. or take away the grief of a wound? no. honor hath no skill in surgery, then? no. what is honor? a word. what is in that word "honor"? what is that "honor"? air. a trim reckoning. who hath it? he that died o' wednesday. doth he feel it? no. doth he hear it? no. 'tis insensible, then? yea, to the dead. but will it not live with the living? no. why? detraction will not suffer it. therefore, i'll none of it. honor is a mere scutcheon. and so ends my catechism.
beshrew me but i love her heartily. for she is wise, if i can judge of her. and fair she is, if that mine eyes be true. and therefore, like herself, wise, fair and true, shall she be placèd in my constant soul.
like balls before me! i'll unhair thy head!
o no, my nephew must not know, sir richard, the liberal and kind offer of the king.
what, art thou come?, on, gentlemen, away! our masquing mates by this time for us stay.
thou shalt be whipped with wire and stewed in brine, smarting in ling'ring pickle!
'twere best he did.
who's there?
gracious madam, i that do bring the news made not the match.
then are we all undone. it is not possible, it cannot be he will suspect us still and find a time to punish this offense in other faults. suspicion all our lives shall be stuck full of eyes, for treason is but trusted like the fox, will have a wild trick of his ancestors. look how we can, or sad or merrily, interpretation will misquote our looks, and we shall feed like oxen at a stall, my nephew's trespass may be well forgot; it hath the excuse of youth and heat of blood, and an adopted name of privilege, a hairbrained hotspur governed by a spleen: and on his father's. we did train him on, and, his corruption being ta'en from us, we as the spring of all shall pay for all. therefore, good cousin, let not harry know
signor antonio?
and make thy fortunes proud. the blow thou hadst shall make thy peace for moving me to rage, and i will boot thee with what gift beside thy modesty can beg.
deliver what you will; i'll say 'tis so.
fie, fie, gratiano! where are all the rest? 'tis nine o'clock. our friends all stay for you. no masque tonight. the wind is come about. bassanio presently will go aboard.
he's married, madam.
here comes your cousin.
i am glad on 't. i desire no more delight than to be under sail and gone tonight.
rogue, thou hast lived too long.
my uncle is returned. deliver up my lord of westmoreland., uncle, what news?
(to servant) go draw aside the curtains and discover the several caskets to this noble prince., 
nay then, i'll run. what mean you, madam? i have made no fault.
the king will bid you battle presently.
a curtain is drawn showing a gold, silver, and lead casket
good madam, keep yourself within yourself. the man is innocent.
defy him by the lord of westmoreland.
(to morocco) now make your choice.
some innocents 'scape not the thunderbolt. turn all to serpents. call the slave again. though i am mad, i will not bite him. call!
lord douglas, go you and tell him so.
"who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire." the second, silver, which this promise carries: "who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves." this third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt: how shall i know if i do choose the right?
he is afeard to come.
marry, and shall, and very willingly.
the one of them contains my picture, prince. if you choose that, then i am yours withal.
i will not hurt him. these hands do lack nobility that they strike have given myself the cause.
there is no seeming mercy in the king.
some god direct my judgment! let me see. what says this leaden casket? "who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath." must give, for what? for lead? hazard for lead? this casket threatens. men that hazard all a golden mind stoops not to shows of dross. i'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead. what says the silver with her virgin hue?
come hither, sir. though it be honest, it is never good to bring bad news. give to a gracious message an host of tongues, but let ill tidings tell
did you beg any? god forbid!
"who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves." and weigh thy value with an even hand. if thou beest rated by thy estimation, thou dost deserve enough, and yet enough may not extend so far as to the lady, were but a weak disabling of myself. as much as i deserve! why, that's the lady. i do in birth deserve her, and in fortunes, in graces, and in qualities of breeding. what if i strayed no further, but chose here? let's see once more this saying graved in gold, "who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire." why, that's the lady. all the world desires her. to kiss this shrine, this mortal breathing saint. the hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds of wide arabia are as thoroughfares now for princes to come view fair portia. spits in the face of heaven, is no bar to stop the foreign spirits, but they come as o'er a brook to see fair portia. one of these three contains her heavenly picture. to think so base a thought. it were too gross to rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave. or shall i think in silver she's immured, being ten times undervalued to tried gold? was set in worse than gold. they have in england a coin that bears the figure of an angel stamped in gold, but that's insculped upon. but here an angel in a golden bed
i have done my duty.
i told him gently of our grievances, of his oath-breaking, which he mended thus by now forswearing that he is forsworn. he calls us "rebels," "traitors," and will scourge
here do i choose, and thrive i as i may!
is he married? i cannot hate thee worser than i do if thou again say "yes."
arm, gentlemen, to arms. for i have thrown a brave defiance in king henry's teeth, and westmoreland, that was engaged, did bear it, which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.
(giving morocco a key) there, take it, prince. and if my form lie there then i am yours.
he's married, madam.
and, nephew, challenged you to single fight.
a carrion death, within whose empty eye there is a written scroll. i'll read the writing. (reads) "all that glisters is not gold, many a man his life hath sold but my outside to behold. gilded tombs do worms enfold. had you been as wise as bold, your answer had not been inscrolled. fare you well. your suit is cold, cold, indeed, and labor lost." then, farewell, heat, and welcome, frost! to take a tedious leave. thus losers part.
the gods confound thee! dost thou hold there still?
o, would the quarrel lay upon our heads, and that no man might draw short breath today but i and harry monmouth! tell me, tell me,
a gentle riddance., draw the curtains, go., let all of his complexion choose me so.
should i lie, madam?
no, by my soul. i never in my life did hear a challenge urged more modestly, unless a brother should a brother dare to gentle exercise and proof of arms. trimmed up your praises with a princely tongue, spoke your deservings like a chronicle, making you ever better than his praise by still dispraising praise valued in you, he made a blushing cital of himself, and chid his truant youth with such a grace as if he mastered there a double spirit of teaching and of learning instantly. if he outlive the envy of this day, england did never owe so sweet a hope, so much misconstrued in his wantonness.
why, man, i saw bassanio under sail. with him is gratiano gone along. and in their ship i am sure lorenzo is not.
oh, i would thou didst, so half my egypt were submerged and made a cistern for scaled snakes! go, get thee hence. hadst thou narcissus in thy face, to me
cousin, i think thou art enamorèd of any prince so wild a liberty. but be he as he will, yet once ere night i will embrace him with a soldier's arm, that he shall shrink under my courtesy., better consider what you have to do than i that have not well the gift of tongue can lift your blood up with persuasion.
the villain jew with outcries raised the duke,
i crave your highness' pardon.
my lord, here are letters for you.
he came too late. the ship was under sail. but there the duke was given to understand that in a gondola were seen together lorenzo and his amorous jessica. they were not with bassanio in his ship.
he is married?
o gentlemen, the time of life is short; to spend that shortness basely were too long if life did ride upon a dial's point, still ending at the arrival of an hour. if die, brave death, when princes die with us. now, for our consciences, the arms are fair when the intent of bearing them is just.
i never heard a passion so confused, so strange, outrageous, and so variable, as the dog jew did utter in the streets. fled with a christian! o my christian ducats! justice, the law, my ducats, and my daughter! a sealèd bag, two sealèd bags of ducats, of double ducats, stol'n from me by my daughter! stol'n by my daughter! justice, find the girl! she hath the stones upon her, and the ducats."
take no offense that i would not offend you. to punish me for what you make me do seems much unequal. he's married to octavia.
my lord, prepare. the king comes on apace.
why, all the boys in venice follow him, crying, "his stones, his daughter, and his ducats!"
that art not what th' art sure of! get thee hence. the merchandise which thou hast brought from rome are all too dear for me. lie they upon thy hand and be undone by 'em!
for i profess not talking. only this: let each man do his best. and here draw i a sword, whose temper i intend to stain with the best blood that i can meet withal now, esperance! percy! and set on. sound all the lofty instruments of war, and by that music let us all embrace, for, heaven to earth, some of us never shall
or he shall pay for this.
good your highness, patience.
what is thy name that in the battle thus thou crossest me? what honor dost thou seek upon my head?
marry, well remembered. i reasoned with a frenchman yesterday, who told me, in the narrow seas that part the french and english, there miscarried i thought upon antonio when he told me, and wished in silence that it were not his.
in praising antony, i have dispraised caesar.
know then, my name is douglas, because some tell me that thou art a king.
you were best to tell antonio what you hear, yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him.
many times, madam.
they tell thee true.
i saw bassanio and antonio part. bassanio told him he would make some speed of his return. he answered, "do not so. slubber not business for my sake, bassanio and for the jew's bond which he hath of me, let it not enter in your mind of love. be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts to courtship and such fair ostents of love and even there, his eye being big with tears, turning his face, he put his hand behind him, and with affection wondrous sensible he wrung bassanio's hand. and so they parted.
i am paid for 't now. lead me from hence. i faint. o iras, charmian! 'tis no matter., go to the fellow, good alexas. bid him her inclination. let him not leave out the color of her hair. bring me word quickly.
the lord of stafford dear today hath bought thy likeness, for instead of thee, king harry, unless thou yield thee as my prisoner.
i pray thee, let us go and find him out and quicken his embracèd heaviness with some delight or other.
let him forever go!, let him not, charmian. though he be painted one way like a gorgon, bring me word how tall she is. pity me, charmian, but do not speak to me. lead me to my chamber.
i was not born a yielder, thou proud scot, and thou shalt find a king that will revenge lord stafford's death.
do we so.
your hostages i have, so have you mine, and we shall talk before we fight.
i never had triumphed upon a scot.
quick, quick, i pray thee. draw the curtain straight. the prince of arragon hath ta'en his oath and comes to his election presently.
most meet that first we come to words, and therefore have we our written purposes before us sent, if 'twill tie up thy discontented sword and carry back to sicily much tall youth that else must perish here.
all's done, all's won; here breathless lies the king.
behold, there stand the caskets, noble prince. straight shall our nuptial rites be solemnized. but if you fail, without more speech, my lord, you must be gone from hence immediately.
to you all three, the senators alone of this great world, wherefore my father should revengers want, having a son and friends, since julius caesar, who at philippi the good brutus ghosted, there saw you laboring for him. what was 't made the all-honored, honest roman brutus, with the armed rest, courtiers of beauteous freedom, to drench the capitol, but that they would have one man but a man? and that is it the angered ocean foams, with which i meant to scourge th' ingratitude that despiteful rome cast on my noble father.
where?
i am enjoined by oath to observe three things: which casket 'twas i chose; next, if i fail of the right casket, never in my life to woo a maid in way of marriage; lastly, if i do fail in fortune of my choice,
take your time.
here.
to these injunctions every one doth swear that comes to hazard for my worthless self.
thou canst not fear us, pompey, with thy sails. how much we do o'ercount thee.
a gallant knight he was; his name was blunt, semblably furnished like the king himself.
and so have i addressed me. fortune now to my heart's hope! gold, silver, and base lead. you shall look fairer ere i give or hazard. what says the golden chest? ha, let me see. "who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire."
at land indeed thou dost o'ercount me of my father's house, but since the cuckoo builds not for himself, remain in 't as thou mayst.
(to blunt) a fool go with thy soul whither it goes! a borrowed title hast thou bought too dear.
"what many men desire", that "many" may be meant not learning more than the fond eye doth teach; which pries not to th' interior, but like the martlet builds in the weather on the outward wall, even in the force and road of casualty. because i will not jump with common spirits and rank me with the barbarous multitudes. why then, to thee, thou silver treasure house. tell me once more what title thou dost bear. and well said too, for who shall go about to cozen fortune and be honorable without the stamp of merit? let none presume to wear an undeservèd dignity. were not derived corruptly, and that clear honor were purchased by the merit of the wearer! how many then should cover that stand bare! how many be commanded that command! from the true seed of honor! and how much honor picked from the chaff and ruin of the times to be new varnished! well, but to my choice. "who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves." and instantly unlock my fortunes here.
be pleased to tell us, the offers we have sent you.
the king hath many marching in his coats.
too long a pause for that which you find there.
there's the point.
now, by my sword, i will kill all his coats. i'll murder all his wardrobe, piece by piece, until i meet the king.
what's here? the portrait of a blinking idiot presenting me a schedule! i will read it., how much unlike my hopes and my deservings! "who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves"! did i deserve no more than a fool's head? is that my prize? are my deserts no better?
which do not be entreated to, but weigh what it is worth embraced.
up and away!
and of opposèd natures.
and what may follow, to try a larger fortune.
though i could 'scape shot-free at london, i fear the shot here. here's no scoring but upon the pate., soft, who are you? sir walter blunt. there's honor for you. here's no vanity. i am as hot as molten lead, and as heavy too. god keep lead out of me; i need no more weight than mine own bowels. i have led my ragamuffins where they are peppered. there's not three of my hundred and fifty left alive, and they are for the town's end, to beg during life. but who comes here?
what is here? (reads) "the fire seven times tried this, seven times tried that judgment is, some there be that shadows kiss. such have but a shadow's bliss. there be fools alive, iwis, silvered o'er, and so was this. i will ever be your head. so be gone. you are sped. still more fool i shall appear" by the time i linger here. but i go away with two., sweet, adieu. i'll keep my oath patiently to bear my wroth."
you have made me offer rid all the sea of pirates, then, to send measures of wheat to rome. this 'greed upon to part with unhacked edges and bear back our targes undinted.
many a nobleman lies stark and stiff under the hoofs of vaunting enemies, whose deaths are yet unrevenged. i prithee, lend me thy sword.
thus hath the candle singed the moth. they have the wisdom by their wit to lose.
that's our offer.
o hal, i prithee, give me leave to breathe awhile. turk gregory never did such deeds in arms as i have done this day. i have paid percy; i have made him sure.
the ancient saying is no heresy. hanging and wiving goes by destiny.
know then to take this offer, but mark antony put me to some impatience. (to antony ), though i lose the praise of it by telling, you must know, when caesar and your brother were at blows, her welcome friendly.
he is indeed, and living to kill thee. i prithee, lend me thy sword.
come, draw the curtain, nerissa.
(to pompey ) i have heard it, pompey, and am well studied for a liberal thanks which i do owe you.
nay, before god, hal, if percy be alive, thou gett'st not my sword; but take my pistol, if thou wilt.
where is my lady?
let me have your hand.
give it to me. what, is it in the case?
here. what would my lord?
i did not think, sir, to have met you here.
henry draws it out and finds it to be a bottle of sack)
madam, there is alighted at your gate a young venetian, one that comes before to signify th' approaching of his lord, from whom he bringeth sensible regreets, gifts of rich value. yet i have not seen so likely an ambassador of love. a day in april never came so sweet to show how costly summer was at hand,
that called me timelier than my purpose hither, for i have gained by 't.
what, is it a time to jest and dally now?
no more, i pray thee. i am half afeard thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee, thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him., come, come, nerissa, for i long to see
(to pompey ) since i saw you last there's a change upon you.
well, if percy be alive, i'll pierce him. if he do come in my way, so; if he do not, if i come in his willingly, let him make a carbonado of me. i like not such grinning honor as sir walter hath. give me life, which if i can save, so: if not, honor comes unlooked for, and there's an end.
bassanio, lord love, if thy will it be!
well, i know not what counts harsh fortune casts upon my face, to make my heart her vassal.
i prithee, harry, withdraw thyself. thou bleedest too much. lord john of lancaster, go you with him.
now, what news on the rialto?
well met here.
not i, my lord, unless i did bleed too.
why, yet it lives there unchecked that antonio hath a ship of rich lading wracked on the narrow seas. the goodwins i think they call the place, a very dangerous flat, and fatal, where the carcasses of many a tall ship lie buried, as they say, if my gossip report be an honest woman of her word.
i hope so, lepidus. thus we are agreed. i crave our composition may be written and sealed between us.
i beseech your majesty, make up,
i would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knapped ginger or made her neighbors believe she wept for the death of a third husband. but it is true, without any slips of prolixity or crossing the plain highway of talk, that the good antonio, the honest antonio, oh, that i had a title good enough to keep his name company!, 
that's the next to do.
i will do so., my lord of westmoreland, lead him to his tent.
come, the full stop.
draw lots who shall begin.
come, my lord, i'll lead you to your tent.
ha, what sayest thou? why, the end is he hath lost a ship.
that will i, pompey.
lead me, my lord? i do not need your help, the prince of wales from such a field as this, where stained nobility lies trodden on, and rebels' arms triumph in massacres.
i would it might prove the end of his losses.
no, antony, take the lot. but, first or last, your fine egyptian cookery shall have the fame. i have heard that julius caesar
we breathe too long. come, cousin westmoreland,
let me say "amen" betimes, lest the devil cross my prayer, for here he comes in the likeness of a jew.
you have heard much.
by god, thou hast deceived me, lancaster. i did not think thee lord of such a spirit. before, i loved thee as a brother, john, but now, i do respect thee as my soul.
how now, shylock? what news among the merchants?
i have fair meanings, sir.
with lustier maintenance than i did look for of such an ungrown warrior.
you knew, none so well, none so well as you, of my daughter's flight.
and fair words to them.
o, this boy lends mettle to us all.
that's certain. i, for my part, knew the tailor that made the wings she flew withal.
then so much have i heard.
another king! they grow like hydra's heads., that wear those colors on them. what art thou that counterfeit'st the person of a king?
and shylock, for his own part, knew the bird was fledged, and then it is the complexion of them all to leave the dam.
(interrupting pompey ) no more of that. he did so.
the king himself, who, douglas, grieves at heart, so many of his shadows thou hast met seek percy and thyself about the field, but, seeing thou fall'st on me so luckily, i will assay thee. and defend thyself.
she is damned for it.
what, i pray you?
i fear thou art another counterfeit, but mine i am sure thou art, whoe'er thou be, and thus i win thee.
that's certain, if the devil may be her judge.
a certain queen to caesar in a mattress.
hold up thy head, vile scot, or thou art like never to hold it up again. the spirits it is the prince of wales that threatens thee, who never promiseth but he means to pay.
my own flesh and blood to rebel!
i know thee now. how far'st thou, soldier?
cheerly, my lord. how fares your grace? sir nicholas gawsey hath for succor sent,
out upon it, old carrion! rebels it at these years?
well, and well am like to do, for i perceive,
stay, and breathe awhile. thou hast redeemed thy lost opinion and showed thou mak'st some tender of my life in this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.
i say my daughter is my flesh and blood.
let me shake thy hand. i never hated thee. i have seen thee fight when i have envied thy behavior.
that ever said i hearkened for your death. if it were so, i might have let alone the insulting hand of douglas over you, which would have been as speedy in your end and saved the treacherous labor of your son.
there is more difference between thy flesh and hers than between jet and ivory, more between your bloods than there is between red wine and rhenish. but tell us, do you hear whether antonio have had any loss at sea or no?
sir, i never loved you much, but i ha' praised ye when you have well deserved ten times as much
make up to clifton. i'll to sir nicholas gawsey.
there i have another bad match!, a bankrupt, a prodigal who dare scarce show his head on the rialto, a beggar that was used to come so smug upon the mart. let him look to his bond. he was wont to call me usurer; let him look to his bond. he was wont to lend money for a christian courtesy; let him look to his bond.
enjoy thy plainness. it nothing ill becomes thee., aboard my galley i invite you all. will you lead, lords?
if i mistake not, thou art harry monmouth.
why, i am sure, if he forfeit thou wilt not take his flesh. what's that good for?
show 's the way, sir.
thou speak'st as if i would deny my name.
to bait fish withal. if it will feed nothing else, it will feed my revenge. he hath disgraced me and hindered me half a million, laughed at my losses, mocked at my gains, scorned my nation, thwarted my bargains, cooled my friends, heated mine enemies, and what's his reason? i am a jew. hath not a jew eyes? hath not a jew hands, organs, dimensions, senses, affections, passions? fed with the same food, hurt with the same weapons, subject to the same diseases, healed by the same means, warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer as a christian is? if you prick us, do we not bleed? if you tickle us, do we not laugh? if you poison us, do we not die? and if you wrong us, shall we not revenge? if we are like you in the rest, we will resemble you in that. if a jew wrong a christian, what is his humility? revenge. if a christian wrong a jew, what should his sufferance be by christian example? why, revenge. the villainy you teach me i will execute, and it shall go hard but i will better the instruction.
come.
my name is harry percy.
(to solanio and salarino) gentlemen, my master antonio is at his house and desires to speak with you both.
(aside) thy father, pompey, would ne'er have made this
why, then i see a very valiant rebel of the name. i am the prince of wales; and think not, percy, to share with me in glory any more. two stars keep not their motion in one sphere, of harry percy and the prince of wales.
we have been up and down to seek him.
at sea, i think.
nor shall it, harry, for the hour is come to end the one of us, and would to god thy name in arms were now as great as mine.
here comes another of the tribe. a third cannot be matched unless the devil himself turn jew.
we have, sir.
and all the budding honors on thy crest i'll crop, to make a garland for my head.
how now, tubal? what news from genoa? hast thou found my daughter?
you have done well by water.
i can no longer brook thy vanities.
i often came where i did hear of her, but cannot find her.
and you by land.
well said, hal! to it hal! nay, you shall find no boys' play here, i can tell you.
why, there, there, there, there! a diamond gone cost me two thousand ducats in frankfurt, the curse never fell upon our nation till now! i never felt it till now, two thousand ducats in that, and other precious, precious jewels. i would my daughter were dead at my foot and the jewels in her ear! would she were hearsed at my foot and the ducats in her coffin! no news of them? why, so. and i know not what's spent in the search. why thou, loss upon loss! the thief gone with so much, and so much to find the thief, and no satisfaction, no revenge. nor no ill luck stirring but what lights o' my shoulders, no sighs but o' my breathing, no tears but o' my shedding.
i will praise any man that will praise me, though it cannot be denied what i have done by land.
o harry, thou hast robbed me of my youth. i better brook the loss of brittle life than those proud titles thou hast won of me. they wound my thoughts worse than thy sword my flesh. and time, that takes survey of all the world, must have a stop. o, i could prophesy, but that the earthy and cold hand of death lies on my tongue. no, percy, thou art dust,
yes, other men have ill luck too. antonio, as i heard in genoa, 
nor what i have done by water.
for worms, brave percy. fare thee well, great heart. ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk! when that this body did contain a spirit, a kingdom for it was too small a bound, is room enough. this earth that bears thee dead bears not alive so stout a gentleman. if thou wert sensible of courtesy, i should not make so dear a show of zeal. and even in thy behalf i'll thank myself for doing these fair rites of tenderness. adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven. thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,
what, what, what? ill luck, ill luck?
yes, something you can deny for your own safety: you have been a great thief by sea.
what, old acquaintance, could not all this flesh keep in a little life? poor jack, farewell. i could have better spared a better man. o, i should have a heavy miss of thee death hath not struck so fat a deer today, though many dearer in this bloody fray. emboweled will i see thee by and by; till then in blood by noble percy lie.
hath an argosy cast away coming from tripolis.
and you by land.
emboweled? if thou embowel me today, i'll give you leave to powder me and eat me too tomorrow. 'sblood, 'twas time
i thank god, i thank god! is 't true, is 't true?
there i deny my land service. but give me your hand, menas.
to counterfeit, or that hot termagant scot had paid me scot and lot too. counterfeit? i lie. i am no counterfeit. to die is to be a counterfeit, for he is but the counterfeit of a man who hath not the life of a man; but to counterfeit dying when a man thereby liveth is to be no counterfeit, but the true and perfect image of life indeed. the better part of valor is discretion, in the which better part i have saved my life. zounds, i am afraid of this gunpowder percy, though he be dead. how if he should counterfeit too and rise? by my faith, i am afraid he would prove the better counterfeit. therefore i'll make him sure, yea, and i'll swear i killed him. why may not he rise as well as i? nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me. therefore, sirrah, (stabs the body) with a new wound in your thigh, come you along with me. (he takes up hotspur on his back)
i spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wrack.
if our eyes had authority, here they might take two thieves kissing.
come, brother john. full bravely hast thou fleshed thy maiden sword.
i thank thee, good tubal. good news, good news! ha, ha, heard in genoa.
all men's faces are true, whatsome'er their hands are.
but soft, whom have we here? did you not tell me this fat man was dead?
your daughter spent in genoa, as i heard, in one night fourscore ducats.
but there is never a fair woman has a true face.
breathless and bleeding on the ground., art thou alive? or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight? i prithee, speak. we will not trust our eyes without our ears. thou art not what thou seem'st.
thou stickest a dagger in me. i shall never see my gold again. fourscore ducats at a sitting! fourscore ducats!
no slander. they steal hearts.
no, that's certain. i am not a double man. but if i be not jack falstaff, then am i a jack. there is percy. if your father will do me any honor,so; if not, let him kill the next percy himself. i look to be either earl or duke, i can assure you.
there came divers of antonio's creditors in my company to venice that swear he cannot choose but break.
we came hither to fight with you.
why, percy i killed myself, and saw thee dead.
i am very glad of it. i'll plague him. i'll torture him. i am glad of it.
for my part, i am sorry it is turned to a drinking. pompey doth this day laugh away his fortune.
didst thou? lord, lord, how this world is given to lying. i grant you, iwas down and out of breath, and so was he, but we rose both at an instant and fought a long hour by shrewsbury clock. if i may be believed, so; if not, let them that should reward valor bear the sin upon their own heads. i'll take it upon my death, i gave him this wound in the thigh. if the man were alive and would deny it, zounds, i would make him eat a piece of my sword.
one of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter for a monkey.
if he do, sure he cannot weep 't back again.
this is the strangest tale that ever i heard.
out upon her! thou torturest me, tubal. it was my turquoise. i had it of leah when i was a bachelor. i would not have given it for a wilderness of monkeys.
you've said, sir. we looked not for mark antony here. pray you, is he married to cleopatra?
this is the strangest fellow, brother john., for my part, if a lie may do thee grace, i'll gild it with the happiest terms i have.
but antonio is certainly undone.
caesar's sister is called octavia.
the trumpet sounds retreat; the day is ours. come, brother, let us to the highest of the field
nay, that's true, that's very true. go, tubal, fee me an officer. bespeak him a fortnight before., i will have the heart of him if he forfeit, for were he out of venice i can make what merchandise i will., go, go, tubal, and meet me at our synagogue. go, good tubal. at our synagogue, tubal.
true, sir. she was the wife of caius marcellus.
i'll follow, as they say, for reward. he that rewards me, god reward him. if i do grow great, i'll grow less, for i'll purge and leave sack and live cleanly as a nobleman should do.
(to bassanio) i pray you, tarry. pause a day or two before you hazard, for in choosing wrong i lose your company. therefore forbear awhile. there's something tells me, but it is not love, hate counsels not in such a quality. but lest you should not understand me well, and yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought, i would detain you here some month or two how to choose right, but i am then forsworn. so will i never be. so may you miss me. but if you do, you'll make me wish a sin, that i had been forsworn. beshrew your eyes, one half of me is yours, the other half yours, mine own, i would say. but if mine, then yours, and so all yours. oh, these naughty times put bars between the owners and their rights! let fortune go to hell for it, not i. i speak too long, but 'tis to peize the time, to eke it and to draw it out in length, to stay you from election.
but she is now the wife of marcus antonius.
thus ever did rebellion find rebuke., ill-spirited worcester, did not we send grace, pardon, and terms of love to all of you? and wouldst thou turn our offers contrary, three knights upon our party slain today, a noble earl, and many a creature else had been alive this hour, if like a christian thou hadst truly borne
let me choose,
pray ye, sir?
what i have done my safety urged me to. and i embrace this fortune patiently, since not to be avoided it falls on me.
upon the rack, bassanio? then confess what treason there is mingled with your love.
'tis true.
bear worcester to the death, and vernon too.
none but that ugly treason of mistrust which makes me fear th' enjoying of my love. 'tween snow and fire, as treason and my love.
then is caesar and he forever knit together.
how goes the field?
ay, but i fear you speak upon the rack where men enforcèd do speak anything.
if i were bound to divine of this unity, i would not prophesy so.
the noble scot, lord douglas, when he saw the fortune of the day quite turned from him, the noble percy slain, and all his men and, falling from a hill, he was so bruised that the pursuers took him. at my tent the douglas is, and i beseech your grace i may dispose of him.
promise me life, and i'll confess the truth.
i think the policy of that purpose made more in the marriage than the love of the parties.
with all my heart.
well then, confess and live.
i think so too. but you shall find the band that seems to tie their friendship together will be the very strangler of their amity. octavia is of a holy, cold, and still conversation.
this honorable bounty shall belong. go to the douglas, and deliver him up to his pleasure, ransomless and free. his valor shown upon our crests today even in the bosom of our adversaries.
"confess and love" had been the very sum of my confession. o happy torment, when my torturer doth teach me answers for deliverance! but let me to my fortune and the caskets.
who would not have his wife so?
i thank your grace for this high courtesy, which i shall give away immediately.
if you do love me you will find me out., nerissa and the rest, stand all aloof. let music sound while he doth make his choice. then if he lose he makes a swanlike end, may stand more proper, my eye shall be the stream and watery deathbed for him. he may win, and what is music then? then music is even as the flourish when true subjects bow as are those dulcet sounds in break of day that creep into the dreaming bridegroom's ear and summon him to marriage.
not he that himself is not so, which is mark antony. he will to his egyptian dish again. then shall the sighs of octavia blow the fire up in caesar, and, as i said before, that which is the strength of their amity shall prove the immediate author of their variance. antony will use his affection where it is. he married but his occasion here.
then this remains, that we divide our power. towards york shall bend you with your dearest speed to meet northumberland and the prelate scroop, who, as we hear, are busily in arms. myself and you, son harry, will towards wales rebellion in this land shall lose his sway, meeting the check of such another day. and since this business so fair is done, let us not leave till all our own be won.
now he goes with no less presence but with much more love the virgin tribute paid by howling troy to the sea monster. i stand for sacrifice. the rest aloof are the dardanian wives, with blearèd visages come forth to view live thou, i live. with much, much more dismay i view the fight than thou that makest the fray.
and thus it may be. come, sir, will you aboard? i have a health for you.
(sings) tell me where is fancy bred. how begot, how nourishèd?
i shall take it, sir. we have used our throats in egypt.
cease to persuade, my loving proteus; home-keeping youth have ever homely wits. were 't not affection chains thy tender days to the sweet glances of thy honored love, to see the wonders of the world abroad than, living dully sluggardized at home, wear out thy youth with shapeless idleness. but since thou lov'st, love still and thrive therein,
reply, reply.
come, let's away.
wilt thou be gone? sweet valentine, adieu! think on thy proteus when thou haply seest some rare noteworthy object in thy travel. wish me partaker in thy happiness if ever danger do environ thee, commend thy grievance to my holy prayers, for i will be thy beadsman, valentine.
(sings) it is engendered in the eyes, in the cradle where it lies. let us all ring fancy's knell i'll begin it., ding, dong, bell.
here they'll be, man. some o' their plants are ill-rooted already. the least wind i' th' world will blow them down.
and on a love book pray for my success?
ding, dong, bell.
lepidus is high-colored.
upon some book i love i'll pray for thee.
the world is still deceived with ornament. in law, what plea so tainted and corrupt but, being seasoned with a gracious voice, obscures the show of evil? in religion, will bless it and approve it with a text, hiding the grossness with fair ornament? there is no vice so simple but assumes some mark of virtue on his outward parts. as stairs of sand wear yet upon their chins the beards of hercules and frowning mars, who, inward searched, have livers white as milk, and these assume but valor's excrement and you shall see 'tis purchased by the weight, which therein works a miracle in nature, making them lightest that wear most of it. so are those crispèd snaky golden locks upon supposèd fairness, often known to be the dowry of a second head, the skull that bred them in the sepulcher. thus ornament is but the guilèd shore veiling an indian beauty, in a word, the seeming truth which cunning times put on to entrap the wisest. therefore then, thou gaudy gold, hard food for midas, i will none of thee. 'tween man and man. but thou, thou meagre lead, which rather threaten'st than dost promise aught, thy paleness moves me more than eloquence, and here choose i. joy be the consequence!
they have made him drink alms-drink.
that's on some shallow story of deep love, how young leander crossed the hellespont.
as doubtful thoughts, and rash-embraced despair, and shuddering fear, and green-eyed jealousy! o love, be moderate. allay thy ecstasy. in measure rein thy joy. scant this excess. for fear i surfeit.
as they pinch one another by the disposition, he cries out, "no more," reconciles them to his entreaty and himself to th' drink.
that's a deep story of a deeper love, for he was more than over shoes in love.
(opening the lead casket) what find i here? fair portia's counterfeit! what demigod hath come so near creation? move these eyes? seem they in motion? here are severed lips, parted with sugar breath. so sweet a bar should sunder such sweet friends. here in her hairs, the painter plays the spider and hath woven faster than gnats in cobwebs. but her eyes, how could he see to do them? having made one, methinks it should have power to steal both his and leave itself unfurnished. yet look how far in underprizing it, so far this shadow doth limp behind the substance. here's the scroll, the continent and summary of my fortune. (reads) chance as fair and choose as true. since this fortune falls to you, be content and seek no new. if you be well pleased with this turn you where your lady is and claim her with a loving kiss."
but it raises the greater war between him and his discretion.
and yet you never swam the hellespont.
a gentle scroll. fair lady, by your leave, i come by note to give and to receive. that thinks he hath done well in people's eyes, hearing applause and universal shout, giddy in spirit, still gazing in a doubt whether these pearls of praise be his or no, as doubtful whether what i see be true until confirmed, signed, ratified by you.
why, this it is to have a name in great men's fellowship. i had as lief have a reed that will do me no service as a partisan i could not heave.
over the boots? nay, give me not the boots.
you see me, lord bassanio, where i stand such as i am. though for myself alone to wish myself much better, yet for you i would be trebled twenty times myself, a thousand times more fair, ten thousand times more rich, that only to stand high in your account exceed account. but the full sum of me is sum of something which, to term in gross, is an unlessoned girl, unschooled, unpracticèd; happy in this, she is not yet so old she is not bred so dull but she can learn. happiest of all is that her gentle spirit commits itself to yours to be directed as from her lord, her governor, her king. is now converted. but now i was the lord of this fair mansion, master of my servants, queen o'er myself. and even now, but now, this house, these servants, and this same myself which when you part from, lose, or give away, let it presage the ruin of your love
to be called into a huge sphere, and not to be seen to move in 't, are the holes where eyes should be, which pitifully disaster the cheeks.
no, i will not, for it boots thee not.
and be my vantage to exclaim on you. (gives bassanio a ring)
thus do they, sir: they take the flow o' th' nile by certain scales i' th' pyramid. they know by th' height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth the more it promises. as it ebbs, the seedsman upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain, and shortly comes to harvest.
what?
only my blood speaks to you in my veins. and there is such confusion in my powers as after some oration fairly spoke by a belovèd prince there doth appear where every something, being blent together, turns to a wild of nothing, save of joy, expressed and not expressed. but when this ring parts from this finger, then parts life from hence.
you've strange serpents there?
coy looks with heartsore sighs, one fading moment's mirth with twenty watchful, weary, tedious nights. if haply won, perhaps a hapless gain; if lost, why then a grievous labour won; or else a wit by folly vanquishèd.
my lord and lady, it is now our time, that have stood by and seen our wishes prosper, to cry, "good joy, good joy, my lord and lady!"
ay, lepidus.
so, by your circumstance, you call me fool.
my lord bassanio and my gentle lady, for i am sure you can wish none from me. and when your honors mean to solemnize the bargain of your faith, i do beseech you even at that time i may be married too.
your serpent of egypt is bred now of your mud by the operation of your sun. so is your crocodile.
so, by your circumstance, i fear you'll prove.
with all my heart, so thou canst get a wife.
they are so.
'tis love you cavil at. i am not love.
i thank your lordship, you have got me one. my eyes, my lord, can look as swift as yours. you saw the mistress, i beheld the maid. you loved, i loved. for intermission your fortune stood upon the casket there, and so did mine too, as the matter falls. for wooing here until i sweat again, and swearing till my very roof was dry i got a promise of this fair one here to have her love, provided that your fortune achieved her mistress.
(to lepidus ) sit, and some wine. a health to lepidus!
and he that is so yokèd by a fool methinks, should not be chronicled for wise.
is this true, nerissa?
i am not so well as i should be, but i'll ne'er out.
yet writers say, as in the sweetest bud the eating canker dwells, so eating love
madam, it is, so you stand pleased withal.
not till you have slept. i fear me you'll be in till then.
and writers say, as the most forward bud is eaten by the canker ere it blow, even so by love the young and tender wit is turned to folly, blasting in the bud, and all the fair effects of future hopes. but wherefore waste i time to counsel thee that art a votary to fond desire? once more adieu! my father at the road
and do you, gratiano, mean good faith?
nay, certainly, i have heard the ptolemies' pyramises are very goodly things. without contradiction i have heard that.
and thither will i bring thee, valentine.
yes, faith, my lord.
(aside to pompey ) pompey, a word.
sweet proteus, no. now let us take our leave. to milan let me hear from thee by letters of thy success in love, and what news else and i likewise will visit thee with mine.
our feast shall be much honored in your marriage.
(aside to menas ) say in mine ear. what is 't?
all happiness bechance to thee in milan!
(to nerissa) we'll play with them the first boy for a thousand ducats.
(aside to pompey ) forsake thy seat, i do beseech thee, captain, and hear me speak a word.
as much to you at home! and so, farewell!
what, and stake down?
(aside to menas ) forbear me till anon., this wine for lepidus!
he after honor hunts, i after love. i leave myself, my friends, and all, for love. thou, julia, thou hast metamorphosed me, made me neglect my studies, lose my time, war with good counsel, set the world at naught;
no, we shall ne'er win at that sport and stake down. but who comes here? lorenzo and his infidel? what, and my old venetian friend salerio?
what manner o' thing is your crocodile?
sir proteus, save you! saw you my master?
lorenzo and salerio, welcome hither, have power to bid you welcome. (to portia) by your leave, i bid my very friends and countrymen, sweet portia, welcome.
it is shaped, sir, like itself, and it is as broad as it hath breadth. it is just so high as it is, and moves with its own organs. it lives by that which nourisheth it, and, the elements once out of it, it transmigrates.
but now he parted hence, to embark for milan.
so do i, my lord.
what color is it of?
twenty to one, then, he is shipped already, and i have played the sheep in losing him.
(to bassanio) i thank your honor. for my part, my lord, my purpose was not to have seen you here. but meeting with salerio by the way, he did entreat me, past all saying nay,
of it own color too.
an if the shepherd be a while away.
i did, my lord. and i have reason for it. signor antonio commends him to you. (gives bassanio letter)
'tis a strange serpent.
you conclude that my master is a shepherd, then, and i a sheep?
ere i ope his letter, i pray you tell me how my good friend doth.
'tis so. and the tears of it are wet.
i do.
nor well, unless in mind. his letter there will show you his estate.
(aside to antony ) will this description satisfy him?
why then, my horns are his horns, whether i wake or sleep.
(indicating jessica) nerissa, cheer yond stranger. bid her welcome., how doth that royal merchant, good antonio? i know he will be glad of our success. we are the jasons, we have won the fleece.
(aside to caesar ) with the health that pompey gives him, else he is a very epicure.
a silly answer, and fitting well a sheep.
i would you had won the fleece that he hath lost.
(aside to menas ) go hang, sir, hang! tell me of that? away! do as i bid you., where's this cup i called for?
this proves me still a sheep.
that steals the color from bassanio's cheek. some dear friend dead, else nothing in the world could turn so much the constitution of any constant man. what, worse and worse?, and i must freely have the half of anything that this same paper brings you.
(aside to pompey ) if for the sake of merit thou wilt hear me, rise from thy stool.
true; and thy master a shepherd.
o sweet portia, here are a few of the unpleasant'st words that ever blotted paper. gentle lady, i freely told you, all the wealth i had ran in my veins. i was a gentleman, and then i told you true. and yet, dear lady, rating myself at nothing, you shall see my state was nothing, i should then have told you that i was worse than nothing, for indeed i have engaged myself to a dear friend, engaged my friend to his mere enemy here is a letter, lady, the paper as the body of my friend, and every word in it a gaping wound, issuing life blood., but is it true, salerio? have all his ventures failed? what, not one hit? from lisbon, barbary, and india? and not one vessel 'scape the dreadful touch of merchant-marring rocks?
(aside to menas ) i think th' art mad.
nay, that i can deny by a circumstance.
not one, my lord. besides, it should appear that if he had he would not take it. never did i know a creature that did bear the shape of man so keen and greedy to confound a man. he plies the duke at morning and at night, if they deny him justice. twenty merchants, the duke himself, and the magnificoes of greatest port have all persuaded with him. but none can drive him from the envious plea
the matter?
it shall go hard but i'll prove it by another.
when i was with him i have heard him swear to tubal and to chus, his countrymen, that he would rather have antonio's flesh than twenty times the value of the sum if law, authority, and power deny not, it will go hard with poor antonio.
i have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.
the shepherd seeks the sheep, and not the sheep the shepherd; but i seek my master, and my master seeks not me. therefore i am no sheep.
is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble?
thou hast served me with much faith. what's else to say?, (to the others) be jolly, lords.
the sheep for fodder follow the shepherd; the shepherd for food follows not the sheep. thou for wages followest thy master; thy master for wages follows not thee. therefore thou art a sheep.
the dearest friend to me, the kindest man, in doing courtesies, and one in whom the ancient roman honor more appears than any that draws breath in italy.
these quicksands, lepidus, keep off them, for you sink.
such another proof will make me cry "baa."
what sum owes he the jew?
(aside to pompey ) wilt thou be lord of all the world?
but dost thou hear? gav'st thou my letter to julia?
for me, three thousand ducats.
what sayst thou?
ay, sir. i, a lost mutton, gave your letter to her, a laced mutton, and she, a laced mutton, gave me, a lost mutton, nothing for my labor.
what, no more? pay him six thousand and deface the bond! double six thousand, and then treble that, before a friend of this description shall lose a hair through bassanio's fault. and then away to venice to your friend. for never shall you lie by portia's side with an unquiet soul. you shall have gold to pay the petty debt twenty times over. my maid nerissa and myself meantime will live as maids and widows. come, away! for you shall hence upon your wedding day. bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer. but let me hear the letter of your friend.
wilt thou be lord of the whole world? that's twice.
here's too small a pasture for such store of muttons.
(reads) "sweet bassanio, my ships have all miscarried. my creditors grow cruel. my estate is very low. my bond to the jew is forfeit. and since in paying it, it is impossible i should live, all debts are cleared between you and i if i might but see you at my death. notwithstanding, use your pleasure. if your love do not persuade you to come, let not my letter."
how should that be?
if the ground be overcharged, you were best stick her.
o love, dispatch all business and be gone!
but entertain it, and, though thou think me poor, i am the man will give thee all the world.
nay, in that you are astray: 'twere best pound you.
since i have your good leave to go away, i will make haste. but till i come again, no bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay,
hast thou drunk well?
nay, sir, less than a pound shall serve me for carrying your letter.
jailer, look to him. tell not me of mercy. this is the fool that lent out money gratis. jailer, look to him.
thou art, if thou dar'st be, the earthly jove. whate'er the ocean pales or sky inclips is thine, if thou wilt ha 't.
you mistake. i mean the pound, a pinfold.
hear me yet, good shylock.
show me which way.
'tis threefold too little for carrying a letter to your lover.
i'll have my bond. speak not against my bond. thou calledst me dog before thou hadst a cause. but since i am a dog, beware my fangs. the duke shall grant me justice., i do wonder, thou naughty jailer, that thou art so fond
these three world-sharers, these competitors, and, when we are put off, fall to their throats. all there is thine.
but what said she?
i pray thee, hear me speak.
ah, this thou shouldst have done and not have spoke on 't! in me 'tis villainy, in thee 't had been good service. thou must know, mine honor, it. repent that e'er thy tongue hath so betrayed thine act. being done unknown, i should have found it afterwards well done, but must condemn it now. desist, and drink.
[nodding] ay.
i'll have my bond. i will not hear thee speak. i'll have my bond, and therefore speak no more. i'll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool to christian intercessors. follow not. i'll have no speaking. i will have my bond.
i'll never follow thy palled fortunes more. who seeks and will not take when once 'tis offered shall never find it more.
nod-ay, why, that's "noddy."
it is the most impenetrable cur that ever kept with men.
this health to lepidus!
you mistook, sir. i say she did nod, and you ask me if she did nod, and i say, "ay."
let him alone. he seeks my life. his reason well i know. i oft delivered from his forfeitures many that have at times made moan to me. therefore he hates me.
(to a servant) bear him ashore., i'll pledge it for him, pompey.
and that set together is "noddy."
i am sure the duke
here's to thee, menas!
now you have taken the pains to set it together, take it for your pains.
the duke cannot deny the course of law. for the commodity that strangers have with us in venice, if it be denied, will much impeach the justice of his state, consisteth of all nations. therefore go. these griefs and losses have so bated me, that i shall hardly spare a pound of flesh tomorrow to my bloody creditor., to see me pay his debt, and then i care not.
enobarbus, welcome.
no, no, you shall have it for bearing the letter.
madam, although i speak it in your presence, you have a noble and a true conceit of godlike amity, which appears most strongly in bearing thus the absence of your lord. how true a gentleman you send relief, how dear a lover of my lord your husband, i know you would be prouder of the work than customary bounty can enforce you.
fill till the cup be hid.
well, i perceive i must be fain to bear with you.
nor shall not now; for in companions that do converse and waste the time together whose souls do bear an equal yoke of love, there must be needs a like proportion which makes me think that this antonio, being the bosom lover of my lord, must needs be like my lord. if it be so, how little is the cost i have bestowed from out the state of hellish cruelty! this comes too near the praising of myself. therefore no more of it. hear other things. lorenzo, i commit into your hands until my lord's return.
there's a strong fellow, menas.
why, sir, how do you bear with me?
for mine own part, i have toward heaven breathed a secret vow to live in prayer and contemplation, only attended by nerissa here there is a monastery two miles off, and there will we abide. i do desire you not to deny this imposition, the which my love and some necessity
why?
marry, sir, the letter, very orderly, having nothing but the word "noddy" for my pains.
madam, with all my heart. i shall obey you in all fair commands.
he bears the third part of the world, man. seest not?
beshrew me, but you have a quick wit.
my people do already know my mind and will acknowledge you and jessica in place of lord bassanio and myself.
the third part, then, is drunk. would it were all,
and yet it cannot overtake your slow purse.
fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you!
drink thou. increase the reels.
come, come, open the matter in brief. what said she?
i wish your ladyship all heart's content.
come.
open your purse, that the money and the matter may be both at once delivered.
i thank you for your wish, and am well pleased to wish it back on you. fare you well, jessica.
this is not yet an alexandrian feast.
[giving him money] well, sir, here is for your pains. what said she?
as i have ever found thee honest true, so let me find thee still. (gives balthazar a letter) take this same letter, and use thou all th' endeavour of a man into my cousin's hands, doctor bellario.
it ripens towards it. strike the vessels, ho!
truly, sir, i think you'll hardly win her.
and look what notes and garments he doth give thee, bring them, i pray thee, with imagined speed unto the traject, to the common ferry but get thee gone. i shall be there before thee.
i could well forbear 't. it's monstrous labor when i wash my brain and it grows fouler.
why, couldst thou perceive so much from her?
madam, i go with all convenient speed.
be a child o' th' time.
sir, i could perceive nothing at all from her, no, not so much as a ducat for delivering your letter. and being so hard to me that brought your mind, i fear she'll prove as hard to you in telling your mind. give her no token but stones, for she's as hard as steel.
come on, nerissa, i have work in hand that you yet know not of. we'll see our husbands
possess it, i'll make answer. but i had rather fast from all four days
what said she? nothing?
shall they see us?
(to antony ) ha! my brave emperor, shall we dance now the egyptian bacchanals and celebrate our drink?
no, not so much as "take this for thy pains." to testify your bounty, i thank you, you have testerned me; in requital whereof, henceforth carry your letters yourself. and so, sir, i'll commend you to my master.
they shall, nerissa, but in such a habit that they shall think we are accomplishèd with that we lack. i'll hold thee any wager, when we are both accoutred like young men, and wear my dagger with the braver grace, and speak between the change of man and boy with a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps into a manly stride, and speak of frays how honorable ladies sought my love, which i denying, they fell sick and died, i could not do withal!, then i'll repent and wish for all that, that i had not killed them. that men shall swear i have discontinued school above a twelvemonth. i have within my mind a thousand raw tricks of these bragging jacks which i will practice.
let's ha 't, good soldier.
go, go, begone, to save your ship from wreck, which cannot perish having thee aboard, being destined to a drier death on shore.
why, shall we turn to men?
come, let's all take hands in soft and delicate lethe.
i fear my julia would not deign my lines, receiving them from such a worthless post.
fie, what a question's that if thou wert near a lewd interpreter! but come, i'll tell thee all my whole device when i am in my coach, which stays for us for we must measure twenty miles today.
all take hands. make battery to our ears with the loud music, the while i'll place you; then the boy shall sing. the holding every man shall beat as loud
but say, lucetta, now we are alone, wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love?
yes, truly, for look you, the sins of the father are to be laid upon the children. therefore i promise ye i fear you. i was always plain with you, and so now i speak my agitation of the matter. therefore be o' good cheer, for truly i think you are damned. there is but one hope in it that can do you any good, and that is but a kind of bastard hope neither.
(sings) come, thou monarch of the vine, plumpy bacchus with pink eyne! in thy vats our cares be drowned, with thy grapes our hairs be crowned.
ay, madam, so you stumble not unheedfully.
and what hope is that, i pray thee?
(singing) cup us till the world go round, cup us till the world go round!
of all the fair resort of gentlemen in thy opinion which is worthiest love?
marry, you may partly hope that your father got you not, that you are not the jew's daughter.
what would you more?, pompey, good night. (to antony ) good brother, let me request you off. our graver business you see we have burnt our cheeks. strong enobarb is weaker than the wine; and mine own tongue splits what it speaks. the wild disguise hath almost anticked us all. what needs more words? good night.
please you repeat their names, i'll show my mind according to my shallow simple skill.
that were a kind of bastard hope indeed. so the sins of my mother should be visited upon me.
i'll try you on the shore.
what think'st thou of the fair sir eglamour?
truly then i fear you are damned both by father and mother. thus when i shun scylla your father, i fall into charybdis your mother. well, you are gone both ways.
and shall, sir. give 's your hand.
but, were i you, he never should be mine.
i shall be saved by my husband. he hath made me a christian.
o antony, you have my father's house. but what? we are friends. come, down into the boat.
what think'st thou of the rich mercatio?
truly, the more to blame he. we were christians eno' before, e'en as many as could well live one by another. this making christians will raise the price of hogs. if we grow all to be pork-eaters, we shall not shortly have a rasher on the coals for money.
take heed you fall not.
well of his wealth, but of himself, so-so.
i'll tell my husband, launcelot, what you say. here he comes.
menas, i'll not on shore.
what think'st thou of the gentle proteus?
i shall grow jealous of you shortly, launcelot, if you thus get my wife into corners.
no, to my cabin. these drums, these trumpets, flutes! what! let neptune hear we bid a loud farewell to these great fellows. sound and be hanged, sound out!
lord, lord, to see what folly reigns in us!
nay, you need not fear us, lorenzo. launcelot and i are out. he tells me flatly there is no mercy for me in heaven because i am a jew's daughter, and he says you are no good member of the commonwealth, for in converting jews to christians you raise the price of pork.
hoo! says 'a. there's my cap.
how now? what means this passion at his name?
i shall answer that better to the commonwealth than you can the getting up of the negro's belly. the moor is with child by you, launcelot.
hoo! noble captain, come.
pardon, dear madam, 'tis a passing shame that i, unworthy body as i am, should censure thus on lovely gentlemen.
it is much that the moor should be more than reason. but if she be less than an honest woman, she is indeed more than i took her for.
now, darting parthia, art thou struck, and now pleased fortune does of marcus crassus' death make me revenger. bear the king's son's body before our army. thy pacorus, orodes,
why not on proteus, as of all the rest?
how every fool can play upon the word! i think the best grace of wit will shortly turn into silence, and discourse grow commendable in none only but parrots. go in, sirrah. bid them prepare for dinner.
noble ventidius, whilst yet with parthian blood thy sword is warm, the fugitive parthians follow. spur through media, mesopotamia, and the shelters whither the routed fly. so thy grand captain, antony, put garlands on thy head.
then thus, of many good i think him best.
that is done, sir. they have all stomachs.
o silius, silius, i have done enough. a lower place, note well, may make too great an act. for learn this, silius: better to leave undone than by our deed caesar and antony have ever won more in their officer than person. sossius, one of my place in syria, his lieutenant, for quick accumulation of renown, who does i' th' wars more than his captain can becomes his captain's captain; and ambition, the soldier's virtue, rather makes choice of loss than gain which darkens him. but 'twould offend him, and in his offense should my performance perish.
your reason?
goodly lord, what a wit-snapper are you! then bid them prepare dinner.
thou hast, ventidius, that without the which a soldier and his sword
i have no other but a woman's reason; i think him so because i think him so.
that is done too, sir. only "cover!" is the word.
i'll humbly signify what in his name, that magical word of war, we have effected: how with his banners and his well-paid ranks the ne'er-yet-beaten horse of parthia
and wouldst thou have me cast my love on him?
will you cover then, sir?
where is he now?
ay, if you thought your love not cast away.
not so, sir, neither. i know my duty.
he purposeth to athens, whither, with what haste the weight we must convey with's will permit, we shall appear before him. (to the soliders) on, there. pass along!
why, he of all the rest hath never moved me.
yet more quarreling with occasion! wilt thou show the whole wealth of thy wit in an instant? i pray thee, understand a plain man in his plain meaning. go to thy fellows, bid them cover the table, serve in the meat, and we will come in to dinner.
what, are the brothers parted?
yet he of all the rest i think best loves ye.
for the table, sir, it shall be served in. for the meat, sir, it shall be covered. for your coming in to dinner, sir, why, let it be as humours and conceits shall govern.
they have dispatched with pompey; he is gone. the other three are sealing. octavia weeps to part from rome. caesar is sad, and lepidus, with the greensickness.
his little speaking shows his love but small.
o dear discretion, how his words are suited! an army of good words, and i do know a many fools that stand in better place, garnished like him, that for a tricksy word defy the matter. how cheerest thou, jessica? how dost thou like the lord bassanio's wife?
'tis a noble lepidus.
fire that's closest kept burns most of all.
past all expressing. it is very meet the lord bassanio live an upright life, for having such a blessing in his lady, and if on earth he do not merit it, in reason he should never come to heaven. why, if two gods should play some heavenly match and on the wager lay two earthly women, pawned with the other, for the poor rude world hath not her fellow.
a very fine one. oh, how he loves caesar!
they do not love that do not show their love.
even such a husband hast thou of me as she is for a wife.
nay, but how dearly he adores mark antony!
o, they love least that let men know their love.
nay, but ask my opinion too of that!
caesar? why, he's the jupiter of men.
i would i knew his mind.
i will anon. first let us go to dinner.
what's antony? the god of jupiter.
[giving a letter] peruse this paper, madam.
nay, let me praise you while i have a stomach.
spake you of caesar? how, the nonpareil!
"to julia." say, from whom?
no, pray thee, let it serve for table talk. then howsome'er thou speak'st 'mong other things i shall digest it.
o antony, o thou arabian bird!
that the contents will show.
well, i'll set you forth.
would you praise caesar, say "caesar." go no further.
say, say, who gave it thee?
what, is antonio here?
indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.
sir valentine's page; and sent, i think, from proteus. he would have given it you, but i, being in the way,
ready, so please your grace.
hoo! hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards, poets, cannot think, speak, cast, write, sing, number, hoo!, his love to antony. but as for caesar, kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.
now, by my modesty, a goodly broker! dare you presume to harbor wanton lines? to whisper and conspire against my youth? now trust me, 'tis an office of great worth, there, take the paper. see it be returned, or else return no more into my sight. [giving the letter back]
i am sorry for thee. thou art come to answer a stony adversary, an inhuman wretch from any dram of mercy.
both he loves.
to plead for love deserves more fee than hate.
i have heard your grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify his rigorous course. but since he stands obdurate and that no lawful means can carry me my patience to his fury, and am armed to suffer with a quietness of spirit the very tyranny and rage of his.
they are his shards, and he their beetle shard-beetles make their home in dung heaps. their beetle .
will ye be gone?
go, one, and call the jew into the court.
so, this is to horse. adieu, noble agrippa.
that you may ruminate.
he is ready at the door. he comes, my lord.
good fortune, worthy soldier, and farewell.
and yet i would i had o'erlooked the letter. it were a shame to call her back again and pray her to a fault for which i chid her. what fool is she, that knows i am a maid since maids, in modesty, say no to that which they would have the profferer construe ay. fie, fie, how wayward is this foolish love that, like a testy babe, will scratch the nurse how churlishly i chid lucetta hence, when willingly i would have had her here! how angerly i taught my brow to frown, when inward joy enforced my heart to smile! and ask remission for my folly past. what ho! lucetta!
make room, and let him stand before our face., shylock, the world thinks, and i think so too, that thou but lead'st this fashion of thy malice to the last hour of act, and then 'tis thought than is thy strange apparent cruelty, and where thou now exacts the penalty, which is a pound of this poor merchant's flesh, thou wilt not only loose the forfeiture forgive a moiety of the principal, glancing an eye of pity on his losses that have of late so huddled on his back eno' to press a royal merchant down from brassy bosoms and rough hearts of flint, from stubborn turks and tartars never trained to offices of tender courtesy. we all expect a gentle answer, jew.
no further, sir.
what would your ladyship?
and by our holy sabbath have i sworn to have the due and forfeit of my bond. if you deny it, let the danger light upon your charter and your city's freedom. a weight of carrion flesh than to receive three thousand ducats. i'll not answer that but say it is my humour. is it answered? what if my house be troubled with a rat to have it baned? what, are you answered yet?
you take from me a great part of myself; as my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest bond shall pass on thy approof., most noble antony, let not the piece of virtue, which is set betwixt us as the cement of our love, the fortress of it. for better might we have loved without this mean, if on both parts this be not cherished.
is 't near dinner time?
some men there are love not a gaping pig, some that are mad if they behold a cat, and others, when the bagpipe sings i' th' nose, mistress of passion, sways it to the mood of what it likes or loathes. now, for your answer: as there is no firm reason to be rendered why he cannot abide a gaping pig; why he, a woollen bagpipe, but of force must yield to such inevitable shame as to offend, himself being offended, so can i give no reason, nor i will not i bear antonio), that i follow thus a losing suit against him. are you answered?
make me not offended in your distrust.
that you might kill your stomach on your meat and not upon your maid.
this is no answer, thou unfeeling man, to excuse the current of thy cruelty.
i have said.
what is 't that you took up so gingerly?
i am not bound to please thee with my answers.
you shall not find, for what you seem to fear. so the gods keep you and make the hearts of romans serve your ends. we will here part.
nothing.
do all men kill the things they do not love?
farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well. thy spirits all of comfort! fare thee well.
why didst thou stoop, then?
hates any man the thing he would not kill?
my noble brother!
to take a paper up that i let fall.
every offense is not a hate at first.
the april's in her eyes; it is love's spring, and these the showers to bring it on. (to octavia ) be cheerful.
and is that paper nothing?
what, wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice?
(to caesar ) sir, look well to my husband's house, and, 
nothing concerning me.
i pray you, think you question with the jew? you may as well go stand upon the beach and bid the main flood bate his usual height. you may as well use question with the wolf
what, octavia?
then let it lie for those that it concerns.
you may as well forbid the mountain pines to wag their high tops and to make no noise when they are fretten with the gusts of heaven. you may as well do anything most hard, his jewish heart. therefore i do beseech you make no more offers, use no farther means, but with all brief and plain conveniency let me have judgment and the jew his will.
i'll tell you in your ear.
unless it have a false interpreter.
(to shylock) for thy three thousand ducats here is six.
her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can her heart inform her tongue, the swan's-down feather that stands upon the swell at the full of tide
some love of yours hath writ to you in rhyme.
if every ducat in six thousand ducats were in six parts, and every part a ducat, i would not draw them. i would have my bond.
(aside to agrippa ) will caesar weep?
that i might sing it, madam, to a tune, give me a note; your ladyship can set.
how shalt thou hope for mercy, rendering none?
(aside to enobarbus ) he has a cloud in 's face.
best sing it to the tune of "light o' love."
you have among you many a purchased slave, which, like your asses and your dogs and mules, you use in abject and in slavish parts because you bought them. shall i say to you, why sweat they under burdens? let their beds be made as soft as yours and let their palates be seasoned with such viands"? you will answer, "the slaves are ours." so do i answer you. is dearly bought. 'tis mine and i will have it. if you deny me, fie upon your law, there is no force in the decrees of venice. i stand for judgment. answer, shall i have it?
(aside to agrippa ) he were the worse for that, were he a horse; so is he, being a man.
it is too heavy for so light a tune.
unless bellario, a learnèd doctor, whom i have sent for to determine this, come here today.
(aside to enobarbus ) why, enobarbus, he cried almost to roaring, and he wept when at philippi he found brutus slain.
heavy! belike it hath some burden then?
my lord, here stays without a messenger with letters from the doctor,
(aside to agrippa ) that year indeed he was troubled with a rheum. what willingly he did confound he wailed,
ay, and melodious were it, would you sing it.
bring us the letter. call the messenger.
(coming forward with octavia ) no, sweet octavia, you shall hear from me still. the time shall not outgo my thinking on you.
and why not you?
good cheer, antonio! what, man, courage yet! the jew shall have my flesh, blood, bones and all, ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood.
come, sir, come, i'll wrestle with you in my strength of love. look, here i have you.
i cannot reach so high.
meetest for death. the weakest kind of fruit drops earliest to the ground, and so let me. you cannot better be employed, bassanio, than to live still and write mine epitaph.
thus i let you go
let's see your song. how now, minion?
came you from padua, from bellario?
adieu. be happy.
keep tune there still; so you will sing it out. and yet methinks i do not like this tune.
from both, my lord. bellario greets your grace. (gives duke a letter)
(to antony ) let all the number of the stars give light to thy fair way.
you do not?
(to shylock) why dost thou whet thy knife so earnestly?
farewell, farewell.
no, madam, 'tis too sharp.
to cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there.
farewell.
you, minion, are too saucy.
thou makest thy knife keen. but no metal can, no, not the hangman's axe, bear half the keenness of thy sharp envy. can no prayers pierce thee?
where is the fellow?
nay, now you are too flat, and mar the concord with too harsh a descant.
no, none that thou hast wit enough to make.
half afeard to come.
the mean is drowned with your unruly bass.
and for thy life let justice be accused! thou almost makest me waver in my faith to hold opinion with pythagoras that souls of animals infuse themselves governed a wolf who, hanged for human slaughter, even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet, and whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam infused itself in thee, for thy desires
go to, go to., come hither, sir.
indeed, i bid the base for proteus.
till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond, thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud. repair thy wit, good youth, or it will fall to cureless ruin. i stand here for law.
good majesty, herod of jewry dare not look upon you but when you are well pleased.
this babble shall not henceforth trouble me. here is a coil with protestation!
a young and learnèd doctor to our court. where is he?
that herod's head through whom i might command it? (to messenger ) come thou near.
you would be fing'ring them to anger me.
he attendeth here hard by to know your answer whether you'll admit him.
most gracious majesty!
she makes it strange, but she would be best pleased to be so angered with another letter.
with all my heart., some three or four of you meantime the court shall hear bellario's letter. (reads) "your grace shall understand that at the receipt of your letter i am very sick, but in the instant that your messenger came, in loving visitation was with me a young doctor of rome. his name is balthazar. i acquainted him with the cause in controversy between the jew and antonio the merchant. we turned o'er many books together. he is furnished with my opinion, which, bettered with his own learning, the greatness whereof i cannot enough commend, comes with him at my importunity to fill up your grace's request in my stead.i beseech you, let his lack of years be no impediment to let him lack a reverend estimation, for i never knew so young a body with so old a head. i leave him to your gracious acceptance, whose trial shall better publish his commendation."
didst thou behold octavia?
nay, would i were so angered with the same!
you hear the learned bellario, what he writes. and here i take it is the doctor come., give me your hand. come you from old bellario?
ay, dread queen.
injurious wasps, to feed on such sweet honey and kill the bees that yield it with your stings! i'll kiss each several paper for amends. look, here is writ "kind julia." unkind julia! i throw thy name against the bruising stones, trampling contemptuously on thy disdain.
i did, my lord.
where?
and here is writ "love-wounded proteus." poor wounded name! my bosom as a bed and thus i search it with a sovereign kiss. but twice or thrice was "proteus" written down. be calm, good wind, blow not a word away till i have found each letter in the letter, unto a ragged, fearful, hanging rock and throw it thence into the raging sea! lo, here in one line is his name twice writ, "poor forlorn proteus, passionate proteus, and yet i will not, sith so prettily he couples it to his complaining names. thus will i fold them, one upon another. now kiss, embrace, contend, do what you will.
you are welcome. take your place. that holds this present question in the court?
madam, in rome. i looked her in the face, and saw her led
dinner is ready, and your father stays.
i am informèd thoroughly of the cause. which is the merchant here, and which the jew?
is she as tall as me?
well, let us go.
antonio and old shylock, both stand forth.
she is not, madam.
what, shall these papers lie like telltales here?
is your name shylock?
didst hear her speak? is she shrill-tongued or low?
if you respect them, best to take them up.
shylock is my name.
madam, i heard her speak. she is low-voiced.
yet here they shall not lie, for catching cold.
of a strange nature is the suit you follow, yet in such rule that the venetian law cannot impugn you as you do proceed., (to antonio) you stand within his danger, do you not?
that's not so good. he cannot like her long.
i see you have a month's mind to them.
ay, so he says.
like her? o isis, 'tis impossible.
ay, madam, you may say what sights you see; i see things too, although you judge i wink.
do you confess the bond?
i think so, charmian. dull of tongue, and dwarfish., what majesty is in her gait? remember, if e'er thou looked'st on majesty.
come, come; will 't please you go?
i do.
she creeps. her motion and her station are as one. a statue than a breather.
tell me, panthino, what sad talk was that wherewith my brother held you in the cloister?
then must the jew be merciful.
is this certain?
'twas of his nephew proteus, your son.
on what compulsion must i? tell me that.
or i have no observance.
why, what of him?
the quality of mercy is not strained. it droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven it blesseth him that gives and him that takes. 'tis mightiest in the mightiest. it becomes the thronèd monarch better than his crown. his scepter shows the force of temporal power, wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings, but mercy is above this sceptered sway. it is enthronèd in the hearts of kings. it is an attribute to god himself. when mercy seasons justice. therefore, jew,
three in egypt cannot make better note.
would suffer him to spend his youth at home, while other men, of slender reputation, put forth their sons to seek preferment out, some to the wars, to try their fortune there, some to the studious universities. for any or for all these exercises he said that proteus your son was meet, and did request me to importune you which would be great impeachment to his age in having known no travel in his youth.
though justice be thy plea, consider this, that in the course of justice none of us should see salvation. we do pray for mercy, the deeds of mercy. i have spoke thus much to mitigate the justice of thy plea, which if thou follow, this strict court of venice must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant there.
he's very knowing, i do perceive 't. there's nothing in her yet.
nor need'st thou much importune me to that whereon this month i have been hammering. and how he cannot be a perfect man, not being tried and tutored in the world. experience is by industry achieved and perfected by the swift course of time.
the penalty, and forfeit of my bond.
excellent.
i think your lordship is not ignorant how his companion, youthful valentine, attends the emperor in his royal court.
is he not able to discharge the money?
(to messenger ) guess at her years, i prithee.
i know it well.
yes, here i tender it for him in the court, yea, twice the sum. if that will not suffice, on forfeit of my hands, my head, my heart. if this will not suffice, it must appear that malice bears down truth., (to duke) and i beseech you, to do a great right, do a little wrong, and curb this cruel devil of his will.
madam, she was a widow, 
there shall he practice tilts and tournaments, hear sweet discourse, converse with noblemen, and be in eye of every exercise worthy his youth and nobleness of birth.
it must not be. there is no power in venice can alter a decree establishèd. and many an error by the same example will rush into the state. it cannot be.
widow? charmian, hark.
and that thou mayst perceive how well i like it, the execution of it shall make known. even with the speediest expedition i will dispatch him to the emperor's court.
a daniel come to judgment, yea, a daniel!, o wise young judge, how i do honor thee!
and i do think she's thirty.
with other gentlemen of good esteem are journeying to salute the emperor and to commend their service to his will.
i pray you, let me look upon the bond.
bear'st thou her face in mind? is 't long or round?
good company. with them shall proteus go, 
(giving portia a document) here 'tis, most reverend doctor, here it is.
round, even to faultiness.
and in good time! now will we break with him.
shylock, there's thrice thy money offered thee.
for the most part, too, they are foolish that are so. her hair, what color?
[to himself] sweet love, sweet lines, sweet life! here is her hand, the agent of her heart; here is her oath for love, her honor's pawn. o, that our fathers would applaud our loves, o heavenly julia!
an oath, an oath, i have an oath in heaven. no, not for venice.
brown, madam, and her forehead
how now? what letter are you reading there?
why, this bond is forfeit! and lawfully by this the jew may claim a pound of flesh to be by him cut off nearest the merchant's heart., be merciful.
(giving money) there's gold for thee. thou must not take my former sharpness ill. i will employ thee back again; i find thee most fit for business. go make thee ready; our letters are prepared.
may 't please your lordship, 'tis a word or two of commendations sent from valentine,
when it is paid according to the tenor. it doth appear you are a worthy judge. you know the law. your exposition hath been most sound. i charge you by the law, proceed to judgment. by my soul i swear there is no power in the tongue of man to alter me. i stay here on my bond.
a proper man.
lend me the letter. let me see what news.
most heartily i do beseech the court
that so i harried him. why, methinks, by him, this creature's no such thing.
there is no news, my lord, but that he writes how happily he lives, how well beloved and daily gracèd by the emperor;
why then, thus it is: you must prepare your bosom for his knife.
nothing, madam.
and how stand you affected to his wish?
o noble judge! o excellent young man!
the man hath seen some majesty and should know.
as one relying on your lordship's will, and not depending on his friendly wish.
for the intent and purpose of the law hath full relation to the penalty,
hath he seen majesty? isis else defend,
my will is something sorted with his wish. for what i will, i will, and there an end. i am resolved that thou shalt spend some time with valentinus in the emperor's court. what maintenance he from his friends receives, tomorrow be in readiness to go. excuse it not, for i am peremptory.
'tis very true. o wise and upright judge! how much more elder art thou than thy looks!
i have one thing more to ask him yet, good charmian, but 'tis no matter; thou shalt bring him to me where i will write. all may be well enough.
my lord, i cannot be so soon provided. please you, deliberate a day or two.
(to antonio) therefore lay bare your bosom.
i warrant you, madam.
no more of stay. tomorrow thou must go. come on, panthino; you shall be employed to hasten on his expedition.
ay, his breast. so says the bond. doth it not, noble judge?
nay, nay, octavia, not only that, that were excusable, that and thousands more of semblable import, but he hath waged new wars 'gainst pompey; made his will, and read it spoke scantly of me; when perforce he could not but pay me terms of honor, cold and sickly he vented them, most narrow measure lent me. when the best hint was given him, he not took 't,
thus have i shunned the fire for fear of burning, i feared to show my father julia's letter lest he should take exceptions to my love, and with the vantage of mine own excuse hath he excepted most against my love. the uncertain glory of an april day, which now shows all the beauty of the sun, and by and by a cloud takes all away!
it is so. are there balance here to weigh the flesh?
o my good lord, believe not all, or, if you must believe, stomach not all. a more unhappy lady, if this division chance, ne'er stood between, praying for both parts. when i shall pray "o bless my lord and husband!" undo that prayer by crying out as loud "o bless my brother!" husband win, win brother prays and destroys the prayer; no midway
sir proteus, your father calls for you.
i have them ready.
gentle octavia, let your best love draw to that point which seeks best to preserve it. if i lose mine honor, i lose myself; better i were not yours than yours so branchless. but, as you requested, i'll raise the preparation of a war shall stain your brother. make your soonest haste; so your desires are yours.
why, this it is: my heart accords thereto, and yet a thousand times it answers no.
have by some surgeon, shylock, on your charge, to stop his wounds lest he do bleed to death.
thanks to my lord. the jove of power make me most weak, most weak, as if the world should cleave, and that slain men should solder up the rift.
sir, your glove.
is it so nominated in the bond?
when it appears to you where this begins, turn your displeasure that way, for our faults can equally move with them. provide your going; choose your own company and command what cost your heart has mind to.
not mine. my gloves are on.
it is not so expressed, but what of that? 'twere good you do so much for charity.
how now, friend eros!
why, then, this may be yours, for this is but one.
i cannot find it. 'tis not in the bond.
there's strange news come, sir.
ha! let me see. ay, give it me, it's mine. ah, sylvia, sylvia!
(to antonio) you, merchant, have you any thing to say?
what, man?
[calling] madam sylvia! madam sylvia!
give me your hand, bassanio. fare you well.
caesar and lepidus have made wars upon pompey.
how now, sirrah?
grieve not that i am fall'n to this for you, for herein fortune shows herself more kind than is her custom. it is still her use to view with hollow eye and wrinkled brow an age of poverty, from which lingering penance of such misery doth she cut me off. commend me to your honorable wife. say how i loved you. speak me fair in death. and when the tale is told, bid her be judge whether bassanio had not once a love. repent but you that you shall lose your friend, for if the jew do cut but deep enough, i'll pay it presently with all my heart.
this is old. what is the success?
she is not within hearing, sir.
antonio, i am married to a wife which is as dear to me as life itself. are not with me esteemed above thy life. i would lose all, ay, sacrifice them all here to this devil, to deliver you.
caesar, having made use of him in the wars 'gainst pompey, presently denied him rivality, would not let him partake in the glory of the action, and, not resting here, accuses him of letters he had formerly wrote to pompey; upon his own appeal seizes him. so the poor third is up, till death enlarge his confine.
why, sir, who bade you call her?
your wife would give you little thanks for that
then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps, no more, and throw between them all the food thou hast, they'll grind the one the other. where's antony?
your worship, sir, or else i mistook.
i have a wife, whom i protest i love. i would she were in heaven, so she could entreat some power to change this currish jew.
the rush that lies before him; cries, "fool lepidus!" and threats the throat of that his officer that murdered pompey.
well, you'll still be too forward.
'tis well you offer it behind her back.
our great navy's rigged.
and yet i was last chidden for being too slow.
these be the christian husbands. i have a daughter. would any of the stock of barabbas had been her husband rather than a christian!, we trifle time. i pray thee, pursue sentence.
for italy and caesar. more, domitius: i might have told hereafter.
go to, sir. tell me, do you know madam sylvia?
the court awards it, and the law doth give it.
'twill be naught, but let it be. bring me to antony.
she that your worship loves?
most rightful judge!
come, sir.
why, how know you that i am in love?
and you must cut this flesh from off his breast. the law allows it, and the court awards it.
contemning rome, he has done all this and more in alexandria. here's the manner of 't: i' th' marketplace, on a tribunal silvered, cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold caesarion, whom they call my father's son, and all the unlawful issue that their lust since then hath made between them. unto her he gave the stablishment of egypt, made her absolute queen.
marry, by these special marks: first, you have learned, like sir proteus, to wreath your arms, like a malcontent; to relish a love-song, like a robin redbreast; to walk alone, like one that had the pestilence; to sigh, like a schoolboy that had lost his a b c; to weep, like a young wench that had buried her grandam; to fast, like one that takes diet; to watch, like one that fears robbing; to speak puling, like a beggar at hallowmas. you were wont, when you laughed, to crow like a cock; when you walked, to walk like one of the lions; when you fasted, it was presently after dinner; when you looked sadly, it was for want of money. and now you are metamorphosed with a mistress, that when i look on you, i can hardly think you my master.
most learnèd judge, a sentence! come, prepare.
this in the public eye?
are all these things perceived in me?
tarry a little. there is something else. this bond doth give thee here no jot of blood. the words expressly are "a pound of flesh." take then thy bond, take thou thy pound of flesh, one drop of christian blood, thy lands and goods are by the laws of venice confiscate unto the state of venice.
i' th' common showplace, where they exercise. his sons he there proclaimed the kings of kings: great media, parthia, and armenia syria, cilicia, and phoenicia. she in th' habiliments of the goddess isis that day appeared, and oft before gave audience, as 'tis reported, so.
they are all perceived without ye.
o upright judge!, mark, jew., o learnèd judge!
let rome be thus informed.
without me? they cannot.
is that the law?
who, queasy with his insolence already, will their good thoughts call from him.
without you? nay, that's certain, for, without you were so simple, none else would. but you are so without these follies that these follies are within you, and shine through you like the water in an urinal, that not an eye that sees you but is a physician to comment on your malady.
thyself shalt see the act. for as thou urgest justice, be assured thou shalt have justice more than thou desirest.
the people knows it, and have now received his accusations.
but tell me, dost thou know my lady sylvia?
o learnèd judge!, mark, jew, a learnèd judge!
who does he accuse?
she that you gaze on so as she sits at supper?
and let the christian go.
sextus pompeius spoiled, we had not rated him his part o' th' isle. then does he say he lent me some shipping, unrestored. lastly, he frets that lepidus of the triumvirate all his revenue.
hast thou observed that? even she i mean.
here is the money.
sir, this should be answered.
why, sir, i know her not.
soft! the jew shall have all justice. soft, no haste. he shall have nothing but the penalty.
'tis done already, and the messenger gone. i have told him, lepidus was grown too cruel, that he his high authority abused i grant him part; but then, in his armenia, and other of his conquered kingdoms, i demand the like.
dost thou know her by my gazing on her, and yet know'st her not?
o jew! an upright judge, a learnèd judge!
he'll never yield to that.
is she not hard-favored, sir?
therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh. shed thou no blood, nor cut thou less nor more but just a pound of flesh. if thou takest more or less than a just pound, be it but so much or the division of the twentieth part of one poor scruple, nay, if the scale do turn but in the estimation of a hair, thou diest and all thy goods are confiscate.
nor must not then be yielded to in this.
not so fair, boy, as well-favored.
now, infidel, i have you on the hip.
hail, caesar, and my lord! hail, most dear caesar!
sir, i know that well enough.
why doth the jew pause? take thy forfeiture.
that ever i should call thee castaway!
what dost thou know?
give me my principal, and let me go.
you have not called me so, nor have you cause.
that she is not so fair as, of you, well-favored.
i have it ready for thee. here it is.
why have you stol'n upon us thus? you come not like caesar's sister. the wife of antony the neighs of horse to tell of her approach long ere she did appear. the trees by th' way should have borne men, and expectation fainted, longing for what it had not. nay, the dust raised by your populous troops. but you are come a market-maid to rome and have prevented the ostentation of our love, which, left unshown, is often left unloved. we should have met you with an augmented greeting.
i mean that her beauty is exquisite but her favor infinite.
he shall have merely justice and his bond.
good my lord, to come thus was i not constrained, but did it on my free will. my lord, mark antony, hearing that you prepared for war, acquainted his pardon for return.
that's because the one is painted and the other out of all count.
a daniel, still say i, a second daniel!, i thank thee, jew, for teaching me that word.
which soon he granted, being an obstruct 'tween his lust and him.
how painted? and how out of count?
shall i not have barely my principal?
do not say so, my lord.
marry, sir, so painted, to make her fair, that no man counts of her beauty.
to be so taken at thy peril, jew.
i have eyes upon him, and his affairs come to me on the wind.
how esteem'st thou me? i account of her beauty.
why then, the devil give him good of it! i'll stay no longer question.
my lord, in athens.
you never saw her since she was deformed.
tarry, jew. the law hath yet another hold on you. if it be proved against an alien that by direct or indirect attempts he seek the life of any citizen, the party 'gainst the which he doth contrive comes to the privy coffer of the state, and the offender's life lies in the mercy of the duke only 'gainst all other voice. in which predicament i say thou stand'st, that indirectly, and directly too, thou hast contrived against the very life of the defendant, and thou hast incurred the danger formerly by me rehearsed.
no, my most wrongèd sister. cleopatra hath nodded him to her. he hath given his empire up to a whore; who now are levying bocchus, the king of libya; archelaus, of cappadocia; philadelphos, king of paphlagonia; the thracian king, adallas; king manchus of arabia; king of pont; of comagen; polemon and amyntas, the kings of mede and lycaonia, with a more larger list of scepters.
how long hath she been deformed?
beg that thou mayst have leave to hang thyself, and yet, thy wealth being forfeit to the state, thou hast not left the value of a cord. therefore thou must be hanged at the state's charge.
ay me, most wretched, that does afflict each other!
ever since you loved her.
i pardon thee thy life before thou ask it. for half thy wealth, it is antonio's. the other half comes to the general state, which humbleness may drive unto a fine.
welcome hither. your letters did withhold our breaking forth till we perceived both how you were wrong led and we in negligent danger. cheer your heart. o'er your content these strong necessities, but let determined things to destiny hold unbewailed their way. welcome to rome, nothing more dear to me. you are abused to do you justice, makes his ministers of us and those that love you. best of comfort, and ever welcome to us.
i have loved her ever since i saw her, and still i see her beautiful.
ay, for the state, not for antonio.
welcome, lady.
if you love her, you cannot see her.
nay, take my life and all. pardon not that. you take my house when you do take the prop that doth sustain my house. you take my life when you do take the means whereby i live.
welcome, dear madam. only th' adulterous antony, most large in his abominations, turns you off and gives his potent regiment to a trull that noises it against us.
why?
what mercy can you render him, antonio?
(to caesar ) is it so, sir?
because love is blind. o, that you had mine eyes, or your own eyes had the lights they were wont to have when you chid at sir proteus for going ungartered!
a halter gratis, nothing else, for god's sake.
be ever known to patience. my dear'st sister!
what should i see then?
so please my lord the duke and all the court, to quit the fine for one half of his goods i am content, so he will let me have upon his death unto the gentleman that lately stole his daughter. two things provided more: that for this favor he presently become a christian; here in the court, of all he dies possessed, unto his son lorenzo and his daughter.
i will be even with thee, doubt it not.
your own present folly and her passing deformity; for he, being in love, could not see to garter his hose, and you, being in love, cannot see to put on your hose.
he shall do this, or else i do recant the pardon that i late pronouncèd here.
but why, why, why?
belike, boy, then you are in love, for last morning you could not see to wipe my shoes.
art thou contented, jew? what dost thou say?
thou hast forspoke my being in these wars and sayst it is not fit.
true, sir. i was in love with my bed. i thank you, you swinged me for my love, which makes me the bolder to chide you for yours.
i am content.
well, is it, is it?
in conclusion, i stand affected to her.
(to nerissa) clerk, draw a deed of gift.
be there in person?
i would you were set; so your affection would cease.
i pray you, give me leave to go from hence. i am not well. send the deed after me,
well, i could reply, if we should serve with horse and mares together, the horse were merely lost. the mares would bear a soldier and his horse.
last night she enjoined me to write some lines to one she loves.
get thee gone, but do it.
what is 't you say?
and have you?
(to shylock) in christening shalt thou have two godfathers. had i been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more, to bring thee to the gallows, not to the font.
take from his heart, take from his brain, from 's time what should not then be spared. he is already traduced for levity, and 'tis said in rome that photinus, an eunuch, and your maids
i have.
(to portia) sir, i entreat you home with me to dinner.
sink rome! and their tongues rot that speak against us! a charge we bear i' th' war, and as the president of my kingdom will appear there for a man. speak not against it. i will not stay behind.
are they not lamely writ?
i humbly do desire your grace of pardon. i must away this night toward padua, and it is meet i presently set forth.
nay, i have done.
no, boy, but as well as i can do them. peace, here she comes.
i am sorry that your leisure serves you not., for in my mind you are much bound to him.
is it not strange, canidius, that from tarentum and brundusium he could so quickly cut the ionian sea and take in toryne?, you have heard on 't, sweet?
[aside] o, excellent motion! o, exceeding puppet! now will he interpret to her.
(to portia) most worthy gentleman, i and my friend have by your wisdom been this day acquitted of grievous penalties, in lieu whereof we freely cope your courteous pains withal.
celerity is never more admired
madam and mistress, a thousand good-morrows.
and stand indebted, over and above, in love and service to you evermore.
a good rebuke, which might have well becomed the best of men, to taunt at slackness., canidius, we will fight with him by sea.
[aside] o, give ye good even! here's a million of manners.
he is well paid that is well satisfied. and therein do account myself well paid. my mind was never yet more mercenary. i pray you, know me when we meet again. i wish you well, and so i take my leave.
by sea, what else?
sir valentine and servant, to you two thousand.
take some remembrance of us as a tribute, not as a fee. grant me two things, i pray you: not to deny me, and to pardon me.
why will my lord do so?
[aside] he should give her interest, and she gives it him.
you press me far and therefore i will yield. give me your gloves. i'll wear them for your sake. (to bassanio) and for your love, i'll take this ring from you. do not draw back your hand. i'll take no more,
for that he dares us to 't.
as you enjoined me, i have writ your letter unto the secret, nameless friend of yours, which i was much unwilling to proceed in but for my duty to your ladyship.
this ring, good sir, alas, it is a trifle. i will not shame myself to give you this.
so hath my lord dared him to single fight.
i thank you, gentle servant. 'tis very clerkly done.
i will have nothing else but only this. and now methinks i have a mind to it.
ay, and to wage this battle at pharsalia, where caesar fought with pompey. but these offers, which serve not for his vantage, he shakes off, and so should you.
now trust me, madam, it came hardly off; for, being ignorant to whom it goes, i writ at random, very doubtfully.
the dearest ring in venice will i give you, and find it out by proclamation. only for this, i pray you, pardon me.
your ships are not well manned, engrossed by swift impress. in caesar's fleet are those that often have 'gainst pompey fought. their ships are yare, yours, heavy. no disgrace shall fall you for refusing him at sea,
perchance you think too much of so much pains?
i see, sir, you are liberal in offers. you teach me how a beggar should be answered.
by sea, by sea.
please you command, a thousand times as much. and yet, 
good sir, this ring was given me by my wife. and when she put it on, she made me vow that i should neither sell nor give nor lose it.
most worthy sir, you therein throw away the absolute soldiership you have by land, distract your army, which doth most consist of war-marked footmen, leave unexecuted the way which promises assurance, and give up yourself merely to chance and hazard from firm security.
a pretty period! well, i guess the sequel; and yet i will not name it, and yet i care not, meaning henceforth to trouble you no more.
an if your wife be not a madwoman, and know how well i have deserved the ring, she would not hold out enemy forever for giving it to me. well, peace be with you.
i'll fight at sea.
[aside] and yet you will, and yet another "yet."
let his deservings and my love withal be valued against your wife's commandment.
i have sixty sails, caesar none better.
what means your ladyship? do you not like it?
(giving gratiano the ring) go, gratiano, run and overtake him. unto antonio's house. away, make haste.
and with the rest full-manned, from th' head of actium beat th' approaching caesar. but if we fail, we then can do 't at land.
yes, yes. the lines are very quaintly writ, nay, take them.
come, you and i will thither presently. and in the morning early will we both fly toward belmont. come, antonio.
thy business?
madam, they are for you.
inquire the jew's house out. give him this deed, and let him sign it. we'll away tonight, and be a day before our husbands home. this deed will be well welcome to lorenzo.
the news is true, my lord. he is descried.
ay, ay. you writ them, sir, at my request, but i will none of them. they are for you.
fair sir, you are well o'erta'en. my lord bassanio upon more advice hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat your company at dinner.
can he be there in person? 'tis impossible, strange that his power should be. canidius, our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land, and our twelve thousand horse. we'll to our ship.
please you, i'll write your ladyship another.
that cannot be. and so i pray you tell him. furthermore, i pray you show my youth old shylock's house.
how now, worthy soldier?
and when it's writ, for my sake read it over. and if it please you, so; if not, why, so.
that will i do.
o noble emperor, do not fight by sea! trust not to rotten planks. do you misdoubt this sword and these my wounds? let th' egyptians and the phoenicians go a-ducking. we and fighting foot to foot.
if it please me, madam, what then?
(to portia) sir, i would speak with you. i'll see if i can get my husband's ring, which i did make him swear to keep for ever.
well, well, away.
and so good morrow, servant.
(aside to nerissa) thou mayst, i warrant. we shall have old swearing but we'll outface them, and outswear them too., 
by hercules, i think i am i' th' right.
[aside] o jest unseen, inscrutable, invisible as a nose on a man's face or a weathercock on a steeple! my master sues to her, and she hath taught her suitor, o excellent device! was there ever heard a better, that my master, being scribe, to himself should write the letter?
away, make haste. thou know'st where i will tarry.
soldier, thou art; but his whole action grows not in the power on 't. so our leader's led,
how now, sir? what, are you reasoning with yourself?
(to gratiano) come, good sir. will you show me to this house?
you keep by land the legions and the horse whole, do you not?
nay, i was rhyming. 'tis you that have the reason.
the moon shines bright. in such a night as this, when the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees and they did make no noise, in such a night troilus methinks mounted the trojan walls where cressid lay that night.
marcus octavius, marcus justeius, publicola, and caelius, are for sea; but we keep whole by land. this speed of caesar's
to do what?
in such a night did thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew and saw the lion's shadow ere himself and ran dismayed away.
while he was yet in rome his power went out in such distractions as beguiled all spies.
to be a spokesman from madam sylvia.
in such a night upon the wild sea banks, and waft her love to come again to carthage.
who's his lieutenant, hear you?
to whom?
in such a night medea gathered the enchanted herbs that did renew old æson.
they say, one taurus.
to yourself. why, she woos you by a figure.
in such a night and with an unthrift love did run from venice as far as belmont.
well i know the man.
what figure?
in such a night did young lorenzo swear he loved her well, stealing her soul with many vows of faith,
the emperor calls canidius.
by a letter, i should say.
in such a night did pretty jessica, like a little shrew, slander her love, and he forgave it her.
with news the time's with labor, and throws forth each minute some.
why, she hath not writ to me.
i would outnight you, did nobody come. but, hark, i hear the footing of a man.
taurus!
what need she, when she hath made you write to yourself? why, do you not perceive the jest?
who comes so fast in silence of the night?
my lord?
no, believe me.
a friend.
strike not by land; keep whole. provoke not battle till we have done at sea. do not exceed
no believing you, indeed, sir. but did you perceive her earnest?
a friend? what friend? your name, i pray you, friend?
our fortune lies upon this jump.
she gave me none, except an angry word.
stephano is my name, and i bring word my mistress will before the break of day by holy crosses, where she kneels and prays for happy wedlock hours.
set we our squadrons on yond side o' th' hill, in eye of caesar's battle, from which place we may the number of the ships behold and so proceed accordingly.
why, she hath given you a letter.
who comes with her?
naught, naught, all naught! i can behold no longer. th' antoniad, the egyptian admiral, with all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder. to see 't mine eyes are blasted.
that's the letter i writ to her friend.
none but a holy hermit and her maid. i pray you, is my master yet returned?
gods and goddesses,
and that letter hath she delivered, and there an end.
but go we in, i pray thee, jessica, and ceremoniously let us prepare some welcome for the mistress of the house.
what's thy passion?
i would it were no worse.
sola, sola! wo, ha, ho! sola, sola!
the greater cantle of the world is lost with very ignorance. we have kissed away kingdoms and provinces.
for often have you writ to her, and she, in modesty, or else for want of idle time, could not again reply; or fearing else some messenger that might her mind discover, herself hath taught her love himself to write unto her lover.
who calls?
how appears the fight?
i have dined.
sola! did you see master lorenzo? master lorenzo, sola, sola!
on our side like the tokened pestilence, whom leprosy o'ertake!, i' th' midst o' th' fight, when vantage like a pair of twins appeared both as the same, or rather ours the elder, the breeze upon her, like a cow in june,
ay, but hearken, sir: though the chameleon love can feed on the air, i am one that am nourished by my victuals, and would fain have meat. o, be not like your mistress; be moved, be moved!
leave holloaing, man. here.
that i beheld. mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could not endure a further view.
have patience, gentle julia.
sola! where, where?
she once being loofed, the noble ruin of her magic, antony, leaving the fight in height, flies after her. i never saw an action of such shame. experience, manhood, honor, ne'er before did violate so itself.
i must, where is no remedy.
here.
alack, alack!
when possibly i can, i will return.
tell him there's a post come from my master with his horn full of good news. my master will be here ere morning.
and sinks most lamentably. had our general been what he knew himself, it had gone well. oh, he has given example for our flight most grossly by his own!
if you turn not, you will return the sooner.
sweet soul, let's in, and there expect their coming. and yet no matter. why should we go in?, my friend stephano, signify, i pray you, and bring your music forth into the air.
ay, are you thereabouts? why then, good night indeed.
why, then, we'll make exchange; here, take you this.
how sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank! here will we sit and let the sounds of music creep in our ears. soft stillness and the night sit, jessica. look how the floor of heaven is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold. there's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st but in his motion like an angel sings, such harmony is in immortal souls, but whilst this muddy vesture of decay doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.
toward peloponnesus are they fled.
and seal the bargain with a holy kiss.
come ho, and wake diana with a hymn! and draw her home with music.
'tis easy to 't, and there i will attend what further comes.
here is my hand for my true constancy; and when that hour o'erslips me in the day the next ensuing hour some foul mischance torment me for my love's forgetfulness! my father stays my coming. answer not. the tide is now, nay, not thy tide of tears; julia, farewell!
i am never merry when i hear sweet music.
to caesar will i render my legions and my horse. six kings already
what, gone without a word? ay, so true love should do; it cannot speak, for truth hath better deeds than words to grace it.
the reason is your spirits are attentive. for do but note a wild and wanton herd, fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud, which is the hot condition of their blood, if they but hear perchance a trumpet sound, or any air of music touch their ears, their savage eyes turned to a modest gaze by the sweet power of music.
i'll yet follow the wounded chance of antony, though my reason sits in the wind against me.
sir proteus, you are stayed for.
therefore the poet did feign that orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods since naught so stockish, hard, and full of rage, the man that hath no music in himself, nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds, is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils. the motions of his spirit are dull as night, let no such man be trusted. mark the music.
hark. the land bids me tread no more upon 't. it is ashamed to bear me. friends, come hither. i am so lated in the world that i have lost my way forever. i have a ship and make your peace with caesar.
go. i come, i come. alas! this parting strikes poor lovers dumb.
that light we see is burning in my hall. how far that little candle throws his beams! so shines a good deed in a naughty world.
fly? not we.
nay, 'twill be this hour ere i have done weeping. all the kind of the lances have this very fault. i have received my proportion, like the prodigious son, and am going with sir proteus to the imperial's court. i think crab, my dog, be the sourest-natured dog that lives. my mother weeping, my father wailing, my sister crying, our maid howling, our cat wringing her hands, and all our house in a great perplexity, yet did not this cruel-hearted cur shed one tear. he is a stone, a very pebblestone, and has no more pity in him than a dog. a jew would have wept to have seen our parting. why, my grandam, having no eyes, look you, wept herself blind at my parting. nay, i'll show you the manner of it. this shoe is my father. no, this left shoe is my father. no, no, this left shoe is my mother. nay, that cannot be so neither. yes, it is so, it is so, it hath the worser sole. this shoe, with the hole in it, is my mother, and this my father. a vengeance on 't! there 'tis. now, sir, this staff is my sister, for, look you, she is as white as a lily and as small as a wand. this hat is nan, our maid. i am the dog. no, the dog is himself, and i am the dog, o, the dog is me, and i am myself. ay, so, so. now come i to my father: "father, your blessing." now should not the shoe speak a word for weeping. now should i kiss my father. well, he weeps on. now come i to my mother. o, that she could speak now like a moved woman! well, i kiss her. why there 'tis. here's my mother's breath up and down. now come i to my sister; mark the moan she makes. now the dog all this while sheds not a tear nor speaks a word; but see how i lay the dust with my tears.
when the moon shone we did not see the candle.
i have fled myself, and have instructed cowards to run and show their shoulders. friends, begone. i have myself resolved upon a course my treasure's in the harbor. take it. oh, i followed that i blush to look upon! my very hairs do mutiny, for the white reprove the brown for rashness, and they them have letters from me to some friends that will sweep your way for you. pray you, look not sad, nor make replies of loathness. take the hint which my despair proclaims. let that be left i will possess you of that ship and treasure. leave me, i pray, a little. pray you now, nay, do so, for indeed i have lost command. therefore i pray you. i'll see you by and by.
lance, away, away, aboard! thy master is shipped, and thou art to post after with oars. what's the matter? why weep'st thou, man? away, ass! you'll lose the tide if you tarry any longer.
so doth the greater glory dim the less. a substitute shines brightly as a king until a king be by, and then his state empties itself, as doth an inland brook
nay, gentle madam, to him, comfort him.
it is no matter if the tied were lost; for it is the unkindest tied that ever any man tied.
it is your music, madam, of the house.
do, most dear queen.
what's the unkindest tide?
nothing is good, i see, without respect. methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.
do. why, what else?
why, he that's tied here, crab, my dog.
silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.
let me sit down. o juno!
tut, man, i mean thou'lt lose the flood, and in losing the flood, lose thy voyage, and in losing thy voyage, lose thy master, and, in losing thy master, lose thy service, and, in losing thy service, 
when neither is attended, and i think the nightingale, if she should sing by day when every goose is cackling, would be thought no better a musician than the wren. to their right praise and true perfection! peace! how the moon sleeps with endymion and would not be awaked.
(seeing cleopatra ) no, no, no, no, no.
why dost thou stop my mouth?
that is the voice, or i am much deceived, of portia.
see you here, sir?
for fear thou shouldst lose thy tongue.
by the bad voice.
oh, fie, fie, fie!
where should i lose my tongue?
dear lady, welcome home.
madam!
in thy tale.
we have been praying for our husbands' welfare, which speed, we hope, the better for our words.
madam, o good empress!
in thy tail!
madam, they are not yet, but there is come a messenger before to signify their coming.
sir, sir, 
lose the tide, and the voyage, and the master, and the service, and the tied! why, man, if the river were dry, i am able to fill it with my tears; if the wind were down, i could drive the boat with my sighs.
go in, nerissa. give order to my servants that they take no note at all of our being absent hence., 
his sword e'en like a dancer, while i struck the lean and wrinkled cassius, and 'twas i that the mad brutus ended. he alone dealt on lieutenantry, and no practice had
come, come away, man. i was sent to call thee.
your husband is at hand. i hear his trumpet. we are no tell-tales, madam. fear you not.
ah, stand by.
sir, call me what thou dar'st.
this night methinks is but the daylight sick. it looks a little paler. 'tis a day
the queen, my lord, the queen.
will thou go?
(to portia) we should hold day with the antipodes, if you would walk in absence of the sun.
go to him, madam, speak to him. he is unqualitied with very shame.
well, i will go.
let me give light, but let me not be light. for a light wife doth make a heavy husband, but god sort all! you are welcome home, my lord.
well then, sustain me. oh!
servant!
i thank you, madam. give welcome to my friend. this is the man, this is antonio, to whom i am so infinitely bound.
her head's declined, and death will seize her but your comfort makes the rescue.
mistress?
for as i hear he was much bound for you.
i have offended reputation, a most unnoble swerving.
master, sir thurio frowns on you.
no more than i am well acquitted of.
sir, the queen.
ay, boy, it's for love.
sir, you are very welcome to our house. it must appear in other ways than words,
how i convey my shame out of thine eyes by looking back what i have left behind 'stroyed in dishonor.
not of you.
(to nerissa) by yonder moon i swear you do me wrong. in faith, i gave it to the judge's clerk. would he were gelt that had it, for my part, since you do take it, love, so much at heart.
o my lord, my lord, forgive my fearful sails! i little thought
of my mistress, then.
a quarrel, ho, already? what's the matter?
egypt, thou knew'st too well my heart was to thy rudder tied by th' strings, and thou shouldst tow me after. o'er my spirit thy full supremacy thou knew'st, and that thy beck might from the bidding of the gods
'twere good you knocked him.
about a hoop of gold, a paltry ring that she did give me, whose posy was for all the world like cutler's poetry upon a knife, "love me and leave me not."
oh, my pardon!
servant, you are sad.
you swore to me when i did give it you that you would wear it till your hour of death, and that it should lie with you in your grave. though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths, gave it a judge's clerk! no, god's my judge. the clerk will ne'er wear hair on 's face that had it.
now i must to the young man send humble treaties, dodge and palter in the shifts of lowness, who with half the bulk o' th' world played as i pleased, making and marring fortunes. you did know my sword, made weak by my affection, would obey it on all cause.
indeed, madam, i seem so.
he will, an if he live to be a man.
pardon, pardon!
seem you that you are not?
ay, if a woman live to be a man.
fall not a tear, i say. one of them rates all that is won and lost. give me a kiss.
haply i do.
a kind of boy, a little scrubbèd boy no higher than thyself, the judge's clerk, a prating boy that begged it as a fee. i could not for my heart deny it him.
we sent our schoolmaster. is he come back?, love, i am full of lead., (calling) some wine, within there, and our viands! fortune knows we scorn her most when most she offers blows.
so do counterfeits.
to part so slightly with your wife's first gift, a thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger and so riveted with faith unto your flesh.
let him appear that's come from antony. know you him?
so do you.
i gave my love a ring and made him swear i dare be sworn for him he would not leave it nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth that the world masters. now in faith, gratiano, you give your wife too unkind a cause of grief.
caesar, 'tis his schoolmaster, an argument that he is plucked, when hither he sends so poor a pinion of his wing, not many moons gone by.
what seem i that i am not?
(aside) why, i were best to cut my left hand off and swear i lost the ring defending it.
approach and speak.
wise.
my lord bassanio gave his ring away unto the judge that begged it and indeed that took some pains in writing, he begged mine. and neither man nor master would take aught but the two rings.
such as i am, i come from antony. i was of late as petty to his ends as is the morn-dew on the myrtle leaf
what instance of the contrary?
what ring gave you my lord? not that, i hope, which you received of me.
be 't so. declare thine office.
your folly.
i would deny it. but you see my finger hath not the ring upon it. it is gone.
lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and requires to live in egypt; which not granted, he lessens his requests, and to thee sues to let him breathe between the heavens and earth next, cleopatra does confess thy greatness, submits her to thy might, and of thee craves the circle of the ptolemies for her heirs, now hazarded to thy grace.
and how quote you my folly?
even so void is your false heart of truth. by heaven, i will ne'er come in your bed
for antony, of audience nor desire shall fail, so she from egypt drive her all-disgracèd friend or take his life there. this if she perform, she shall not sue unheard. so to them both.
i quote it in your jerkin.
(to gratiano) nor i in yours till i again see mine.
fortune pursue thee!
my "jerkin" is a doublet.
sweet portia, if you did know to whom i gave the ring, if you did know for whom i gave the ring, and how unwillingly i left the ring when naught would be accepted but the ring, you would abate the strength of your displeasure.
bring him through the bands.
well, then, i'll double your folly.
if you had known the virtue of the ring, or your own honor to contain the ring, you would not then have parted with the ring. what man is there so much unreasonable, if you had pleased to have defended it to urge the thing held as a ceremony? nerissa teaches me what to believe. i'll die for 't but some woman had the ring.
(to thidias ) to try thy eloquence now 'tis time. dispatch. from antony win cleopatra. promise, and in our name, what she requires. add more, from thine invention, offers. women are not the ne'er-touched vestal. try thy cunning, thidias. make thine own edict for thy pains, which we will answer as a law.
how?
no, by my honor, madam, by my soul, which did refuse three thousand ducats of me and begged the ring, the which i did deny him and suffered him to go displeased away, even he that did uphold the very life i was enforced to send it after him. i was beset with shame and courtesy. my honor would not let ingratitude so much besmear it. pardon me, good lady, had you been there i think you would have begged the ring of me to give the worthy doctor.
caesar, i go.
what, angry, sir thurio? do you change color?
let not that doctor e'er come near my house! since he hath got the jewel that i loved, i will become as liberal as you. i'll not deny him anything i have, no, not my body, nor my husband's bed. know him i shall, i am well sure of it. if you do not, if i be left alone, now, by mine honor, which is yet mine own, i'll have that doctor for my bedfellow.
observe how antony becomes his flaw, in every power that moves.
give him leave, madam; he is a kind of chameleon.
(to gratiano) and i his clerk. therefore be well advised
caesar, i shall.
that hath more mind to feed on your blood than live in your air.
well, do you so, let not me take him then. for if i do i'll mar the young clerk's pen.
what shall we do, enobarbus?
you have said, sir.
i am th' unhappy subject of these quarrels.
think and die.
ay, sir, and done too, for this time.
sir, grieve not you. you are welcome notwithstanding.
is antony or we in fault for this?
i know it well, sir; you always end ere you begin.
and in the hearing of these many friends i swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes wherein i see myself, 
antony only, that would make his will lord of his reason. what though you fled frighted each other? why should he follow? the itch of his affection should not then have nicked his captainship at such a point when half to half the world opposed, he being than was his loss, to course your flying flags and leave his navy gazing.
a fine volley of words, gentlemen, and quickly shot off.
mark you but that! in both my eyes he doubly sees himself, and there's an oath of credit!
prithee, peace.
'tis indeed, madam, we thank the giver.
nay, but hear me. pardon this fault, and by my soul i swear i never more will break an oath with thee.
is that his answer?
who is that, servant?
i once did lend my body for his wealth, had quite miscarried. i dare be bound again, my soul upon the forfeit, that your lord will never more break faith advisedly.
ay, my lord.
yourself, sweet lady, for you gave the fire. sir thurio borrows his wit from your ladyship's looks, and spends what he borrows kindly in your company.
(giving antonio a ring) and bid him keep it better than the other.
will yield us up?
sir, if you spend word for word with me, i shall make your wit bankrupt.
(giving bassanio portia's ring) here, lord bassanio. swear to keep this ring.
he says so.
i know it well, sir; you have an exchequer of words, and, i think, no other treasure to give your followers, for it appears, by their bare liveries, that they live by your bare words.
by heaven, it is the same i gave the doctor!
let her know 't., (to cleopatra ) to the boy caesar send this grizzled head, and he will fill thy wishes to the brim with principalities.
no more, gentlemen, no more. here comes my father.
for by this ring, the doctor lay with me.
that head, my lord?
now, daughter sylvia, you are hard beset. sir valentine, your father is in good health. what say you to a letter from your friends of much good news?
(taking out a ring) and pardon me, my gentle gratiano, for that same scrubbèd boy, the doctor's clerk,
of youth upon him, from which the world should note something particular. his coin, ships, legions, may be a coward's, whose ministers would prevail under the service of a child as soon to lay his gay caparisons apart and answer me declined, sword against sword, ourselves alone. i'll write it. follow me.
to any happy messenger from thence.
why, this is like the mending of highways in summer where the ways are fair enough! what, are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it?
(aside) yes, like enough, high-battled caesar will against a sworder! i see men's judgments are a parcel of their fortunes, and things outward do draw the inward quality after them to suffer all alike. that he should dream, answer his emptiness! caesar, thou hast subdued his judgment too.
know ye don antonio, your countryman?
speak not so grossly., you are all amazed. here is a letter. read it at your leisure. it comes from padua, from bellario. there you shall find that portia was the doctor, nerissa there her clerk. lorenzo here and even but now returned. i have not yet entered my house., antonio, you are welcome. and i have better news in store for you than you expect. unseal this letter soon. there you shall find three of your argosies are richly come to harbor suddenly. you shall not know by what strange accident i chancèd on this letter.
a messenger from caesar.
ay, my good lord, i know the gentleman to be of worth and worthy estimation,
i am dumb.
what, no more ceremony? see, my women, against the blown rose may they stop their nose,
hath he not a son?
(to portia) were you the doctor and i knew you not?
(aside) mine honesty and i begin to square. the loyalty well held to fools does make our faith mere folly. yet he that can endure to follow with allegiance a fall'n lord and earns a place i' th' story.
ay, my good lord, a son that well deserves the honor and regard of such a father.
(to nerissa) were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?
caesar's will?
you know him well?
ay, but the clerk that never means to do it
hear it apart.
we have conversed and spent our hours together. and though myself have been an idle truant, omitting the sweet benefit of time to clothe mine age with angel-like perfection, made use and fair advantage of his days; his years but young, but his experience old; his head unmellowed, but his judgment ripe. and, in a word, for far behind his worth he is complete in feature and in mind with all good grace to grace a gentleman.
(to portia) sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow. when i am absent then lie with my wife.
none but friends. say boldly.
beshrew me, sir, but if he make this good, he is as worthy for an empress' love well, sir, this gentleman is come to me, with commendation from great potentates, and here he means to spend his time awhile. i think 'tis no unwelcome news to you.
sweet lady, you have given me life and living. for here i read for certain that my ships
so haply are they friends to antony.
should i have wished a thing, it had been he.
how now, lorenzo? my clerk hath some good comforts too for you.
he needs as many, sir, as caesar has, will leap to be his friend. for us, you know whose he is we are, and that is caesar's.
welcome him then according to his worth. sylvia, i speak to you, and you, sir thurio; for valentine, i need not cite him to it. i will send him hither to you presently.
ay, and i'll give them him without a fee. (gives lorenzo a document) from the rich jew, a special deed of gift, after his death of all he dies possessed of.
so., thus then, thou most renowned: caesar entreats further than he is caesar.
had come along with me but that his mistress did hold his eyes locked in her crystal looks.
fair ladies, you drop manna in the way of starvèd people.
go on. right royal.
belike that now she hath enfranchised them upon some other pawn for fealty.
it is almost morning, of these events at full. let us go in, and charge us there upon interr'gatories, and we will answer all things faithfully.
he knows that you embrace not antony as you did love, but as you feared him.
nay, sure, i think she holds them prisoners still.
let it be so. the first interr'gatory whether till the next night she had rather stay, or go to bed now, being two hours to day. but were the day come, i should wish it dark, that i were couching with the doctor's clerk. so sore as keeping safe nerissa's ring.
oh!
nay, then he should be blind, and being blind how could he see his way to seek out you?
the scars upon your honor therefore he not as deserved.
why, lady, love hath twenty pair of eyes.
hence! home, you idle creatures get you home! is this a holiday? what, know you not, being mechanical, you ought not walk upon a laboring day without the sign
he is a god and knows what is most right. mine honor was not yielded, but conquered merely.
they say that love hath not an eye at all.
why, sir, a carpenter.
(aside) to be sure of that, i will ask antony. sir, sir, thou art so leaky thy dearest quit thee.
upon a homely object love can wink.
where is thy leather apron and thy rule? what dost thou with thy best apparel on? , you, sir, what trade are you?
shall i say to caesar what you require of him? for he partly begs to be desired to give. it much would please him that of his fortunes you should make a staff to hear from me you had left antony and put yourself under his shroud, the universal landlord.
have done, have done. here comes the gentleman.
truly, sir, in respect of a fine workman, i am but, as you would say, a cobbler.
what's your name?
welcome, dear proteus!, mistress, i beseech you, confirm his welcome with some special favor.
but what trade art thou? answer me directly.
my name is thidias.
if this be he you oft have wished to hear from.
a trade, sir, that i hope i may use with a safe conscience, which is, indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.
most kind messenger, i kiss his conqu'ring hand. tell him i am prompt to lay my crown at 's feet, and there to kneel. tell him, from his all-obeying breath i hear the doom of egypt.
mistress, it is. sweet lady, entertain him to be my fellow servant to your ladyship.
what trade, thou knave? thou naughty knave, what trade?
'tis your noblest course. if that the former dare but what it can, no chance may shake it. give me grace to lay my duty on your hand.
too low a mistress for so high a servant.
nay, i beseech you, sir, be not out with me. yet, if you be out, sir, i can mend you.
your caesar's father oft, bestowed his lips on that unworthy place as it rained kisses.
to have a look of such a worthy mistress.
what mean'st thou by that? "mend" me, thou saucy fellow?
favors? by jove that thunders! what art thou, fellow?
leave off discourse of disability. sweet lady, entertain him for your servant.
why, sir, cobble you.
one that but performs the bidding of the fullest man, and worthiest
my duty will i boast of, nothing else.
thou art a cobbler, art thou?
you will be whipped.
servant, you are welcome to a worthless mistress.
truly, sir, all that i live by is with the awl. i meddle with no tradesman's matters nor women's matters, but withal i am indeed, sir, a surgeon to old shoes. when they are in great danger, i recover them. as proper men as ever trod upon neat's leather have gone upon my handiwork.
(calling for servants) approach, there! (to thidias ) ah, you kite!, now, gods and devils! authority melts from me. of late, when i cried "ho!" like boys unto a muss kings would start forth and cry, "your will?" (calling to servants) have you no ears? i am
i'll die on him that says so but yourself.
but wherefore art not in thy shop today? why dost thou lead these men about the streets?
take hence this jack and whip him.
that you are welcome?
truly, sir, to wear out their shoes to get myself into more work. but indeed, sir, we make holiday to see caesar and to rejoice in his triumph.
(aside) 'tis better playing with a lion's whelp than with an old one dying.
that you are worthless.
wherefore rejoice? what conquest brings he home? what tributaries follow him to rome to grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels? o you hard hearts, you cruèl men of rome, knew you not pompey? many a time and oft have you climbed up to walls and battlements, to towers and windows, yea, to chimney tops, the livelong day with patient expectation to see great pompey pass the streets of rome. and when you saw his chariot but appear, have you not made an universal shout to hear the replication of your sounds made in her concave shores? and do you now put on your best attire? and do you now cull out a holiday?
moon and stars! whip him. were 't twenty of the greatest tributaries that do acknowledge caesar, should i find them since she was cleopatra? whip him, fellows, till like a boy, you see him cringe his face and whine aloud for mercy. take him hence.
madam, my lord your father would speak with you.
that comes in triumph over pompey's blood? be gone! run to your houses, fall upon your knees, pray to the gods to intermit the plague
mark antony, 
i wait upon his pleasure.
go, go, good countrymen, and for this fault, assemble all the poor men of your sort, draw them to tiber banks, and weep your tears into the channel till the lowest stream
tug him away! being whipped, bear us an errand to him.
come, sir thurio, go with me. once more, new servant, welcome. i'll leave you to confer of home affairs.
see whether their basest metal be not moved. they vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness. go you down that way towards the capitol. this way will i. disrobe the images
(to cleopatra ) you were half blasted ere i knew you. ha! have i my pillow left unpressed in rome, forborne the getting of a lawful race, by one that looks on feeders?
we'll both attend upon your ladyship.
may we do so? you know it is the feast of lupercal.
good my lord, 
now tell me, how do all from whence you came?
it is no matter. let no images be hung with caesar's trophies. i'll about so do you too, where you perceive them thick. these growing feathers plucked from caesar's wing will make him fly an ordinary pitch, who else would soar above the view of men
you have been a boggler ever. but when we in our viciousness grow hard, oh, misery on 't!, the wise gods seel our eyes, adore our errors, laugh at 's while we strut to our confusion.
your friends are well and have them much commended.
calphurnia!
oh, is 't come to this?
and how do yours?
peace, ho! caesar speaks.
i found you as a morsel cold upon dead caesar's trencher. nay, you were a fragment unregistered in vulgar fame, you have luxuriously picked out. for i am sure, though you can guess what temperance should be, you know not what it is.
i left them all in health.
calphurnia!
wherefore is this?
how does your lady, and how thrives your love?
here, my lord.
and say "god quit you!" be familiar with my playfellow, your hand, this kingly seal and plighter of high hearts! oh, that i were upon the hill of basan, to outroar and to proclaim it civilly were like a haltered neck which does the hangman thank for being yare about him.
my tales of love were wont to weary you; i know you joy not in a love discourse.
when he doth run his course., antonius!
is he whipped?
ay, proteus, but that life is altered now. whose high imperious thoughts have punished me with bitter fasts, with penitential groans, with nightly tears, and daily heartsore sighs; for, in revenge of my contempt of love, and made them watchers of mine own heart's sorrow. o gentle proteus, love's a mighty lord, and hath so humbled me as i confess there is no woe to his correction, now, no discourse, except it be of love; now can i break my fast, dine, sup, and sleep upon the very naked name of love.
caesar, my lord.
soundly, my lord.
enough. i read your fortune in your eye.
forget not in your speed, antonius, to touch calphurnia, for our elders say shake off their sterile curse.
cried he? and begged he pardon?
even she. and is she not a heavenly saint?
i shall remember. when caesar says, "do this," it is performed.
he did ask favor.
no, but she is an earthly paragon.
set on, and leave no ceremony out.
(to thidias ) if that thy father live, let him repent thou wast not made his daughter, and be thou sorry to follow caesar in his triumph, since the white hand of a lady fever thee; shake thou to look on 't. get thee back to caesar. tell him thy entertainment. look thou say he makes me angry with him, for he seems not what he knew i was. he makes me angry, and at this time most easy 'tis to do 't, when my good stars, that were my former guides, have empty left their orbs and shot their fires my speech and what is done, tell him he has hipparchus, my enfranchèd bondman, whom he may at pleasure whip, or hang, or torture, as he shall like, to quit me. urge it thou.
call her divine.
caesar!
have you done yet?
i will not flatter her.
ha! who calls?
alack, our terrene moon is now eclipsed, and it portends alone the fall of antony.
o, flatter me, for love delights in praises.
bid every noise be still. peace yet again.
(aside) i must stay his time.
when i was sick, you gave me bitter pills, and i must minister the like to you.
who is it in the press that calls on me? i hear a tongue, shriller than all the music, cry "caesar!", speak. caesar is turned to hear.
to flatter caesar, would you mingle eyes
then speak the truth by her; if not divine, yet let her be a principality,
beware the ides of march.
not know me yet?
except my mistress.
what man is that?
coldhearted toward me?
sweet, except not any, except thou wilt except against my love.
a soothsayer bids you beware the ides of march.
ah, dear, if i be so, from my cold heart let heaven engender hail, and poison it in the source, and the first stone drop in my neck. as it determines, so till by degrees the memory of my womb, together with my brave egyptians all, by the discandying of this pelleted storm lie graveless till the flies and gnats of nile
have i not reason to prefer mine own?
set him before me. let me see his face.
i am satisfied. caesar sits down in alexandria, where i will oppose his fate. our force by land hath nobly held. our severed navy too have knit again, and fleet, threat'ning most sealike. if from the field i shall return once more to kiss these lips, i will appear in blood. i and my sword will earn our chronicle. there's hope in 't yet.
she shall be dignified with this high honor: to bear my lady's train, lest the base earth should from her vesture chance to steal a kiss and, of so great a favor growing proud, and make rough winter everlastingly.
fellow, come from the throng. look upon caesar.
that's my brave lord!
why, valentine, what braggartism is this?
what sayst thou to me now? speak once again.
i will be treble-sinewed, -hearted, -breathed, and fight maliciously. for when mine hours were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives of me for jests; but now i'll set my teeth let's have one other gaudy night. call to me all my sad captains. fill our bowls once more. let's mock the midnight bell.
pardon me, proteus, all i can is nothing to her whose worth makes other worthies nothing.
beware the ides of march.
it is my birthday. i had thought t' have held it poor; but since my lord
then, let her alone.
he is a dreamer. let us leave him. pass!
we will yet do well.
not for the world. why, man, she is mine own, and i as rich in having such a jewel as twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl, forgive me that i do not dream on thee, because thou seest me dote upon my love. my foolish rival, that her father likes only for his possessions are so huge, for love, thou know'st, is full of jealousy.
will you go see the order of the course?
(to enobarbus ) call all his noble captains to my lord.
but she loves you?
not i.
do so. we'll speak to them, and tonight i'll force the wine peep through their scars., come on, my queen, i'll make death love me, for i will contend even with his pestilent scythe.
ay, and we are betrothed. nay, more, our marriage-hour, with all the cunning manner of our flight, the ladder made of cords, and all the means plotted and 'greed on for my happiness. good proteus, go with me to my chamber, in these affairs to aid me with thy counsel.
i pray you, do.
now he'll outstare the lightning. to be furious is to be frighted out of fear, and in that mood a diminution in our captain's brain restores his heart. when valor preys on reason, it eats the sword it fights with. i will seek some way to leave him.
i must unto the road, to disembark some necessaries that i needs must use, and then i'll presently attend you.
of that quick spirit that is in antony. let me not hinder, cassius, your desires. i'll leave you.
he calls me "boy" and chides as he had power to beat me out of egypt. my messenger he hath whipped with rods, dares me to personal combat, caesar to antony. let the old ruffian know laugh at his challenge.
will you make haste?
brutus, i do observe you now of late and show of love as i was wont to have. you bear too stubborn and too strange a hand over your friend that loves you.
caesar must think when one so great begins to rage, he's hunted even to falling. give him no breath, but now made good guard for itself.
even as one heat another heat expels, or as one nail by strength drives out another, so the remembrance of my former love is by a newer object quite forgotten. her true perfection, or my false transgression that makes me, reasonless, to reason thus? she is fair; and so is julia that i love, that i did love, for now my love is thawed, bears no impression of the thing it was. methinks my zeal to valentine is cold, and that i love him not as i was wont. o, but i love his lady too, too much, how shall i dote on her with more advice, that thus without advice begin to love her! 'tis but her picture i have yet beheld, and that hath dazzlèd my reason's light; there is no reason but i shall be blind. if i can check my erring love, i will; if not, to compass her i'll use my skill.
cassius, be not deceived. if i have veiled my look, merely upon myself. vexèd i am of late with passions of some difference, conceptions only proper to myself, which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors. among which number, cassius, be you one, nor construe any further my neglect than that poor brutus, with himself at war, forgets the shows of love to other men.
let our best heads know that tomorrow the last of many battles we mean to fight. within our files there are, of those that served mark antony but late, and feast the army. we have store to do 't, and they have earned the waste. poor antony!
lance, by mine honesty, welcome to milan!
by means whereof this breast of mine hath buried thoughts of great value, worthy cogitations. tell me, good brutus, can you see your face?
he will not fight with me, domitius?
forswear not thyself, sweet youth, for i am not welcome. i reckon this always, that a man is never undone till he be hanged, nor never welcome to a place till some certain shot be paid and the hostess say "welcome!"
no, cassius, for the eye sees not itself
no.
come on, you madcap, i'll to the alehouse with you presently, where, for one shot of five pence, thou shalt have five thousand welcomes. but, sirrah, how did thy master part with madam julia?
'tis just. and it is very much lamented, brutus, that you have no such mirrors as will turn your hidden worthiness into your eye where many of the best respect in rome, except immortal caesar, speaking of brutus and groaning underneath this age's yoke, have wished that noble brutus had his eyes.
why should he not?
marry, after they closed in earnest, they parted very fairly in jest.
that you would have me seek into myself for that which is not in me?
he thinks, being twenty times of better fortune, he is twenty men to one.
but shall she marry him?
therefore, good brutus, be prepared to hear. and since you know you cannot see yourself will modestly discover to yourself that of yourself which you yet know not of. and be not jealous on me, gentle brutus. were i a common laugher, or did use to every new protester, if you know that i do fawn on men and hug them hard and, after, scandal them, or if you know that i profess myself in banqueting
tomorrow, soldier, or bathe my dying honor in the blood shall make it live again. woo't thou fight well?
no.
what means this shouting? i do fear, the people choose caesar for their king.
i'll strike and cry, "take all."
how then? shall he marry her?
ay, do you fear it? then must i think you would not have it so.
well said. come on! call forth my household servants.
no, neither.
i would not, cassius. yet i love him well. what is it that you would impart to me? if it be aught toward the general good, set honor in one eye and death i' th' other, and i will look on both indifferently, the name of honor more than i fear death.
let's tonight
what, are they broken?
i know that virtue to be in you, brutus, as well as i do know your outward favor. well, honor is the subject of my story. think of this life, but, for my single self, i had as lief not be as live to be in awe of such a thing as i myself. i was born free as caesar. so were you. endure the winter's cold as well as he. for once upon a raw and gusty day, the troubled tiber chafing with her shores, caesar said to me, "darest thou, cassius, now and swim to yonder point?" upon the word, accoutred as i was, i plungèd in and bade him follow. so indeed he did. the torrent roared, and we did buffet it and stemming it with hearts of controversy. but ere we could arrive the point proposed, caesar cried, "help me, cassius, or i sink!" i, as aeneas, our great ancestor, the old anchises bear, so from the waves of tiber did i the tired caesar. and this man
give me thy hand. thou hast been rightly honest., so hast thou,, thou,, and thou,, and thou. you have served me well, and kings have been your fellows.
no, they are both as whole as a fish.
is now become a god, and cassius is a wretched creature and must bend his body he had a fever when he was in spain, and when the fit was on him, i did mark how he did shake. 'tis true, this god did shake! his coward lips did from their color fly, did lose his luster. i did hear him groan, ay, and that tongue of his that bade the romans mark him and write his speeches in their books, "alas," it cried, "give me some drink, titinius," a man of such a feeble temper should so get the start of the majestic world and bear the palm alone.
(aside to enobarbus ) what means this?
why, then, how stands the matter with them?
another general shout! i do believe that these applauses are
out of the mind.
marry, thus: when it stands well with him, it stands well with her.
why, man, he doth bestride the narrow world like a colossus, and we petty men walk under his huge legs and peep about to find ourselves dishonorable graves. the fault, dear brutus, is not in our stars but in ourselves, that we are underlings. brutus and caesar, what should be in that "caesar"? why should that name be sounded more than yours? sound them, it doth become the mouth as well. weigh them, it is as heavy. conjure with 'em,
(to another servitor ) and thou art honest too. i wish i could be made so many men, and all of you clapped up together in an antony, that i might do you service
what an ass art thou! i understand thee not.
"brutus" will start a spirit as soon as "caesar." now in the names of all the gods at once, that he is grown so great? age, thou art shamed! rome, thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods! when went there by an age, since the great flood, but it was famed with more than with one man? that her wide walks encompassed but one man? now is it rome indeed, and room enough, when there is in it but one only man. oh, you and i have heard our fathers say, th' eternal devil to keep his state in rome as easily as a king.
the gods forbid!
what a block art thou, that thou canst not! my staff understands me.
that you do love me, i am nothing jealous. what you would work me to, i have some aim. i shall recount hereafter. for this present, i would not, so with love i might entreat you, be any further moved. what you have said i will consider, what you have to say both meet to hear and answer such high things. till then, my noble friend, chew upon this: brutus had rather be a villager than to repute himself a son of rome is like to lay upon us.
well, my good fellows, wait on me tonight. scant not my cups, and make as much of me as when mine empire was your fellow too, and suffered my command.
what thou sayest?
i am glad that my weak words have struck but thus much show of fire from brutus.
(aside to enobarbus ) what does he mean?
ay, and what i do too. look thee, i'll but lean, and my staff understands me.
the games are done and caesar is returning.
(aside to cleopatra ) to make his followers weep.
it stands under thee, indeed.
as they pass by, pluck casca by the sleeve, what hath proceeded worthy note today.
(to the servitors ) tend me tonight. may be it is the period of your duty. haply you shall not see me more, or if, you'll serve another master. i look on you as one that takes his leave. mine honest friends, i turn you not away, but, like a master married to your good service, stay till death. and the gods yield you for 't!
why, stand-under and under-stand is all one.
i will do so. but, look you, cassius, the angry spot doth glow on caesar's brow, and all the rest look like a chidden train. looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes as we have seen him in the capitol being crossed in conference by some senators.
what mean you, sir, to give them this discomfort? look, they weep, and i, an ass, am onion-eyed. for shame, transform us not to women.
but tell me true, will 't be a match?
casca will tell us what the matter is.
ho, ho, ho! grace grow where those drops fall! my hearty friends, you take me in too dolorous a sense, for i spake to you for your comfort, did desire you to burn this night with torches. know, my hearts, where rather i'll expect victorious life than death and honor. let's to supper, come, and drown consideration.
ask my dog. if he say ay, it will; if he say no, it will; if he shake his tail and say nothing, it will.
antonio.
brother, good night. tomorrow is the day.
the conclusion is then that it will.
caesar.
it will determine one way. fare you well. heard you of nothing strange about the streets?
thou shalt never get such a secret from me but by a parable.
(aside to antony) let me have men about me that are fat, sleek-headed men and such as sleep a-nights. yond cassius has a lean and hungry look.
nothing. what news?
'tis well that i get it so. but, lance, how sayest thou, that my master is become a notable lover?
(aside to caesar) fear him not, caesar. he's not dangerous. he is a noble roman and well given.
belike 'tis but a rumor. good night to you.
i never knew him otherwise.
(aside to antony) would he were fatter! but i fear him not. yet if my name were liable to fear, so soon as that spare cassius. he reads much. he is a great observer, and he looks quite through the deeds of men. he loves no plays, as thou dost, antony. he hears no music. as if he mocked himself and scorned his spirit that could be moved to smile at anything. such men as he be never at heart's ease whiles they behold a greater than themselves, i rather tell thee what is to be feared than what i fear, for always i am caesar. come on my right hand, for this ear is deaf, and tell me truly what thou think'st of him.
well, sir, good night.
than how?
you pulled me by the cloak. would you speak with me?
soldiers, have careful watch.
a notable lubber, as thou reportest him to be.
ay, casca. tell us what hath chanced today that caesar looks so sad.
and you. good night, good night.
why, thou whoreson ass, thou mistak'st me.
why, you were with him, were you not?
here we. and if tomorrow our landmen will stand up.
why, fool, i meant not thee. i meant thy master.
i should not then ask casca what had chanced.
'tis a brave army, and full of purpose.
i tell thee, my master is become a hot lover.
why, there was a crown offered him; and, being offered him, he put it by with the back of his hand, thus; and then the people fell a-shouting.
peace! what noise?
why, i tell thee i care not, though he burn himself in love. if thou wilt, go with me to the alehouse; if not, thou art an hebrew, a jew, and not worth the name of a christian.
what was the second noise for?
list, list!
why?
why, for that too.
hark!
because thou hast not so much charity in thee as to go to the ale with a christian. wilt thou go?
they shouted thrice. what was the last cry for?
music i' th' air.
at thy service.
why, for that too.
under the earth.
to leave my julia, shall i be forsworn; to love fair sylvia, shall i be forsworn; to wrong my friend, i shall be much forsworn. and ev'n that power which gave me first my oath love bade me swear, and love bids me forswear. o sweet-suggesting love, if thou hast sinned, teach me, thy tempted subject, to excuse it! at first i did adore a twinkling star, unheedful vows may heedfully be broken, and he wants wit that wants resolvèd will to learn his wit t' exchange the bad for better. fie, fie, unreverent tongue, to call her bad with twenty thousand soul-confirming oaths! i cannot leave to love, and yet i do; but there i leave to love where i should love. julia i lose, and valentine i lose. if i lose them, thus find i by their loss for valentine, myself; for julia, sylvia. i to myself am dearer than a friend, for love is still most precious in itself, shows julia but a swarthy ethiop. i will forget that julia is alive, remembering that my love to her is dead; and valentine i'll hold an enemy, i cannot now prove constant to myself without some treachery used to valentine. this night he meaneth with a corded ladder to climb celestial sylvia's chamber window, now presently i'll give her father notice of their disguising and pretended flight, who, all enraged, will banish valentine; for thurio, he intends, shall wed his daughter; by some sly trick blunt thurio's dull proceeding. love, lend me wings to make my purpose swift, as thou hast lent me wit to plot this drift!
was the crown offered him thrice?
it signs well, does it not?
counsel, lucetta. gentle girl, assist me; and ev'n in kind love i do conjure thee, who art the table wherein all my thoughts are visibly charactered and engraved, how, with my honor, i may undertake a journey to my loving proteus.
ay, marry, was 't, and he put it by thrice, every time gentler than other, and at every putting-by mine honest neighbors shouted.
no.
alas, the way is wearisome and long!
who offered him the crown?
peace, i say! what should this mean?
a true-devoted pilgrim is not weary much less shall she that hath love's wings to fly, and when the flight is made to one so dear, of such divine perfection, as sir proteus.
why, antony.
'tis the god hercules, whom antony loved, now leaves him.
better forbear till proteus make return.
tell us the manner of it, gentle casca.
walk. let's see if other watchmen do hear what we do.
pity the dearth that i have pinèd in by longing for that food so long a time. didst thou but know the inly touch of love, thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow
i can as well be hanged as tell the manner of it. it was mere foolery. i did not mark it. i saw mark antony offer him a crown (yet 'twas not a crown neither, 'twas one of these coronets) and, as i told you, he put it by once, but, for all that, to my thinking, he would fain have had it. then he offered it to him again, then he put it by again, but, to my thinking, he was very loath to lay his fingers off it. and then he offered it the third time. he put it the third time by. and still, as he refused it, the rabblement hooted and clapped their chapped hands and threw up their sweaty night-caps and uttered such a deal of stinking breath because caesar refused the crown that it had almost choked caesar, for he swooned and fell down at it. and for mine own part, i durst not laugh for fear of opening my lips and receiving the bad air.
how now, masters?
i do not seek to quench your love's hot fire, but qualify the fire's extreme rage, lest it should burn above the bounds of reason.
but soft, i pray you. what, did caesar swoon?
(speak together) how now? how now? do you hear this?
the more thou damm'st it up, the more it burns. thou know'st, being stopped, impatiently doth rage; but when his fair course is not hinderèd, he makes sweet music with th' enameled stones, giving a gentle kiss to every sedge and so by many winding nooks he strays with willing sport to the wild ocean. then let me go, and hinder not my course. i'll be as patient as a gentle stream till the last step have brought me to my love, and there i'll rest, as after much turmoil a blessèd soul doth in elysium.
he fell down in the marketplace, and foamed at mouth, and was speechless.
ay. is 't not strange?
but in what habit will you go along?
'tis very like. he hath the falling sickness.
do you hear, masters? do you hear?
the loose encounters of lascivious men. gentle lucetta, fit me with such weeds as may beseem some well-reputed page.
no, caesar hath it not. but you and i and honest casca, we have the falling sickness.
follow the noise so far as we have quarter;
why, then, your ladyship must cut your hair.
i know not what you mean by that, but i am sure caesar fell down. if the tag-rag people did not clap him and hiss him according as he pleased and displeased them, as they use to do the players in the theatre, i am no true man.
content. 'tis strange.
with twenty odd-conceited true-love knots. to be fantastic may become a youth of greater time than i shall show to be.
what said he when he came unto himself?
(calling) eros! mine armor, eros!
what fashion, madam, shall i make your breeches?
marry, before he fell down, when he perceived the common herd was glad he refused the crown, he plucked me ope his doublet and offered them his throat to cut. an i had been a man of any occupation, if i would not have taken him at a word, i would i might go to hell among the rogues. and so he fell. when he came to himself again, he said, if he had done or said anything amiss, he desired their worships to think it was his infirmity. three or four wenches where i stood cried, "alas, good soul!" and forgave him with all their hearts. but there's no heed to be taken of them. if caesar had stabbed their mothers they would have done no less.
sleep a little.
what compass will you wear your farthingale?" why, even what fashion thou best likes, lucetta.
and after that he came thus sad away?
no, my chuck., eros, come, mine armor, eros!
you must needs have them with a codpiece, madam.
ay.
come, good fellow, put thine iron on. if fortune be not ours today, it is
out, out, lucetta! that will be ill-favored.
did cicero say anything?
nay, i'll help too. what's this for?
unless you have a codpiece to stick pins on.
ay, he spoke greek.
ah, let be, let be! thou art the armorer of my heart. false, false. this, this.
lucetta, as thou lov'st me, let me have what thou think'st meet and is most mannerly. but tell me, wench, how will the world repute me i fear me it will make me scandalized.
to what effect?
sooth, la, i'll help. thus it must be.
if you think so, then stay at home and go not.
nay, an i tell you that, i'll ne'er look you i' th' face again. but those that understood him smiled at one another and shook their heads. but, for mine own part, it was greek to me. i could tell you more news too. murellus and flavius, for pulling scarfs off caesar's images, are put to silence. fare you well. there was more foolery yet, if i could remember it.
well, well, we shall thrive now., seest thou, my good fellow?
nay, that i will not.
will you sup with me tonight, casca?
briefly, sir.
then never dream on infamy, but go. no matter who's displeased when you are gone. i fear me he will scarce be pleased withal.
no, i am promised forth.
is not this buckled well?
that is the least, lucetta, of my fear. a thousand oaths, an ocean of his tears, warrant me welcome to my proteus.
will you dine with me tomorrow?
rarely, rarely. he that unbuckles this, till we do please to doff 't for our repose, shall hear a storm., thou fumblest, eros, and my queen's a squire that thou couldst see my wars today, and knew'st the royal occupation! thou shouldst see a workman in 't.
all these are servants to deceitful men.
ay, if i be alive and your mind hold and your dinner worth the eating.
good morrow to thee. welcome. thou look'st like him that knows a warlike charge. and go to 't with delight.
base men that use them to so base effect! but truer stars did govern proteus' birth; his love sincere, his thoughts immaculate, his tears pure messengers sent from his heart, his heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth.
good. i will expect you.
a thousand, sir, early though 't be, have on their riveted trim and at the port expect you.
pray heaven he prove so when you come to him!
do so. farewell both.
the morn is fair. good morrow, general.
to bear a hard opinion of his truth. only deserve my love by loving him, and presently go with me to my chamber to take a note of what i stand in need of all that is mine i leave at thy dispose, my goods, my lands, my reputation; only, in lieu thereof, dispatch me hence. come, answer not, but to it presently!
what a blunt fellow is this grown to be! he was quick mettle when he went to school.
good morrow, general.
sir thurio, give us leave, i pray, awhile. we have some secrets to confer about.
so is he now in execution of any bold or noble enterprise, this rudeness is a sauce to his good wit, which gives men stomach to digest his words with better appetite.
'tis well blown, lads. this morning, like the spirit of a youth that means to be of note, begins betimes. so, so. (to cleopatra ) come, give me that. this way. well said. fare thee well, dame.
now tell me, proteus, what's your will with me?
and so it is. for this time i will leave you. i will come home to you. or, if you will, come home to me, and i will wait for you.
whate'er becomes of me, and worthy shameful check it were to stand on more mechanic compliment. i'll leave thee now like a man of steel. (to others) you that will fight, follow me close. i'll bring you to 't. (to cleopatra ) adieu.
my gracious lord, that which i would discover but when i call to mind your gracious favors done to me, undeserving as i am, my duty pricks me on to utter that which else no worldly good should draw from me. this night intends to steal away your daughter. myself am one made privy to the plot. i know you have determined to bestow her on thurio, whom your gentle daughter hates; it would be much vexation to your age. thus, for my duty's sake, i rather chose to cross my friend in his intended drift than, by concealing it, heap on your head being unprevented, to your timeless grave.
i will do so. till then, think of the world.
please you retire to your chamber?
proteus, i thank thee for thine honest care, which to requite, command me while i live. this love of theirs myself have often seen, and oftentimes have purposed to forbid sir valentine her company and my court. but, fearing lest my jealous aim might err, and so, unworthily, disgrace the man, i gave him gentle looks, thereby to find that which thyself hast now disclosed to me. and, that thou mayst perceive my fear of this, knowing that tender youth is soon suggested, the key whereof myself have ever kept; and thence she cannot be conveyed away.
well, brutus, thou art noble. yet i see from that it is disposed. therefore it is meet that noble minds keep ever with their likes, for who so firm that cannot be seduced? caesar doth bear me hard, but he loves brutus. he should not humor me. i will this night, in several hands, in at his windows throw, as if they came from several citizens, writings all tending to the great opinion caesar's ambition shall be glancèd at. and after this let caesar seat him sure, for we will shake him, or worse days endure.
lead me. he goes forth gallantly. that he and caesar might determine this great war in single fight! then antony, but now, . well, on.
know, noble lord, they have devised a means how he her chamber window will ascend for which the youthful lover now is gone, and this way comes he with it presently, where, if it please you, you may intercept him. but, good my lord, do it so cunningly for, love of you, not hate unto my friend, hath made me publisher of this pretence.
good even, casca. brought you caesar home? why are you breathless? and why stare you so?
the gods make this a happy day to antony!
upon mine honor, he shall never know that i had any light from thee of this.
are not you moved when all the sway of earth shakes like a thing unfirm? o cicero, have rived the knotty oaks, and i have seen th' ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam to be exalted with the threatening clouds, but never till tonight, never till now, either there is a civil strife in heaven, or else the world, too saucy with the gods, incenses them to send destruction.
would thou and those thy scars had once prevailed to make me fight at land!
adieu, my lord. sir valentine is coming.
why, saw you anything more wonderful?
hadst thou done so, the kings that have revolted, and the soldier followed thy heels.
sir valentine, whither away so fast?
held up his left hand, which did flame and burn like twenty torches joined, and yet his hand, not sensible of fire, remained unscorched. besides, i ha' not since put up my sword, who glared upon me and went surly by, without annoying me. and there were drawn upon a heap a hundred ghastly women, transformèd with their fear, who swore they saw
who's gone this morning?
please it your grace, there is a messenger that stays to bear my letters to my friends, and i am going to deliver them.
and yesterday the bird of night did sit even at noon-day upon the marketplace, hooting and shrieking. when these prodigies do so conjointly meet, let not men say, for i believe they are portentous things unto the climate that they point upon.
who? one ever near thee. call for enobarbus he shall not hear thee, or from caesar's camp say "i am none of thine."
be they of much import?
indeed, it is a strange-disposèd time. but men may construe things after their fashion, comes caesar to the capitol tomorrow?
what sayest thou?
the tenor of them doth but signify my health and happy being at your court.
he doth, for he did bid antonius send word to you he would be there tomorrow.
sir,
nay then, no matter. stay with me awhile. i am to break with thee of some affairs 'tis not unknown to thee that i have sought to match my friend sir thurio to my daughter.
good night then, casca. this disturbèd sky
sir, his chests and treasure he has not with him.
i know it well, my lord, and sure the match were rich and honorable. besides, the gentleman beseeming such a wife as your fair daughter. cannot your grace win her to fancy him?
farewell, cicero.
is he gone?
no, trust me. she is peevish, sullen, froward, proud, disobedient, stubborn, lacking duty, nor fearing me as if i were her father. and, may i say to thee, this pride of hers, upon advice, hath drawn my love from her; and, where i thought the remnant of mine age i now am full resolved to take a wife, and turn her out to who will take her in. then let her beauty be her wedding dower, for me and my possessions she esteems not.
who's there?
most certain.
what would your grace have me to do in this?
a roman.
go, eros, send his treasure after. do it. detain no jot, i charge thee. write to him, i will subscribe, gentle adieus and greetings. to change a master. oh, my fortunes have corrupted honest men! dispatch., enobarbus!
there is a lady in verona here whom i affect, but she is nice and coy, and naught esteems my agèd eloquence. now therefore would i have thee to my tutor, besides, the fashion of the time is changed, how and which way i may bestow myself to be regarded in her sun-bright eye.
casca, by your voice.
go forth, agrippa, and begin the fight. our will is antony be took alive. make it so known.
win her with gifts, if she respect not words. more than quick words do move a woman's mind.
your ear is good. cassius, what night is this!
caesar, i shall.
but she did scorn a present that i sent her.
a very pleasing night to honest men.
prove this a prosp'rous day, the three-nooked world shall bear the olive freely.
a woman sometime scorns what best contents her. send her another. never give her o'er, if she do frown, 'tis not in hate of you, but rather to beget more love in you. if she do chide, 'tis not to have you gone, forwhy the fools are mad if left alone. for "get you gone," she doth not mean "away!'" flatter and praise, commend, extol their graces; though ne'er so black, say they have angels' faces. that man that hath a tongue, i say, is no man
who ever knew the heavens menace so?
antony is come into the field.
but she i mean is promised by her friends unto a youthful gentleman of worth, and kept severely from resort of men, that no man hath access by day to her.
those that have known the earth so full of faults. for my part, i have walked about the streets, submitting me unto the perilous night, and, thus unbracèd, casca, as you see, and when the cross blue lightning seemed to open the breast of heaven, i did present myself even in the aim and very flash of it.
go charge agrippa plant those that have revolted in the vant, upon himself.
why then i would resort to her by night.
but wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens? when the most mighty gods by tokens send such dreadful heralds to astonish us.
alexas did revolt and went to jewry on affairs of antony, there did dissuade great herod to incline himself to caesar caesar hath hanged him. canidius and the rest that fell away have entertainment but no honorable trust. i have done ill, of which i do accuse myself so sorely
ay, but the doors be locked and keys kept safe, that no man hath recourse to her by night.
you are dull, casca, and those sparks of life that should be in a roman you do want, and put on fear, and cast yourself in wonder to see the strange impatience of the heavens. but if you would consider the true cause why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts, why old men fool and children calculate, why all these things change from their ordinance their natures and preformèd faculties to monstrous quality, why, you shall find to make them instruments of fear and warning unto some monstrous state. now could i, casca, name to thee a man most like this dreadful night, as doth the lion in the capitol, 
enobarbus, antony hath after thee sent all thy treasure, with his bounty overplus. the messenger came on my guard, and at thy tent is now unloading of his mules.
what lets but one may enter at her window?
a man no mightier than thyself or me in personal action, yet prodigious grown, and fearful as these strange eruptions are.
i give it you.
her chamber is aloft, far from the ground, without apparent hazard of his life.
'tis caesar that you mean. is it not, cassius?
mock not, enobarbus. i tell you true. best you safed the bringer out of the host. i must attend mine office, or would have done 't myself. your emperor
why then, a ladder quaintly made of cords to cast up, with a pair of anchoring hooks, would serve to scale another hero's tower,
let it be who it is. for romans now have thews and limbs like to their ancestors, but, woe the while!, our fathers' minds are dead, and we are governed with our mothers' spirits.
i am alone the villain of the earth, and feel i am so most. o antony, thou mine of bounty, how wouldst thou have paid my better service, when my turpitude if swift thought break it not, a swifter mean shall outstrike thought, but thought will do 't, i feel. i fight against thee? no, i will go seek some ditch wherein to die. the foul'st best fits
now, as thou art a gentleman of blood, advise me where i may have such a ladder.
indeed, they say the senators tomorrow mean to establish caesar as a king, and he shall wear his crown by sea and land in every place save here in italy.
retire! we have engaged ourselves too far. caesar himself has work, and our oppression exceeds what we expected.
when would you use it? pray, sir, tell me that.
cassius from bondage will deliver cassius. therein, ye gods, you make the weak most strong. therein, ye gods, you tyrants do defeat. nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass, can be retentive to the strength of spirit. but life, being weary of these worldly bars, never lacks power to dismiss itself. if i know this, know all the world besides, i can shake off at pleasure.
o my brave emperor, this is fought indeed! with clouts about their heads.
this very night; for love is like a child,
so can i. so every bondman in his own hand bears the power to cancel his captivity.
thou bleed'st apace.
by seven o'clock i'll get you such a ladder.
and why should caesar be a tyrant then? but that he sees the romans are but sheep. he were no lion were not romans hinds. those that with haste will make a mighty fire begin it with weak straws. what trash is rome, for the base matter to illuminate so vile a thing as caesar! but, o grief, where hast thou led me? i perhaps speak this before a willing bondman. then i know and dangers are to me indifferent.
i had a wound here that was like a "t," but now 'tis made an "h."
but, hark thee, i will go to her alone; how shall i best convey the ladder thither?
you speak to casca, and to such a man that is no fleering telltale. hold, my hand. be factious for redress of all these griefs, as who goes farthest.
they do retire.
it will be light, my lord, that you may bear it
there's a bargain made. now know you, casca, i have moved already some certain of the noblest-minded romans to undergo with me an enterprise and i do know by this they stay for me in pompey's porch. for now, this fearful night, there is no stir or walking in the streets, and the complexion of the element most bloody, fiery, and most terrible.
we'll beat 'em into bench-holes. i have yet
a cloak as long as thine will serve the turn?
stand close awhile, for here comes one in haste.
they are beaten, sir, and our advantage serves for a fair victory.
ay, my good lord.
'tis cinna. i do know him by his gait. he is a friend., cinna, where haste you so?
let us score their backs and snatch 'em up, as we take hares, behind! 'tis sport to maul a runner.
then let me see thy cloak. i'll get me one of such another length.
to find out you. who's that? metellus cimber?
i will reward thee for thy good valor. come thee on.
why, any cloak will serve the turn, my lord.
no, it is casca, one incorporate to our attempts. am i not stayed for, cinna?
i'll halt after.
how shall i fashion me to wear a cloak? i pray thee, let me feel thy cloak upon me.
i am glad on 't. what a fearful night is this! there's two or three of us have seen strange sights.
we have beat him to his camp. run one before and let the queen know of our gests.
what letter is this same? what's here? "to sylvia"! and here an engine fit for my proceeding.
am i not stayed for? tell me.
tomorrow, before the sun shall see 's, we'll spill the blood that has today escaped. i thank you all, not as you served the cause, but as 't had been each man's like mine. you have shown all hectors. enter the city. clip your wives, your friends. tell them your feats, whilst they with joyful tears the honored gashes whole.
"my thoughts do harbor with my sylvia nightly, and slaves they are to me, that send them flying. o, could their master come and go as lightly, himself would lodge where, senseless, they are lying! while i, their king, that thither them importune, do curse the grace that with such grace hath blest them, because myself do want my servants' fortune. i curse myself, for they are sent by me, what's here? "sylvia, this night i will enfranchise thee." 'tis so; and here's the ladder for the purpose. why, phaëthon, for thou art merops' son and with thy daring folly burn the world? wilt thou reach stars because they shine on thee? go, base intruder, overweening slave! bestow thy fawning smiles on equal mates, is privilege for thy departure hence. thank me for this more than for all the favors which, all too much, i have bestowed on thee. but if thou linger in my territories will give thee time to leave our royal court, by heaven, my wrath shall far exceed the love i ever bore my daughter or thyself. begone! i will not hear thy vain excuse,
yes, you are. o cassius, if you could but win the noble brutus to our party, 
(to scarus ) give me thy hand. to this great fairy i'll commend thy acts, make her thanks bless thee. o thou day o' the world, (to cleopatra ) chain mine armed neck. leap thou, attire and all, ride on the pants triumphing!
and why not death rather than living torment? to die is to be banished from myself, and sylvia is myself. banished from her is self from self, a deadly banishment! what joy is joy, if sylvia be not by? unless it be to think that she is by and feed upon the shadow of perfection. except i be by sylvia in the night, unless i look on sylvia in the day, there is no day for me to look upon. she is my essence, and i leave to be if i be not by her fair influence i fly not death, to fly his deadly doom; tarry i here, i but attend on death, but, fly i hence, i fly away from life.
be you content. good cinna, take this paper, where brutus may but find it. and throw this in at his window. set this up with wax upon old brutus' statue. all this done, repair to pompey's porch, where you shall find us.
lord of lords! o infinite virtue, com'st thou smiling from the world's great snare uncaught?
run, boy, run, run, and seek him out.
all but metellus cimber, and he's gone to seek you at your house. well, i will hie, and so bestow these papers as you bade me.
mine nightingale, we have beat them to their beds. what, girl, though gray a brain that nourishes our nerves and can get goal for goal of youth. behold this man. commend unto his lips thy favoring hand. (to scarus ) kiss it, my warrior.
so-ho, so-ho!
that done, repair to pompey's theatre.
he hath fought today destroyed in such a shape.
what seest thou?
see brutus at his house. three parts of him is ours already, and the man entire upon the next encounter yields him ours.
(to scarus ) i'll give thee, friend, an armor all of gold. it was a king's.
him we go to find. there's not a hair on 's head but 'tis a valentine.
oh, he sits high in all the people's hearts, his countenance, like richest alchemy, will change to virtue and to worthiness.
he has deserved it, were it carbuncled like holy phoebus' car. give me thy hand. bear our hacked targets like the men that owe them. had our great palace the capacity to camp this host, we all would sup together and drink carouses to the next day's fate, with brazen din blast you the city's ear; make mingle with our rattling taborins, that heaven and earth may strike their sounds together, applauding our approach.
valentine?
him and his worth and our great need of him you have right well conceited. let us go, we will awake him and be sure of him.
if we be not relieved within this hour, we must return to th' court of guard. the night is shiny, and they say we shall embattle by th' second hour i' th' morn.
no.
what, lucius, ho!, i cannot by the progress of the stars give guess how near to day., lucius, i say!, i would it were my fault to sleep so soundly., 
this last day was a shrewd one to 's.
who then? his spirit?
called you, my lord?
o bear me witness, night, 
neither.
get me a taper in my study, lucius. when it is lighted, come and call me here.
what man is this?
what then?
i will, my lord.
stand close and list him.
nothing.
i know no personal cause to spurn at him but for the general. he would be crowned. how that might change his nature, there's the question. it is the bright day that brings forth the adder and then i grant we put a sting in him that at his will he may do danger with.
be witness to me, o thou blessèd moon, bear hateful memory, poor enobarbus did before thy face repent.
can nothing speak? master, shall i strike?
th' abuse of greatness is when it disjoins remorse from power. and, to speak truth of caesar, more than his reason. but 'tis a common proof that lowliness is young ambition's ladder, whereto the climber upward turns his face. but when he once attains the upmost round, looks in the clouds, scorning the base degrees by which he did ascend. so caesar may. then, lest he may, prevent. and since the quarrel will bear no color for the thing he is, would run to these and these extremities. and therefore think him as a serpent's egg, which, hatched, would as his kind grow mischievous, and kill him in the shell.
enobarbus?
who wouldst thou strike?
searching the window for a flint, i found this paper, thus sealed up, and i am sure it did not lie there when i went to bed. (gives him a letter)
peace! hark further.
nothing.
is not tomorrow, boy, the ides of march?
the poisonous damp of night disponge upon me, that life, a very rebel to my will, may hang no longer on me. throw my heart against the flint and hardness of my fault, and finish all foul thoughts. o antony, nobler than my revolt is infamous, forgive me in thine own particular, but let the world rank me in register o antony! o antony!
villain, forbear.
i know not, sir.
let's speak to him.
why, sir, i'll strike nothing. i pray you, 
look in the calendar and bring me word.
let's hear him, for the things he speaks may concern caesar.
sirrah, i say, forbear., friend valentine, a word.
i will, sir.
let's do so. but he sleeps.
so much of bad already hath possessed them.
give so much light that i may read by them. (opens the letter and reads) "brutus, thou sleep'st. awake, and see thyself. shall rome, etc. speak, strike, redress!" such instigations have been often dropped where i have took them up. , "shall rome, etc." thus must i piece it out: "shall rome stand under one man's awe?" what, rome? the tarquin drive when he was called a king. , "speak, strike, redress!" am i entreated to speak and strike? o rome, i make thee promise, if the redress will follow, thou receivest
was never yet for sleep.
then in dumb silence will i bury mine, for they are harsh, untuneable, and bad.
sir, march is wasted fifteen days.
go we to him.
is sylvia dead?
'tis good. go to the gate. somebody knocks.
awake, sir, awake. speak to us.
no, valentine.
since cassius first did whet me against caesar, i have not slept.
hear you, sir?
no valentine, indeed, for sacred sylvia. hath she forsworn me?
and the first motion, all the interim is like a phantasma or a hideous dream. the genius and the mortal instruments are then in council, and the state of man, the nature of an insurrection.
the hand of death hath raught him.
no, valentine.
sir, 'tis your brother cassius at the door, who doth desire to see you.
hark, the drums demurely wake the sleepers. let us bear him to th' court of guard. he is of note. our hour is fully out.
no valentine, if sylvia have forsworn me.
is he alone?
come on, then. he may recover yet.
sir, there is a proclamation that you are vanished.
no, sir, there are more with him.
their preparation is today by sea. we please them not by land.
that thou art banished, o, that's the news!, from hence, from sylvia, and from me thy friend.
do you know them?
for both, my lord.
o, i have fed upon this woe already, doth sylvia know that i am banished?
and half their faces buried in their cloaks, that by no means i may discover them by any mark of favor.
i would they'd fight i' th' fire or i' th' air, we'd fight there too. but this it is: our foot shall stay with us. order for sea is given; they have put forth the haven, where their appointment we may best discover and look on their endeavor.
ay, ay; and she hath offered to the doom, which, unreversed, stands in effectual force, a sea of melting pearl, which some call tears. with them, upon her knees, her humble self, wringing her hands, whose whiteness so became them as if but now they waxed pale for woe. but neither bended knees, pure hands held up, could penetrate her uncompassionate sire, but valentine, if he be ta'en, must die. besides, her intercession chafed him so, when she for thy repeal was suppliant, with many bitter threats of biding there.
let 'em enter.
but being charged, we will be still by land, which, as i take 't, we shall, for his best force is forth to man his galleys. to the vales, and hold our best advantage.
no more, unless the next word that thou speak'st have some malignant power upon my life! if so, i pray thee, breathe it in mine ear,
they are the faction. o conspiracy, when evils are most free? o, then by day where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough to mask thy monstrous visage? seek none, conspiracy. hide it in smiles and affability.
yet they are not joined. where yond pine does stand i shall discover all. i'll bring thee word straight how 'tis like to go.
cease to lament for that thou canst not help, and study help for that which thou lament'st. time is the nurse and breeder of all good. here if thou stay thou canst not see thy love; hope is a lover's staff; walk hence with that and manage it against despairing thoughts. thy letters may be here, though thou art hence, which, being writ to me, shall be delivered the time now serves not to expostulate. come, i'll convey thee through the city gate, and, ere i part with thee confer at large of all that may concern thy love affairs. regard thy danger, and along with me!
not erebus itself were dim enough to hide thee from prevention.
swallows have built in cleopatra's sails their nests. the auguries and dare not speak their knowledge. antony is valiant and dejected, and by starts his fretted fortunes give him hope and fear of what he has and has not.
i pray thee, lance, an if thou seest my boy, bid him make haste and meet me at the north gate.
i think we are too bold upon your rest. good morrow, brutus. do we trouble you?
all is lost! my fleet hath yielded to the foe, and yonder they cast their caps up and carouse together like friends long lost. triple-turned whore! 'tis thou hast sold me to this novice, and my heart for when i am revenged upon my charm, i have done all. bid them all fly. begone!
go, sirrah, find him out., come, valentine.
know i these men that come along with you?
o sun, thy uprise shall i see no more. fortune and antony part here. even here that spanieled me at heels, to whom i gave their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets on blossoming caesar, and this pine is barked that overtopped them all. betrayed i am. whose eye becked forth my wars and called them home, whose bosom was my crownet, my chief end, like a right gypsy hath at fast and loose beguiled me to the very heart of loss.
o my dear sylvia! hapless valentine!
yes, every man of them, and no man here but honors you, and every one doth wish you had but that opinion of yourself this is trebonius.
ah, thou spell! avaunt!
i am but a fool, look you, and yet i have the wit to think my master is a kind of a knave. but that's all one, if he be but one knave. he lives not now that knows me to be in love, yet i am in love. but a team of horse shall not pluck that from me, nor who 'tis i love. and yet 'tis a woman, but what woman, i will not tell myself. and yet 'tis a milkmaid. yet 'tis not a maid, for she hath had gossips. yet 'tis a maid, for she is her master's maid, and serves for wages. she hath more qualities than a water spaniel, which is much in a bare christian.
he is welcome hither.
why is my lord enraged against his love?
here is the catalog of her condition. "imprimis: she can fetch and carry." why, a horse can do no more. nay, a horse cannot fetch, but only carry; therefore is she better than a jade. "item: she can milk." look you, a sweet virtue in a maid with clean hands.
this, decius brutus.
vanish, or i shall give thee thy deserving, and blemish caesar's triumph. let him take thee and hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians! of all thy sex. most monsterlike be shown for poor'st diminutives, for dolts, and let patient octavia plow thy visage up with her preparèd nails!
how now, signor lance, what news with your mastership?
he is welcome too.
'tis well th'art gone, thou fell'st into my fury, for one death might have prevented many., eros, ho!, the shirt of nessus is upon me. teach me, alcides, thou mine ancestor, thy rage. and with those hands that grasped the heaviest club subdue my worthiest self. the witch shall die. to the young roman boy she hath sold me, and i fall under this plot. she dies for 't., eros, ho!
with my master's ship? why, it is at sea.
this, casca. this, cinna. and this, metellus cimber.
help me, my women! oh, he's more mad than telamon for his shield. the boar of thessaly was never so embossed.
well, your old vice still: mistake the word. what news, then, in your paper?
what watchful cares do interpose themselves betwixt your eyes and night?
to th' monument! there lock yourself and send him word you are dead. than greatness going off.
the black'st news that ever thou heardest.
shall i entreat a word?
to th' monument!, mardian, go tell him i have slain myself. say that the last i spoke was "antony," and word it, prithee, piteously. hence, mardian,
why, man, how black?
here lies the east. doth not the day break here?
eros, thou yet behold'st me?
why, as black as ink.
no.
ay, noble lord.
let me read them.
o, pardon, sir, it doth, and yon gray lines that fret the clouds are messengers of day.
sometimes we see a cloud that's dragonish, a vapor sometime like a bear or lion, a towered citadel, a pendant rock, with trees upon 't that nod unto the world and mock our eyes with air. thou hast seen these signs. they are black vesper's pageants.
fie on thee, jolt-head! thou canst not read.
you shall confess that you are both deceived. (points his sword) which is a great way growing on the south, weighing the youthful season of the year. some two months hence up higher toward the north he first presents his fire, and the high east
ay, my lord.
thou liest. i can.
(comes forward with cassius) give me your hands all over, one by one. (shakes their hands)
that which is now a horse, even with a thought as water is in water.
i will try thee. tell me this: who begot thee?
and let us swear our resolution.
it does, my lord.
marry, the son of my grandfather.
the sufferance of our souls, the time's abuse, if these be motives weak, break off betimes, and every man hence to his idle bed. so let high-sighted tyranny range on as i am sure they do, bear fire enough to kindle cowards and to steel with valor the melting spirits of women, then, countrymen, what need we any spur but our own cause than secret romans that have spoke the word and will not palter? and what other oath than honesty to honesty engaged, that this shall be, or we will fall for it? old feeble carrions and such suffering souls that welcome wrongs. unto bad causes swear such creatures as men doubt. but do not stain the even virtue of our enterprise, to think that or our cause or our performance did need an oath, when every drop of blood that every roman bears, and nobly bears, is guilty of a several bastardy of any promise that hath passed from him.
my good knave eros, now thy captain is even such a body. here i am antony, yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave. whose heart i thought i had, for she had mine, which whilst it was mine had annexed unto 't a million more, now lost, she, eros, has packed cards with caesar and false-played my glory nay, weep not, gentle eros. there is left us ourselves to end ourselves.
o, illiterate loiterer! it was the son of thy grandmother. this proves that thou canst not read.
but what of cicero? shall we sound him? i think he will stand very strong with us.
oh, thy vile lady! she has robbed me of my sword.
come, fool, come. try me in thy paper.
let us not leave him out.
no, antony, my mistress loved thee, and her fortunes mingled
there, [giving him the paper] and saint nicholas be thy speed!
no, by no means.
hence, saucy eunuch! peace! she hath betrayed me and shall die the death.
[reads.] "imprimis, she can milk."
will purchase us a good opinion and buy men's voices to commend our deeds. it shall be said his judgment ruled our hands. our youths and wildness shall no whit appear,
death of one person can be paid but once, and that she has discharged. what thou wouldst do is done unto thy hand. the last she spake then in the midst a tearing groan did break the name of antony. it was divided between her heart and lips. she rendered life, thy name so buried in her.
ay, that she can.
o, name him not. let us not break with him, for he will never follow anything that other men begin.
dead, then?
"item: she brews good ale."
then leave him out.
dead.
and thereof comes the proverb: "blessing of your heart, you brew good ale."
indeed he is not fit.
and we must sleep. (to mardian ) that thou depart'st hence safe does pay thy labor richly. go.
"item: she can sew."
shall no man else be touched but only caesar?
off, pluck off! the sevenfold shield of ajax cannot keep the battery from my heart. o, cleave, my sides! crack thy frail case!, apace, eros, apace. no more a soldier. bruisèd pieces, go. you have been nobly borne. (to eros ) from me awhile.
that's as much as to say "can she so?"
decius, well urged. i think it is not meet mark antony, so well beloved of caesar, should outlive caesar. we shall find of him if he improve them, may well stretch so far as to annoy us all; which to prevent, let antony and caesar fall together.
i will o'ertake thee, cleopatra, and all length is torture. since the torch is out, lie down and stray no farther. now all labor mars what it does. yea, very force entangles itself with strength. seal then, and all is done., where souls do couch on flowers, we'll hand in hand, and with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze. dido and her aeneas shall want troops, and all the haunt be ours., come, eros, eros!
"item: she can knit."
our course will seem too bloody, caius cassius, like wrath in death and envy afterwards, for antony is but a limb of caesar. let us be sacrificers but not butchers, caius. we all stand up against the spirit of caesar, oh, that we then could come by caesar's spirit and not dismember caesar! but, alas, caesar must bleed for it. and, gentle friends, let's kill him boldly but not wrathfully. not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds. and let our hearts, as subtle masters do, stir up their servants to an act of rage and after seem to chide 'em. this shall make which so appearing to the common eyes, we shall be called purgers, not murderers. and for mark antony, think not of him, for he can do no more than caesar's arm
what would my lord?
what need a man care for a stock with a wench, when she can knit him a stock?
yet i fear him. for in the engrafted love he bears to caesar, 
since cleopatra died i have lived in such dishonor that the gods detest my baseness. i, that with my sword quartered the world, and o'er green neptune's back with ships made cities, condemn myself to lack than she which by her death our caesar tells "i am conqueror of myself." thou art sworn, eros, that when the exigent should come which now is come indeed, when i should see behind me disgrace and horror, that on my command, thou then wouldst kill me. do 't. the time is come. thou strik'st not me, 'tis caesar thou defeat'st. put color in thy cheek.
"item: she can wash and scour."
alas, good cassius, do not think of him. if he love caesar, all that he can do is to himself: take thought and die for caesar. to sports, to wildness and much company.
the gods withhold me! though enemy, lost aim and could not?
a special virtue, for then she need not be washed and scoured.
there is no fear in him. let him not die, for he will live and laugh at this hereafter.
eros, wouldst thou be windowed in great rome and see thy master thus with pleached arms, bending down his corrigible neck, his face subdued of fortunate caesar, drawn before him, branded his baseness that ensued?
"item: she can spin."
peace! count the clock.
i would not see 't.
then may i set the world on wheels, when she can spin for her living.
the clock hath stricken three.
come, then, for with a wound i must be cured. draw that thy honest sword, which thou hast worn
"item: she hath many nameless virtues."
'tis time to part.
o sir, pardon me!
that's as much as to say, bastard virtues, that indeed know not their fathers and therefore have no names.
but it is doubtful yet whether caesar will come forth today or no. for he is superstitious grown of late, quite from the main opinion he held once it may be, these apparent prodigies, the unaccustomed terror of this night, and the persuasion of his augurers may hold him from the capitol today.
when i did make thee free, swor'st thou not then to do this when i bade thee? do it at once, or thy precedent services are all but accidents unpurposed. draw and come.
here follow her vices.
i can o'ersway him. for he loves to hear that unicorns may be betrayed with trees, and bears with glasses, elephants with holes, lions with toils, and men with flatterers. he says he does, being then most flatterèd. let me work. for i can give his humor the true bent, and i will bring him to the capitol.
wherein the worship of the whole world lies.
close at the heels of her virtues.
nay, we will all of us be there to fetch him.
lo thee!
"item: she is not to be kissed fasting, in respect of her breath."
by the eighth hour. is that the uttermost?
my sword is drawn.
well, that fault may be mended with a breakfast. read on.
be that the uttermost, and fail not then.
then let it do at once the thing why thou hast drawn it.
"item: she hath a sweet mouth."
caius ligarius doth bear caesar hard, who rated him for speaking well of pompey.
my dear master, before i strike this bloody stroke, farewell.
that makes amends for her sour breath.
now, good metellus, go along by him. he loves me well, and i have given him reasons. send him but hither and i'll fashion him.
'tis said, man, and farewell.
"item: she doth talk in her sleep."
the morning comes upon 's. we'll leave you, brutus. what you have said, and show yourselves true romans.
farewell, great chief. shall i strike now?
it's no matter for that, so she sleep not in her talk.
good gentlemen, look fresh and merrily. let not our looks put on our purposes, but bear it as our roman actors do, and so good morrow to you every one.
now, eros.
"item: she is slow in words."
boy! lucius!, fast asleep? it is no matter. enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber. thou hast no figures nor no fantasies, therefore thou sleep'st so sound.
why, there then!
o villain, that set this down among her vices! to be slow in words is a woman's only virtue. i pray thee, out with 't, and place it for her chief virtue.
brutus, my lord.
thus i do escape the sorrow
"item: she is proud."
portia, what mean you? wherefore rise you now? it is not for your health thus to commit your weak condition to the raw, cold morning.
thrice nobler than myself, thou teachest me, o valiant eros, what i should and thou couldst not. my queen and eros have by their brave instruction got upon me a nobleness in record. but i will be as to a lover's bed. come then, and eros, thy master dies thy scholar. to do thus i learned of thee.
out with that too; it was eve's legacy, and cannot be ta'en from her.
stole from my bed. and yesternight, at supper, you suddenly arose and walked about, musing and sighing, with your arms across, and when i asked you what the matter was, i urged you further, then you scratched your head and too impatiently stamped with your foot. yet i insisted; yet you answered not, but with an angry wafture of your hand fearing to strengthen that impatience which seemed too much enkindled, and withal hoping it was but an effect of humor, which sometime hath his hour with every man. and could it work so much upon your shape as it hath much prevailed on your condition, i should not know you, brutus. dear my lord, make me acquainted with your cause of grief.
how! not dead? not dead? the guard, ho! oh, dispatch me!
"item: she hath no teeth."
i am not well in health, and that is all.
what's the noise?
i care not for that neither, because i love crusts.
brutus is wise, and were he not in health, he would embrace the means to come by it.
i have done my work ill, friends. oh, make an end of what i have begun!
"item: she is curst."
why, so i do. good portia, go to bed.
the star is fall'n.
well, the best is, she hath no teeth to bite.
is brutus sick? and is it physical of the dank morning? what, is brutus sick, and will he steal out of his wholesome bed, to dare the vile contagion of the night and tempt the rheumy and unpurgèd air you have some sick offense within your mind, which by the right and virtue of my place i ought to know of. (kneels) and upon my knees by all your vows of love and that great vow which did incorporate and make us one that you unfold to me, your self, your half, why you are heavy, and what men tonight some six or seven who did hide their faces even from darkness.
and time is at his period.
"item: she will often praise her liquor."
kneel not, gentle portia.
alas, and woe!
if her liquor be good, she shall. if she will not, i will, for good things should be praised.
(rising) i should not need if you were gentle, brutus. within the bond of marriage, tell me, brutus, that appertain to you? am i yourself but, as it were, in sort or limitation, to keep with you at meals, comfort your bed, and talk to you sometimes?
let him that loves me strike me dead.
"item: she is too liberal."
dwell i but in the suburbs portia is brutus' harlot, not his wife.
not i.
of her tongue she cannot, for that's writ down she is slow of; of her purse she shall not, for that i'll keep shut. now of another thing she may, and that cannot i help. well, proceed.
you are my true and honorable wife, as dear to me as are the ruddy drops that visit my sad heart.
nor i.
"item: she hath more hair than wit, and more faults than hairs, and more wealth than faults."
i grant i am a woman, but withal a woman that lord brutus took to wife. i grant i am a woman, but withal a woman well-reputed, cato's daughter. being so fathered and so husbanded? tell me your counsels. i will not disclose 'em. i have made strong proof of my constancy, giving myself a voluntary wound and not my husband's secrets?
nor anyone.
stop there; i'll have her; she was mine and not mine twice or thrice in that last article. rehearse that once more.
o ye gods, render me worthy of this noble wife!
thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly.
"item: she hath more hair than wit, "
hark, hark! one knocks. portia, go in awhile. and by and by thy bosom shall partake all my engagements i will construe to thee, all the charactery of my sad brows. leave me with haste.
this sword but shown to caesar, with this tidings,
more hair than wit? it may be: i'll prove it. the cover of the salt hides the salt, and therefore it is more than the salt; the hair that covers the wit is more than the wit, for the greater hides the less. what's next?
lucius, who's that knocking?
where's antony?
"and more faults than hairs, "
he is a sick man that would speak with you.
there, diomed, there.
that's monstrous. o, that that were out!
caius ligarius, that metellus spake of., boy, stand aside., caius ligarius, how?
lives he? wilt thou not answer, man?
"and more wealth than faults."
vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.
art thou there, diomed? draw thy sword and give me
why, that word makes the faults gracious. well, i'll have her; an if it be a match, as nothing is impossible, 
o, what a time have you chose out, brave caius,
most absolute lord, my mistress cleopatra sent me to thee.
what then?
i am not sick if brutus have in hand any exploit worthy the name of honor.
when did she send thee?
why, then will i tell thee, that thy master stays for thee at the north gate.
such an exploit have i in hand, ligarius, had you a healthful ear to hear of it.
now, my lord.
for me?
by all the gods that romans bow before, i here discard my sickness! soul of rome, brave son derived from honorable loins, thou, like an exorcist, hast conjured up and i will strive with things impossible, yea, get the better of them. what's to do?
where is she?
for thee? ay, who art thou? he hath stayed for a better man than thee.
a piece of work that will make sick men whole.
locked in her monument. she had a prophesying fear of what hath come to pass. for when she saw, she had disposed with caesar, and that your rage would not be purged, she sent you word she was dead. but fearing since how it might work, hath sent me to proclaim the truth, and i am come,
and must i go to him?
but are not some whole that we must make sick?
too late, good diomed. call my guard, i prithee.
thou must run to him, for thou hast stayed so long that going will scarce serve the turn.
i shall unfold to thee as we are going to whom it must be done.
what ho, the emperor's guard! the guard, what ho! come, your lord calls!
why didst not tell me sooner? pox of your love letters!
set on your foot, and with a heart new-fired i follow you, to do i know not what. but it sufficeth
bear me, good friends, where cleopatra bides.
now will he be swinged for reading my letter, an unmannerly slave, that will thrust himself into secrets! i'll after, to rejoice in the boy's correction.
follow me, then.
woe, woe are we, sir, you may not live to wear all your true followers out.
sir thurio, fear not but that she will love you, now valentine is banished from her sight.
nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight. thrice hath calphurnia in her sleep cried out, "help, ho! they murder caesar!", who's within?
most heavy day!
since his exile she hath despised me most, forsworn my company and railed at me,
my lord.
nay, good my fellows, do not please sharp fate to grace it with your sorrows. bid that welcome seeming to bear it lightly. take me up. i have led you oft; carry me now, good friends, and have my thanks for all.
this weak impress of love is as a figure trenchèd in ice, which with an hour's heat dissolves to water and doth lose his form. a little time will melt her frozen thoughts,
and bring me their opinions of success.
o charmian, i will never go from hence.
how now, sir proteus? is your countryman, according to our proclamation, gone?
i will, my lord.
be comforted, dear madam.
gone, my good lord.
what mean you, caesar? think you to walk forth? you shall not stir out of your house today.
no, i will not. all strange and terrible events are welcome, but comforts we despise. our size of sorrow, as that which makes it.
my daughter takes his going grievously.
ne'er looked but on my back. when they shall see the face of caesar, they are vanishèd.
how now? is he dead?
a little time, my lord, will kill that grief.
caesar, i never stood on ceremonies, yet now they fright me. there is one within, recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch. a lioness hath whelpèd in the streets, and graves have yawned and yielded up their dead.
his death's upon him, but not dead. look out o' th' other side your monument. his guard have brought him thither.
so i believe, but thurio thinks not so. proteus, the good conceit i hold of thee, for thou hast shown some sign of good desert, makes me the better to confer with thee.
fierce fiery warriors fought upon the clouds which drizzled blood upon the capitol. the noise of battle hurtled in the air. horses did neigh, and dying men did groan, and ghosts did shriek and squeal about the streets. and i do fear them.
o sun, the varying shore o' th' world! o antony, antony, antony! help, charmian, help, iras, help! help, friends below! let's draw him hither.
let me not live to look upon your grace.
what can be avoided whose end is purposed by the mighty gods? yet caesar shall go forth, for these predictions are to the world in general as to caesar.
peace! not caesar's valor hath o'erthrown antony,
thou know'st how willingly i would effect the match between sir thurio and my daughter.
the heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.
so it should be, that none but antony should conquer antony, but woe 'tis so!
i do, my lord.
cowards die many times before their deaths. the valiant never taste of death but once. of all the wonders that i yet have heard, seeing that death, a necessary end, will come when it will come.
i am dying, egypt, dying. only i here importune death awhile, until i lay upon thy lips.
how she opposes her against my will.
what say the augurers?
i dare not, dear, dear my lord, pardon, i dare not, lest i be taken. not th' imperious show of the full-fortuned caesar ever shall edge, sting, or operation, i am safe. your wife octavia, with her modest eyes and still conclusion, shall acquire no honor demuring upon me. but come, come, antony, assist, good friends.
she did, my lord, when valentine was here.
they would not have you to stir forth today. plucking the entrails of an offering forth,
oh, quick, or i am gone.
ay, and perversely she persevers so. what might we do to make the girl forget
the gods do this in shame of cowardice. caesar should be a beast without a heart if he should stay at home today for fear. no, caesar shall not. danger knows full well
here's sport indeed! how heavy weighs my lord! our strength is all gone into heaviness, that makes the weight. had i great juno's power, and set thee by jove's side. yet come a little. wishers were ever fools. oh, come, come, come!
the best way is to slander valentine with falsehood, cowardice, and poor descent, three things that women highly hold in hate.
we are two lions littered in one day, and i the elder and more terrible. and caesar shall go forth.
and welcome, welcome! die when thou hast lived. quicken with kissing. had my lips that power,
ay, but she'll think that it is spoke in hate.
alas, my lord, your wisdom is consumed in confidence. that keeps you in the house, and not your own. we'll send mark antony to the senate house, and he shall say you are not well today. (kneels) let me, upon my knee, prevail in this.
a heavy sight!
therefore it must with circumstance be spoken by one whom she esteemeth as his friend.
and for thy humor i will stay at home.
i am dying, egypt, dying. give me some wine and let me speak a little.
then you must undertake to slander him.
here's decius brutus. he shall tell them so.
no, let me speak, and let me rail so high provoked by my offense.
and that, my lord, i shall be loath to do. especially against his very friend.
caesar, all hail! good morrow, worthy caesar. i come to fetch you to the senate house.
one word, sweet queen: of caesar seek your honor, with your safety, oh!
where your good word cannot advantage him, your slander never can endamage him; therefore the office is indifferent,
to bear my greeting to the senators and tell them that i will not come today. "cannot" is false, and that i dare not, falser. i will not come today. tell them so, decius.
they do not go together.
you have prevailed, my lord. if i can do it by aught that i can speak in his dispraise, she shall not long continue love to him. but say this weed her love from valentine,
say he is sick.
gentle, hear me. none about caesar trust but proculeius.
therefore, as you unwind her love from him, lest it should ravel and be good to none, you must provide to bottom it on me; which must be done by praising me as much
shall caesar send a lie? have i in conquest stretched mine arm so far to be afraid to tell graybeards the truth?
none about caesar.
and, proteus, we dare trust you in this kind because we know, on valentine's report, you are already love's firm votary and cannot soon revolt and change your mind. where you with sylvia may confer at large; for she is lumpish, heavy, melancholy, and, for your friend's sake, will be glad of you, where you may temper her by your persuasion
decius, go tell them caesar will not come.
the miserable change now at my end lament nor sorrow at, but please your thoughts in feeding them with those my former fortunes, the noblest, and do now not basely die, not cowardly put off my helmet to my countryman, a roman by a roman valiantly vanquished. now my spirit is going.
as much as i can do, i will effect. but you, sir thurio, are not sharp enough; you must lay lime to tangle her desires by wailful sonnets, whose composèd rhymes
most mighty caesar, let me know some cause,
noblest of men, woo't die? hast thou no care of me? shall i abide in this dull world, which in thy absence is no better than a sty? o see, my women, the crown o' th' earth doth melt. my lord!
ay, much is the force of heaven-bred poesy.
the cause is in my will. i will not come. that is enough to satisfy the senate. but for your private satisfaction, because i love you, i will let you know. she dreamt tonight she saw my statue, which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts, did run pure blood. and many lusty romans came smiling and did bathe their hands in it. and evils imminent, and on her knee hath begged that i will stay at home today.
the soldier's pole is fall'n! young boys and girls are level now with men. the odds is gone, and there is nothing left remarkable beneath the visiting moon.
say that upon the altar of her beauty you sacrifice your tears, your sighs, your heart. write till your ink be dry, and with your tears that may discover such integrity: for orpheus' lute was strung with poets' sinews, whose golden touch could soften steel and stones, make tigers tame, and huge leviathans after your dire-lamenting elegies, visit by night your lady's chamber window with some sweet consort. to their instruments tune a deploring dump; the night's dead silence this, or else nothing, will inherit her.
this dream is all amiss interpreted. it was a vision fair and fortunate. in which so many smiling romans bathed, signifies that from you great rome shall suck reviving blood, and that great men shall press for tinctures, stains, relics, and cognizance.
oh, quietness, lady!
this discipline shows thou hast been in love.
and this way have you well expounded it.
she's dead too, our sovereign.
and thy advice this night i'll put in practice. therefore, sweet proteus, my direction-giver, to sort some gentlemen well skilled in music. i have a sonnet that will serve the turn to give the onset to thy good advice.
i have, when you have heard what i can say. and know it now: the senate have concluded to give this day a crown to mighty caesar.
lady!
about it, gentlemen!
their minds may change. besides, it were a mock apt to be rendered for someone to say, "break up the senate till another time when caesar's wife shall meet with better dreams." "lo, caesar is afraid"? pardon me, caesar. for my dear, dear love to your proceeding bids me tell you this, and reason to my love is liable.
madam!
and afterward determine our proceedings.
i am ashamèd i did yield to them. give me my robe, for i will go.
o madam, madam, madam!
even now about it! i will pardon you.
and look, where publius is come to fetch me.
royal egypt, empress!
fellows, stand fast. i see a passenger.
good morrow, caesar.
peace, peace, iras.
if there be ten, shrink not, but down with 'em.
, what, brutus, are you stirred so early too? , good morrow, casca., caius ligarius, caesar was ne'er so much your enemy as that same ague which hath made you lean.
no more but e'en a woman, and commanded by such poor passion as the maid that milks and does the meanest chares. it were for me to throw my scepter at the injurious gods, till they had stolen our jewel. all's but naught. patience is sottish, and impatience does become a dog that's mad. then is it sin to rush into the secret house of death what, what, good cheer! why, how now, charmian? my noble girls! ah, women, women! look, our lamp is spent, it's out. good sirs, take heart. we'll bury him, and then, what's brave, what's noble, and make death proud to take us. come, away. this case of that huge spirit now is cold. ah, women, women! come. we have no friend but resolution, and the briefest end.
stand, sir! and throw us that you have about ye. if not, we'll make you sit, and rifle you.
caesar, 'tis strucken eight.
go to him, dolabella, bid him yield. being so frustrate, tell him, he mocks the pauses that he makes.
that all the travelers do fear so much.
i thank you for your pains and courtesy.
caesar, i shall.
my friends, 
see, antony, that revels long a-nights, is notwithstanding up., good morrow, antony.
wherefore is that? and what art thou that dar'st
that's not so, sir. we are your enemies.
so to most noble caesar.
i am called dercetus. mark antony i served, who best was worthy best to be served. whilst he stood up and spoke, he was my master, and i wore my life to spend upon his haters. if thou please i'll be to caesar. if thou pleasest not, i yield thee up my life.
peace! we'll hear him.
bid them prepare within. , now, cinna., now, metellus., what, trebonius, i have an hour's talk in store for you. remember that you call on me today. be near me, that i may remember you.
what is 't thou say'st?
ay, by my beard will we, for he is a proper man.
that your best friends shall wish i had been further.
i say, o caesar, antony is dead.
then know that i have little wealth to lose. a man i am, crossed with adversity; my riches are these poor habiliments, of which if you should here disfurnish me
good friends, go in and taste some wine with me. and we, like friends, will straightway go together.
the breaking of so great a thing should make should have shook lions into civil streets and citizens to their dens. the death of antony is not a single doom. in the name lay a moiety of the world.
whither travel you?
(aside) that every "like" is not the same, o caesar,
he is dead, caesar, nor by a hirèd knife, but that self hand which writ his honor in the acts it did hath, with the courage which the heart did lend it, splitted the heart. this is his sword. with his most noble blood.
to verona.
(reads aloud) "caesar, beware of brutus. take heed of cassius. come not near casca. have an eye to cinna. trust not trebonius. mark well metellus cimber. decius brutus loves thee not. thou hast wronged caius ligarius. there is but one mind in all these men, and it is bent against caesar. if thou beest not immortal, look about you. security gives way to conspiracy. the mighty gods defend thee! thy lover, artemidorus" and as a suitor will i give him this. my heart laments that virtue cannot live out of the teeth of emulation. if thou read this, o caesar, thou mayst live.
look you, sad friends, the gods rebuke me, but it is tidings to wash the eyes of kings.
whence came you?
i prithee, boy, run to the senate house. stay not to answer me, but get thee gone. why dost thou stay?
and strange it is that nature must compel us to lament
from milan.
to know my errand, madam.
his taints and honors waged equal with him.
have you long sojourned there?
i would have had thee there and here again , o constancy, be strong upon my side, set a huge mountain 'tween my heart and tongue! i have a man's mind but a woman's might. how hard it is for women to keep counsel!
a rarer spirit never did steer humanity, but you gods will give us some faults to make us men. caesar is touched.
some sixteen months, and longer might have stayed if crooked fortune had not thwarted me.
madam, what should i do? run to the capitol, and nothing else? and so return to you, and nothing else?
when such a spacious mirror's set before him,
what! were you banished thence?
yes, bring me word, boy, if thy lord look well, for he went sickly forth. and take good note hark, boy! what noise is that?
o antony, i have followed thee to this, but we do launch diseases in our bodies. i must perforce have shown to thee such a declining day, or look on thine. we could not stall together with tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts that thou, my brother, my competitor in top of all design, my mate in empire, friend and companion in the front of war, where mine his thoughts did kindle, that our stars, unreconcilable, should divide our equalness to this. hear me, good friends, 
i was.
i hear none, madam.
but i will tell you at some meeter season. we'll hear him what he says. (to egyptian ) whence are you?
for what offence?
prithee, listen well. i heard a bustling rumor like a fray,
a poor egyptian yet, the queen my mistress, confined in all she has, her monument, of thy intents desires instruction, to th' way she's forced to.
for that which now torments me to rehearse: i killed a man, whose death i much repent, but yet i slew him manfully in fight without false vantage or base treachery.
sooth, madam, i hear nothing.
bid her have good heart. she soon shall know of us, by some of ours, how honorable and how kindly we determine for her, for caesar cannot live
but were you banished for so small a fault?
come hither, fellow. which way hast thou been?
so the gods preserve thee!
i was, and held me glad of such a doom.
at mine own house, good lady.
come hither, proculeius. go and say we purpose her no shame. give her what comforts the quality of her passion shall require, lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke would be eternal in our triumph. go, and with your speediest bring us what she says and how you find of her.
have you the tongues?
what is 't o'clock?
caesar, i shall.
my youthful travel therein made me happy,
about the ninth hour, lady.
gallus, go you along.
by the bare scalp of robin hood's fat friar, this fellow were a king for our wild faction!
is caesar yet gone to the capitol?
where's dolabella,
we'll have him. sirs, a word.
madam, not yet. i go to take my stand to see him pass on to the capitol.
dolabella!
master, be one of them.
thou hast some suit to caesar, hast thou not?
let him alone, for i remember now how he's employed. he shall in time be ready. go with me to my tent, where you shall see how hardly i was drawn into this war, in all my writings. go with me and see what i can show in this.
peace, villain!
to be so good to caesar as to hear me, i shall beseech him to befriend himself.
my desolation does begin to make a better life. 'tis paltry to be caesar. not being fortune, he's but fortune's knave, a minister of her will. and it is great which shackles accidents and bolts up change, which sleeps and never palates more the dung, the beggar's nurse, and caesar's.
[returning to valentine] tell us this: have you anything to take to?
why, know'st thou any harm's intended towards him?
caesar sends greeting to the queen of egypt, thou mean'st to have him grant thee.
nothing but my fortune.
none that i know will be; much that i fear may chance. the throng that follows caesar at the heels, of senators, of praetors, common suitors, will crowd a feeble man almost to death. i'll get me to a place more void, and there
what's thy name?
know, then, that some of us are gentlemen, thrust from the company of awful men. myself was from verona banishèd for practicing to steal away a lady, an heir, and near allied unto the duke.
i must go in. (aside) ay me, how weak a thing the heart of woman is! o brutus, the heavens speed thee in thine enterprise! sure, the boy heard me. (to lucius) brutus hath a suit run, lucius, and commend me to my lord. say i am merry. come to me again, and bring me word what he doth say to thee.
my name is proculeius.
who, in my mood, i stabbed unto the heart.
(to the soothsayer) the ides of march are come.
antony did tell me of you, bade me trust you, but i do not greatly care to be deceived, would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him, that majesty, to keep decorum, must no less beg than a kingdom. if he please to give me conquered egypt for my son, will kneel to him with thanks.
and i for suchlike petty crimes as these. but to the purpose, for we cite our faults that they may hold excused our lawless lives; with goodly shape, and by your own report a linguist, and a man of such perfection as we do in our quality much want, 
ay, caesar, but not gone.
be of good cheer. you're fall'n into a princely hand. fear nothing. make your full reference freely to my lord, who is so full of grace that it flows over your sweet dependency, and you shall find a conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness where he for grace is kneeled to.
indeed, because you are a banished man, are you content to be our general? to make a virtue of necessity and live, as we do, in this wilderness?
(offering his letter) hail, caesar! read this schedule.
pray you, tell him i am his fortune's vassal, and i send him a doctrine of obedience, and would gladly look him i' th' face.
what sayst thou? wilt thou be of our consort? we'll do thee homage, and be ruled by thee, love thee as our commander and our king.
(offering caesar another paper) at your best leisure, this his humble suit.
this i'll report, dear lady. have comfort, for i know your plight is pitied of him that caused it.
but if thou scorn our courtesy thou diest.
o caesar, read mine first, for mine's a suit that touches caesar nearer. read it, great caesar.
(to the soldiers) guard her till caesar come.
thou shalt not live to brag what we have offered.
what touches us ourself shall be last served.
royal queen!
provided that you do no outrages on silly women or poor passengers.
delay not, caesar. read it instantly.
o cleopatra! thou art taken, queen.
no, we detest such vile base practices. come, go with us. we'll bring thee to our crews which, with ourselves, all rest at thy dispose.
what, is the fellow mad?
quick, quick, good hands.
already have i been false to valentine, and now i must be as unjust to thurio. under the color of commending him, i have access my own love to prefer. to be corrupted with my worthless gifts. when i protest true loyalty to her, she twits me with my falsehood to my friend. when to her beauty i commend my vows, in breaking faith with julia, whom i loved. and notwithstanding all her sudden quips, the least whereof would quell a lover's hope, yet, spaniel-like, the more she spurns my love, but here comes thurio. now must we to her window and give some evening music to her ear.
(to artemidorus) sirrah, give place.
hold, worthy lady, hold! do not yourself such wrong, who are in this
how now, sir proteus, are you crept before us?
(to artemidorus) what, urge you your petitions in the street?
what, of death too, that rids our dogs of languish?
ay, gentle thurio, for you know that love
(to cassius) i wish your enterprise today may thrive.
cleopatra, do not abuse my master's bounty by th' undoing of yourself. let the world see his nobleness well acted, which your death
ay, but i hope, sir, that you love not here.
what enterprise, popillius?
where art thou, death? come hither, come! come, come and take a queen worth many babes and beggars!
sir, but i do, or else i would be hence.
fare you well.
oh, temperance, lady!
who? sylvia?
(to cassius) what said popillius lena?
sir, i will eat no meat, i'll not drink, sir. if idle talk will once be necessary, do caesar what he can. know, sir, that i will not wait pinioned at your master's court, nor once be chastised with the sober eye of dull octavia. shall they hoist me up of censuring rome? rather a ditch in egypt be gentle grave unto me. rather on nilus' mud lay me stark naked and let the waterflies blow me into abhorring. rather make and hang me up in chains!
ay, sylvia, for your sake.
(aside to brutus) i fear our purpose is discoverèd.
you do extend these thoughts of horror further than you shall find cause in caesar.
let's tune, and to it lustily awhile.
look how he makes to caesar. mark him.
proculeius, what thou hast done thy master caesar knows, i'll take her to my guard.
now, my young guest, methinks you're allycholly. i pray you, why is it?
casca, be sudden, for we fear prevention , brutus, what shall be done? if this be known, for i will slay myself.
so, dolabella, it shall content me best. be gentle to her. (to cleopatra ) to caesar i will speak what you shall please, if you'll employ me to him.
marry, mine host, because i cannot be merry.
cassius, be constant. popillius lena speaks not of our purposes. for, look, he smiles, and caesar doth not change.
say i would die.
come, we'll have you merry. i'll bring you where you shall hear music and see the gentleman that you asked for.
trebonius knows his time. for, look you, brutus.
most noble empress, you have heard of me?
but shall i hear him speak?
where is metellus cimber? let him go and presently prefer his suit to caesar.
i cannot tell.
ay, that you shall.
he is addressed. press near and second him.
assuredly you know me.
that will be music.
casca, you are the first that rears your hand.
no matter, sir, what i have heard or known. you laugh when boys or women tell their dreams.
hark! hark!
that caesar and his senate must redress?
i understand not, madam.
is he among these?
(kneeling) most high, most mighty, and most puissant caesar, metellus cimber throws before thy seat
i dreamt there was an emperor antony. oh, such another sleep, that i might see but such another man!
ay, but peace! let's hear 'em.
i must prevent thee, cimber. these couchings and these lowly courtesies might fire the blood of ordinary men and turn preordinance and first decree into the law of children. be not fond, that will be thawed from the true quality with that which melteth fools, i mean, sweet words, low-crookèd curtsies, and base spaniel fawning. thy brother by decree is banishèd. i spurn thee like a cur out of my way. know, caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause will he be satisfied.
if it might please ye, 
who is sylvia? what is she, that all our swains commend her? holy, fair, and wise is she; the heaven such grace did lend her, is she kind as she is fair? for beauty lives with kindness. love doth to her eyes repair to help him of his blindness, then to sylvia let us sing, that sylvia is excelling. she excels each mortal thing upon the dull earth dwelling.
is there no voice more worthy than my own for the repealing of my banished brother?
his face was as the heavens, and therein stuck the little "o," the earth.
how now? are you sadder than you were before? how do you, man? the music likes you not.
(kneeling) i kiss thy hand, but not in flattery, caesar, desiring thee that publius cimber may have an immediate freedom of repeal.
most sovereign creature, 
you mistake; the musician likes me not.
what, brutus?
his legs bestrid the ocean. his reared arm crested the world. his voice was propertied as all the tunèd spheres, and that to friends. he was as rattling thunder. for his bounty, there was no winter in 't, an autumn 'twas that grew the more by reaping. his delights were dolphinlike; they showed his back above walked crowns and crownets. realms and islands were as plates dropped from his pocket.
why, my pretty youth?
(kneeling) pardon, caesar. caesar, pardon. as low as to thy foot doth cassius fall to beg enfranchisement for publius cimber.
cleopatra, 
he plays false, father.
i could be well moved if i were as you. if i could pray to move, prayers would move me. of whose true-fixed and resting quality there is no fellow in the firmament. the skies are painted with unnumbered sparks. they are all fire and every one doth shine, so in the world. 'tis furnished well with men, and men are flesh and blood, and apprehensive, yet in the number i do know but one that unassailable holds on his rank, let me a little show it even in this: that i was constant cimber should be banished, and constant do remain to keep him so.
think you there was or might be such a man as this i dreamt of?
how? out of tune on the strings?
(kneeling) o caesar, 
gentle madam, no.
not so, but yet so false that he grieves my very heartstrings.
hence! wilt thou lift up olympus?
but if there be nor ever were one such, it's past the size of dreaming. nature wants stuff to vie strange forms with fancy, yet t' imagine an antony were nature's piece 'gainst fancy,
you have a quick ear.
(kneeling) great caesar, 
hear me, good madam. your loss is as yourself, great, and you bear it as answering to the weight. would i might never o'ertake pursued success, but i do feel, by the rebound of yours, a grief that smites
ay, i would i were deaf; it makes me have a slow heart.
doth not brutus bootless kneel?
i thank you, sir. know you what caesar means to do with me?
i perceive you delight not in music.
speak, hands, for me!
i am loath to tell you what i would you knew.
not a whit, when it jars so.
et tu, bruté?, then fall, caesar.
nay, pray you, sir.
hark, what fine change is in the music!
liberty! freedom! tyranny is dead! run hence, proclaim, cry it about the streets.
though he be honorable, 
ay, that change is the spite.
some to the common pulpits, and cry out, "liberty, freedom, and enfranchisement!"
he'll lead me, then, in triumph.
you would have them always play but one thing?
fly not. stand still. ambition's debt is paid.
madam, he will. i know 't.
i would always have one play but one thing. but, host, doth this sir proteus that we talk on often resort unto this gentlewoman?
go to the pulpit, brutus.
make way there! caesar!
i tell you what lance, his man, told me: he loved her out of all nick.
and cassius too.
which is the queen of egypt?
where is lance?
where's publius?
(to cleopatra ) it is the emperor, madam.
gone to seek his dog, which tomorrow, by his master's command, he must carry for a present to his lady.
here, quite confounded with this mutiny.
arise, you shall not kneel.
peace! stand aside. the company parts.
stand fast together, lest some friend of caesar's should chance, 
sir, the gods will have it thus. my master and my lord i must obey.
sir thurio, fear not you. i will so plead
talk not of standing., publius, good cheer. there is no harm intended to your person,
take to you no hard thoughts. the record of what injuries you did us, though written in our flesh, we shall remember
where meet we?
and leave us, publius, lest that the people, rushing on us, should do your age some mischief.
sole sir o' th' world, i cannot project mine own cause so well to make it clear, but do confess i have been laden with like frailties which before have often shamed our sex.
at saint gregory's well.
do so. and let no man abide this deed but we the doers.
cleopatra, know if you apply yourself to our intents, which towards you are most gentle, you shall find a benefit in this change, but if you seek to lay on me a cruelty by taking of my good purposes and put your children to that destruction which i'll guard them from if thereon you rely. i'll take my leave.
farewell.
where is antony?
and may, through all the world! 'tis yours, and we, hang in what place you please. here, my good lord.
madam, good even to your ladyship.
fled to his house amazed. men, wives, and children stare, cry out, and run as it were doomsday.
you shall advise me in all for cleopatra.
who is that that spake?
fates, we will know your pleasures. that we shall die, we know. 'tis but the time,
this is the brief of money, plate, and jewels i am possessed of. 'tis exactly valued,
one, lady, if you knew his pure heart's truth, you would quickly learn to know him by his voice.
why, he that cuts off twenty years of life cuts off so many years of fearing death.
here, madam.
sir proteus, as i take it.
grant that, and then is death a benefit. so are we caesar's friends, that have abridged and let us bathe our hands in caesar's blood up to the elbows, and besmear our swords. then walk we forth, even to the marketplace, and waving our red weapons o'er our heads
this is my treasurer. let him speak, my lord, upon his peril, that i have reserved to myself nothing., speak the truth, seleucus.
sir proteus, gentle lady, and your servant.
stoop, then, and wash.
than to my peril speak that which is not.
what's your will?
how many ages hence shall this our lofty scene be acted over in states unborn and accents yet unknown!
what have i kept back?
that i may compass yours.
how many times shall caesar bleed in sport, no worthier than the dust!
enough to purchase what you have made known.
you have your wish. my will is even this: that presently you hie you home to bed. think'st thou i am so shallow, so conceitless, to be seducèd by thy flattery, that hast deceived so many with thy vows? return, return, and make thy love amends. i am so far from granting thy request that i despise thee for thy wrongful suit, and by and by intend to chide myself even for this time i spend in talking to thee.
so oft as that shall be, so often shall the knot of us be called "the men that gave their country liberty."
nay, blush not, cleopatra. i approve
but she is dead.
what, shall we forth?
see, caesar! oh, behold how pomp is followed! mine will now be yours, and, should we shift estates, yours would be mine. the ingratitude of this seleucus does even make me wild. (to seleucus ) o slave, of no more trust what, goest thou back? thou shalt go back, i warrant thee! but i'll catch thine eyes, though they had wings. slave, soulless villain, dog! oh, rarely base!
[aside] 'twere false, if i should speak it, for i am sure she is not burièd.
ay, every man away. with the most boldest and best hearts of rome.
good queen, let us entreat you, 
say that she be, yet valentine, thy friend, i am betrothed. and art thou not ashamed to wrong him with thy importunacy?
soft! who comes here? a friend of antony's.
o caesar, what a wounding shame is this, doing the honor of thy lordliness to one so meek, that mine own servant should parcel the sum of my disgraces by addition of his envy! say, good caesar, immoment toys, things of such dignity as we greet modern friends withal, and say some nobler token i have kept apart for livia and octavia, to induce with one that i have bred? the gods! it smites me beneath the fall i have. (to seleucus ) prithee, go hence, or i shall show the cinders of my spirit through th' ashes of my chance. wert thou a man,
i likewise hear that valentine is dead.
(kneeling) thus, brutus, did my master bid me kneel. (falls prostrate) thus did mark antony bid me fall down, brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and honest. caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving. say i love brutus, and i honor him. say i feared caesar, honored him, and loved him.
forbear, seleucus.
and so suppose am i, for in his grave,
may safely come to him and be resolved how caesar hath deserved to lie in death, mark antony shall not love caesar dead so well as brutus living, but will follow thorough the hazards of this untrod state with all true faith. so says my master antony.
be it known that we, the greatest, are misthought for things that others do, and when we fall we answer others' merits in our name, are therefore to be pitied.
sweet lady, let me rake it from the earth.
thy master is a wise and valiant roman. i never thought him worse. he shall be satisfied and, by my honor, depart untouched.
cleopatra, put we i' th' roll of conquest. still be 't yours. bestow it at your pleasure, and believe caesar's no merchant, to make prize with you of things that merchants sold. therefore be cheered. for we intend so to dispose you as yourself shall give us counsel. feed and sleep. our care and pity is so much upon you that we remain your friend. and so, adieu.
go to thy lady's grave and call hers thence. or, at the least, in hers sepulchre thine.
(rising) i'll fetch him presently.
my master, and my lord!
[aside] he heard not that.
i know that we shall have him well to friend.
not so. adieu.
vouchsafe me yet your picture for my love, the picture that is hanging in your chamber. to that i'll speak, to that i'll sigh and weep; for, since the substance of your perfect self and to your shadow will i make true love.
i wish we may. but yet have i a mind falls shrewdly to the purpose.
he words me, girls, he words me, that i should not be noble to myself. but, hark thee, charmian.
[aside] if 'twere a substance, you would, sure, deceive it, and make it but a shadow, as i am.
but here comes antony., welcome, mark antony.
finish, good lady. the bright day is done, and we are for the dark.
i am very loath to be your idol, sir. to worship shadows and adore false shapes, send to me in the morning, and i'll send it. and so, good rest.
o mighty caesar! dost thou lie so low? are all thy conquests, glories, triumphs, spoils, , i know not, gentlemen, what you intend, who else must be let blood, who else is rank.
(to charmian ) hie thee again. go put it to the haste.
as wretches have o'ernight
if i myself, there is no hour so fit as caesar's death's hour, nor no instrument with the most noble blood of all this world. i do beseech ye, if you bear me hard, now, whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke, fulfill your pleasure. live a thousand years, no place will please me so, no mean of death, as here by caesar, and by you cut off, the choice and master spirits of this age.
madam, i will.
host, will you go?
o antony, beg not your death of us. as by our hands and this our present act you see we do, yet see you but our hands and this the bleeding business they have done. our hearts you see not. they are pitiful. as fire drives out fire, so pity pity, hath done this deed on caesar. for your part, to you our swords have leaden points, mark antony. our arms in strength of malice and our hearts with all kind love, good thoughts, and reverence.
where's the queen?
by my halidom, i was fast asleep.
your voice shall be as strong as any man's in the disposing of new dignities.
behold, sir.
pray you, where lies sir proteus?
only be patient till we have appeased and then we will deliver you the cause, why i, that did love caesar when i struck him, have thus proceeded.
dolabella!
marry, at my house. trust me, i think 'tis almost day.
i doubt not of your wisdom. let each man render me his bloody hand. first, marcus brutus, will i shake with you. , next, caius cassius, do i take your hand. , now, decius brutus, yours., now yours, metellus. , yours, cinna., and, my valiant casca, yours. , gentlemen all, alas, what shall i say? my credit now stands on such slippery ground that one of two bad ways you must conceit me, either a coward or a flatterer if then thy spirit look upon us now, shall it not grieve thee dearer than thy death to see thy antony making his peace, shaking the bloody fingers of thy foes, had i as many eyes as thou hast wounds, weeping as fast as they stream forth thy blood, it would become me better than to close in terms of friendship with thine enemies. here didst thou fall; and here thy hunters stand, signed in thy spoil, and crimsoned in thy lethe. o world, thou wast the forest to this hart, and this indeed, o world, the heart of thee. dost thou here lie!
madam, as thereto sworn by your command, which my love makes religion to obey, intends his journey, and within three days you with your children will he send before. make your best use of this. i have performed your pleasure and my promise.
that e'er i watched, and the most heaviest.
mark antony, 
dolabella,
this is the hour that madam sylvia entreated me to call and know her mind. there's some great matter she'd employ me in. madam, madam!
pardon me, caius cassius. the enemies of caesar shall say this;
i your servant. adieu, good queen. i must attend on caesar.
who calls?
i blame you not for praising caesar so. but what compact mean you to have with us? will you be pricked in number of our friends? or shall we on, and not depend on you?
farewell, and thanks.
your servant and your friend; one that attends your ladyship's command.
swayed from the point by looking down on caesar. friends am i with you all and love you all upon this hope: that you shall give me reasons why and wherein caesar was dangerous.
now, iras, what think'st thou? thou an egyptian puppet shalt be shown in rome, as well as i. mechanic slaves uplift us to the view. in their thick breaths, rank of gross diet, shall be enclouded, and forced to drink their vapor.
sir eglamour, a thousand times good morrow.
our reasons are so full of good regard that were you, antony, the son of caesar, you should be satisfied.
the gods forbid!
as many, worthy lady, to yourself. i am thus early come to know what service it is your pleasure to command me in.
that's all i seek. and am moreover suitor that i may and in the pulpit, as becomes a friend, speak in the order of his funeral.
nay, 'tis most certain, iras. saucy lictors ballad us out o' tune. the quick comedians extemporally will stage us and present our alexandrian revels. antony shall be brought drunken forth, and i shall see i' th' posture of a whore.
o eglamour, thou art a gentleman, think not i flatter, for i swear i do not, thou art not ignorant what dear good will i bear unto the banished valentine, nor how my father would enforce me marry vain thurio, whom my very soul abhors. no grief did ever come so near thy heart as when thy lady and thy true love died, upon whose grave thou vowedst pure chastity. sir eglamour, i would to valentine, and, for the ways are dangerous to pass, i do desire thy worthy company, upon whose faith and honor i repose. urge not my father's anger, eglamour, and on the justice of my flying hence to keep me from a most unholy match, which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues. i do desire thee, even from a heart to bear me company and go with me; if not, to hide what i have said to thee, that i may venture to depart alone.
you shall, mark antony.
oh, the good gods!
madam, i pity much your grievances, i give consent to go along with you, recking as little what betideth me as much i wish all good befortune you. when will you go?
brutus, a word with you. (aside to brutus) you know not what you do. that antony speak in his funeral. know you how much the people may be moved by that which he will utter?
nay, that's certain.
this evening coming.
(aside to cassius) by your pardon. and show the reason of our caesar's death.
i'll never see 't! for i am sure mine nails are stronger than mine eyes.
where shall i meet you?
what antony shall speak, i will protest, he speaks by leave and by permission, and that we are contented caesar shall it shall advantage more than do us wrong.
why, that's the way their most absurd intents.
at friar patrick's cell, where i intend holy confession.
(aside to brutus) i know not what may fall. i like it not.
now, charmian! show me, my women, like a queen. go fetch my best attires. i am again for cydnus, to meet mark antony., sirrah iras, go., and when thou hast done this chare i'll give thee leave to play till doomsday. (to iras ) bring our crown and all.
i will not fail your ladyship.
mark antony, here, take you caesar's body. you shall not in your funeral speech blame us, and say you do 't by our permission. else shall you not have any hand at all about his funeral. and you shall speak in the same pulpit whereto i am going,
wherefore's this noise?
good morrow, kind sir eglamour.
be it so. i do desire no more.
here is a rural fellow that will not be denied your highness' presence.
when a man's servant shall play the cur with him, look you, it goes hard, one that i brought up of a puppy, one that i saved from drowning when three or four of his blind brothers and sisters went to it. i have taught him, even as one would say precisely, "thus i would teach a dog." i was sent to deliver him as a present to mistress sylvia from my master, and i came no sooner into the dining chamber, but he steps me to her trencher and steals her capon's leg. o, 'tis a foul thing when a cur cannot keep himself in all companies! i would have, as one should say, one that takes upon him to be a dog indeed, to be, as it were, a dog at all things. if i had not had more wit than he, to take a fault upon me that he did, i think verily he had been hanged for 't; sure as i live, he had suffered for 't. you shall judge. he thrusts me himself into the company of three or four gentlemanlike dogs, under the duke's table. he had not been there, bless the mark!, a pissing while but all the chamber smelt him. "out with the dog!" says one; "what cur is that?" says another. "whip him out" says the third. "hang him up" says the duke. i, having been acquainted with the smell before, knew it was crab, and goes me to the fellow that whips the dogs. "friend," quoth i "you mean to whip the dog?" "ay, marry do i," quoth he. "you do him the more wrong," quoth i; "'twas i did the thing you wot of." he makes me no more ado, but whips me out of the chamber. how many masters would do this for his servant? nay, i'll be sworn i have sat in the stocks for puddings he hath stolen, otherwise he had been executed. i have stood on the pillory for geese he hath killed, otherwise he had suffered for 't., thou think'st not of this now. nay, i remember the trick you served me when i took my leave of madam sylvia. did not i bid thee still mark me and do as i do? when didst thou see me heave up my leg and make water against a gentlewoman's farthingale? didst thou ever see me do such a trick?
prepare the body then, and follow us.
let him come in.
[to julia] sebastian is thy name? i like thee well, and will employ thee in some service presently.
o, pardon me, thou bleeding piece of earth, thou art the ruins of the noblest man that ever livèd in the tide of times. woe to the hand that shed this costly blood! over thy wounds now do i prophesy, to beg the voice and utterance of my tongue, a curse shall light upon the limbs of men.
what poor an instrument may do a noble deed! he brings me liberty. my resolution's placed, and i have nothing of woman in me. now from head to foot no planet is of mine.
in what you please. i'll do what i can.
domestic fury and fierce civil strife shall cumber all the parts of italy. and dreadful objects so familiar, that mothers shall but smile when they behold their infants quartered with the hands of war, all pity choked with custom of fell deeds, with ate by his side come hot from hell, shall in these confines with a monarch's voice cry "havoc!" and let slip the dogs of war, that this foul deed shall smell above the earth
this is the man.
i hope thou wilt.
you serve octavius caesar, do you not?
avoid, and leave him.
how now, you whoreson peasant, where have you been these two days loitering?
i do, mark antony.
hast thou the pretty worm of nilus there, that kills and pains not?
marry, sir, i carried mistress sylvia the dog you bade me.
caesar did write for him to come to rome.
truly, i have him, but i would not be the party that should desire you to touch him, for his biting is immortal. those that do die of it do seldom or never recover.
and what says she to my little jewel?
he did receive his letters and is coming. (sees caesar's body) o caesar!, 
remember'st thou any that have died on 't?
marry, she says your dog was a cur, and tells you currish thanks is good enough for such a present.
thy heart is big. get thee apart and weep. passion, i see, is catching, for mine eyes, seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine,
very many, men and women too. i heard of one of them no longer than yesterday, a very honest woman, but something given to lie, as a woman should not do but in the way of honesty, how she died of the biting of it, what pain she felt. truly, she makes a very good report o' th' worm. but he that will believe all that they say shall never be saved by half that they do. but this is most falliable, the worm's an odd worm.
but she received my dog?
he lies tonight within seven leagues of rome.
get thee hence, farewell.
no, indeed, did she not. here have i brought him back again.
post back with speed, and tell him what hath chanced. here is a mourning rome, a dangerous rome, no rome of safety for octavius yet. thou shalt not back till i have borne this corse into the marketplace. there shall i try, in my oration, how the people take the cruèl issue of these bloody men. to young octavius of the state of things. lend me your hand.
i wish you all joy of the worm.
what, didst thou offer her this from me?
we will be satisfied! let us be satisfied!
farewell.
ay, sir: the other squirrel was stolen from me by the hangman boys in the marketplace, and then i offered her mine own, who is a dog as big as ten of yours, and therefore the gift the greater.
then follow me and give me audience, friends. , cassius, go you into the other street and part the numbers. those that will follow cassius, go with him, and public reasons shall be renderèd of caesar's death.
you must think this, look you, that the worm will do his kind.
or ne'er return again into my sight. away, i say! stayest thou to vex me here?
i will hear brutus speak.
ay, ay. farewell.
a slave, that still an end turns me to shame!, sebastian, i have entertainèd thee, that can with some discretion do my business, for 'tis no trusting to yond foolish lout, but chiefly for thy face and thy behavior, which, if my augury deceive me not, therefore know thou, for this i entertain thee. go presently, and take this ring with thee.
i will hear cassius and compare their reasons
look you, the worm is not to be trusted but in the keeping of wise people, for indeed there is no goodness in the worm.
deliver it to madam sylvia, she loved me well delivered it to me.
the noble brutus is ascended. silence!
take thou no care. it shall be heeded.
she's dead, belike?
be patient till the last. romans, countrymen, and lovers! hear me for my cause, and be silent that you may hear. believe me for mine honor, and have respect to mine honor that you may believe. censure me in your wisdom, and awake your senses that you may the better judge. if there be any in this assembly, any dear friend of caesar's, to him i say that brutus' love to caesar was no less than his. if then that friend demand why brutus rose against caesar, this is my answer: not that i loved caesar less, but that i loved rome more.
very good. give it nothing, i pray you, for it is not worth the feeding.
not so. i think she lives.
had you rather caesar were living and die all slaves, than that caesar were dead, to live all free men? as caesar loved me, i weep for him. as he was fortunate, i rejoice at it. as he was valiant, i honor him. but, as he was ambitious, i slew him. there is tears for his love, joy for his fortune, honor for his valor, and death for his ambition. who is here so base that would be a bondman? if any, speak, for him have i offended. who is here so rude that would not be a roman? if any, speak, for him have i offended. who is here so vile that will not love his country? if any, speak, for him have i offended. i pause for a reply.
will it eat me?
alas!
none, brutus, none.
you must not think i am so simple but i know the devil himself will not eat a woman. i know that a woman is a dish for the gods, if the devil dress her not. but, truly, these same whoreson devils do the gods great harm in their women, for in every ten that they make, the devils mar five.
why dost thou cry "alas"?
then none have i offended. i have done no more to caesar than you shall do to brutus. the question of his death is enrolled in the capitol. his glory not extenuated wherein he was worthy, nor his offenses enforced for which he suffered death.
well, get thee gone. farewell.
i cannot choose but pity her.
here comes his body, mourned by mark antony, who, though he had no hand in his death, shall receive the benefit of his dying, a place in the commonwealth, as which of you shall not? with this i depart: that, as i slew my best lover for the good of rome, i have the same dagger for myself when it shall please my country to need my death.
yes, forsooth. i wish you joy o' th' worm.
wherefore shouldst thou pity her?
live, brutus! live, live!
give me my robe. put on my crown. i have immortal longings in me. now no more the juice of egypt's grape shall moist this lip.
because methinks that she loved you as well as you do love your lady sylvia. she dreams on him that has forgot her love; 'tis pity love should be so contrary; and thinking on it makes me cry "alas!"
bring him with triumph home unto his house!
antony call. i see him rouse himself to praise my noble act. i hear him mock the luck of caesar, which the gods give men to excuse their after wrath., husband, i come! i am fire and air, my other elements i give to baser life., so, have you done? come then and take the last warmth of my lips. farewell, kind charmian. iras, long farewell.
well, give her that ring and therewithal this letter. [giving a letter] that's her chamber. tell my lady your message done, hie home unto my chamber, where thou shalt find me, sad and solitary.
give him a statue with his ancestors!
if thou and nature can so gently part, the stroke of death is as a lover's pinch, which hurts, and is desired. dost thou lie still? if thus thou vanishest, thou tell'st the world
how many women would do such a message? alas, poor proteus! thou hast entertained alas, poor fool, why do i pity him that with his very heart despiseth me? because he loves her, he despiseth me; because i love him, i must pity him. to bind him to remember my good will; and now am i, unhappy messenger, to plead for that which i would not obtain, to carry that which i would have refused, i am my master's true-confirmèd love, but cannot be true servant to my master unless i prove false traitor to myself. yet will i woo for him, but yet so coldly
let him be caesar!
dissolve, thick cloud, and rain, that i may say the gods themselves do weep!
gentlewoman, good day! i pray you be my means to bring me where to speak with madam sylvia.
caesar's better parts shall be crowned in brutus!
this proves me base. if she first meet the curlèd antony, he'll make demand of her and spend that kiss
what would you with her, if that i be she?
we'll bring him to his house with shouts and clamors.
with thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate of life at once untie. poor venomous fool be angry and dispatch. oh, couldst thou speak, that i might hear thee call great caesar ass
if you be she, i do entreat your patience
my countrymen, 
o eastern star!
from whom?
peace, silence! brutus speaks.
peace, peace! dost thou not see my baby at my breast, that sucks the nurse asleep?
from my master, sir proteus, madam.
peace, ho!
oh, break! oh, break!
o, he sends you for a picture?
good countrymen, let me depart alone. and, for my sake, stay here with antony. tending to caesar's glories, which mark antony by our permission is allowed to make. i do entreat you, not a man depart, save i alone, till antony have spoke.
as sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle, o antony!, nay, i will take thee too.
ay, madam.
stay, ho! and let us hear mark antony.
what should i stay, 
ursula, bring my picture there.
let him go up into the public chair. we'll hear him., noble antony, go up.
in this wild world? so, fare thee well. now boast thee, death, in thy possession lies a lass unparalleled. downy windows, close,
go, give your master this. tell him from me, one julia, that his changing thoughts forget, would better fit his chamber than this shadow.
for brutus' sake, i am beholding to you. (ascends the pulpit)
and golden phoebus never be beheld i'll mend it and then play, 
madam, please you peruse this letter., 
what does he say of brutus?
where's the queen?
delivered you a paper that i should not.
he says for brutus' sake he finds himself beholding to us all.
speak softly. wake her not.
this is the letter to your ladyship.
'twere best he speak no harm of brutus here.
caesar hath sent, 
i pray thee, let me look on that again.
this caesar was a tyrant.
too slow a messenger.
it may not be. good madam, pardon me.
nay, that's certain. we are blest that rome is rid of him.
oh, come apace, dispatch! i partly feel thee.
i will not look upon your master's lines. i know they are stuffed with protestations and full of newfound oaths, which he will break as easily as i do tear his paper.
peace! let us hear what antony can say.
(calling) approach, ho! all's not well. caesar's beguiled.
[offering the ring] madam, he sends your ladyship this ring.
you gentle romans, 
there's dolabella sent from caesar. call him.
the more shame for him that he sends it me, for i have heard him say a thousand times his julia gave it him at his departure. though his false finger have profaned the ring,
peace, ho! let us hear him.
what work is here, charmian? is this well done?
she thanks you.
friends, romans, countrymen, lend me your ears. i come to bury caesar, not to praise him. the evil that men do lives after them; so let it be with caesar. the noble brutus hath told you caesar was ambitious. if it were so, it was a grievous fault, and grievously hath caesar answered it. for brutus is an honorable man; so are they all, all honorable men, come i to speak in caesar's funeral. he was my friend, faithful and just to me. and brutus is an honorable man. he hath brought many captives home to rome whose ransoms did the general coffers fill.
it is well done and fitting for a princess descended of so many royal kings.
what sayst thou?
did this in caesar seem ambitious? ambition should be made of sterner stuff. yet brutus says he was ambitious, and brutus is an honorable man. you all did see that on the lupercal which he did thrice refuse. was this ambition? yet brutus says he was ambitious, and, sure, he is an honorable man. i speak not to disprove what brutus spoke, you all did love him once, not without cause. what cause withholds you then to mourn for him? o judgment! thou art fled to brutish beasts, and men have lost their reason. bear with me. and i must pause till it come back to me. (weeps)
how goes it here?
i thank you, madam, that you tender her. poor gentlewoman! my master wrongs her much.
methinks there is much reason in his sayings.
all dead.
dost thou know her?
if thou consider rightly of the matter, caesar has had great wrong.
caesar, thy thoughts touch their effects in this. thyself art coming to see performed the dreaded act which thou so sought'st to hinder.
almost as well as i do know myself. to think upon her woes i do protest that i have wept a hundred several times.
has he, masters?
a way there, a way for caesar!
belike she thinks that proteus hath forsook her.
marked ye his words? he would not take the crown. therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious.
o sir, you are too sure an augurer. that you did fear is done.
i think she doth, and that's her cause of sorrow.
if it be found so, some will dear abide it.
bravest at the last, she leveled at our purposes and, being royal, i do not see them bleed.
is she not passing fair?
poor soul! his eyes are red as fire with weeping.
who was last with them?
she hath been fairer, madam, than she is. when she did think my master loved her well, she, in my judgment, was as fair as you; and threw her sun-expelling mask away, the air hath starved the roses in her cheeks and pinched the lily tincture of her face, that now she is become as black as i.
there's not a nobler man in rome than antony.
a simple countryman that brought her figs. this was his basket.
how tall was she?
now mark him. he begins again to speak.
poisoned, then.
about my stature; for at pentecost, when all our pageants of delight were played, our youth got me to play the woman's part, and i was trimmed in madam julia's gown, as if the garment had been made for me: therefore i know she is about my height. and at that time i made her weep agood, for i did play a lamentable part: for theseus' perjury and unjust flight; which i so lively acted with my tears that my poor mistress, movèd therewithal, wept bitterly; and would i might be dead
but yesterday the word of caesar might have stood against the world. now lies he there, and none so poor to do him reverence. your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage, i should do brutus wrong, and cassius wrong, who, you all know, are honorable men. i will not do them wrong. i rather choose than i will wrong such honorable men. but here's a parchment with the seal of caesar. i found it in his closet. 'tis his will. let but the commons hear this testament, and they would go and kiss dead caesar's wounds and dip their napkins in his sacred blood, yea, beg a hair of him for memory, and, dying, mention it within their wills, unto their issue.
oh, caesar, this charmian lived but now. she stood and spake. on her dead mistress. tremblingly she stood and on the sudden dropped.
she is beholding to thee, gentle youth. alas, poor lady, desolate and left! i weep myself, to think upon thy words. here, youth, there is my purse.
we'll hear the will. read it, mark antony!
oh, noble weakness! if they had swallowed poison, 'twould appear by external swelling, but she looks like sleep, in her strong toil of grace.
for thy sweet mistress' sake, because thou lov'st her. farewell.
the will, the will! we will hear caesar's will.
here on her breast there is a vent of blood, and something blown. the like is on her arm.
and she shall thank you for 't, if e'er you know her., a virtuous gentlewoman, mild and beautiful! since she respects my mistress' love so much. alas, how love can trifle with itself! here is her picture.
have patience, gentle friends. i must not read it. you are not wood, you are not stones, but men. and, being men, bearing the will of caesar, it will inflame you, it will make you mad. 'tis good you know not that you are his heirs.
this is an aspic's trail, and these fig leaves upon the caves of nile.
let me see, i think were full as lovely as is this of hers; and yet the painter flattered her a little, unless i flatter with myself too much. her hair is auburn, mine is perfect yellow; i'll get me such a colored periwig. her eyes are grey as glass, and so are mine. ay, but her forehead's low, and mine's as high. what should it be that he respects in her if this fond love were not a blinded god? come, shadow, come, and take this shadow up, for 'tis thy rival.
read the will. we'll hear it, antony. you shall read us the will, caesar's will.
most probable that so she died, for her physician tells me she hath pursued conclusions infinite of easy ways to die. take up her bed she shall be buried by her antony. no grave upon the earth shall clip in it a pair so famous. high events as these strike those that make them, and their story is brought them to be lamented. our army shall in solemn show attend this funeral, and then to rome. come, dolabella, see high order in this great solemnity.
o thou senseless form, and, were there sense in his idolatry, my substance should be statue in thy stead. i'll use thee kindly for thy mistress' sake, that used me so; or else, by jove i vow, to make my master out of love with thee!
will you be patient? will you stay awhile? i have o'ershot myself to tell you of it. whose daggers have stabbed caesar. i do fear it.
the sun begins to gild the western sky, and now it is about the very hour that sylvia at friar patrick's cell should meet me. she will not fail, for lovers break not hours so much they spur their expedition.
they were traitors! "honorable men"!
see, where she comes., lady, a happy evening!
the will! the testament!
amen, amen! go on, good eglamour, out at the postern by the abbey wall.
they were villains, murderers. the will! read the will!
fear not. the forest is not three leagues off. if we recover that, we are sure enough.
then make a ring about the corpse of caesar, and let me show you him that made the will. shall i descend? and will you give me leave?
sir proteus, what says sylvia to my suit?
come down.
o, sir, i find her milder than she was, and yet she takes exceptions at your person.
descend.
what, that my leg is too long?
you shall have leave.
no, that it is too little.
a ring!
i'll wear a boot, to make it somewhat rounder.
stand from the hearse. stand from the body.
[aside] but love will not be spurred to what it loathes.
room for antony, most noble antony!
what says she to my face?
nay, press not so upon me. stand far off.
she says it is a fair one.
stand back. room! bear back.
nay, then, the wanton lies; my face is black.
if you have tears, prepare to shed them now. the first time ever caesar put it on. 'twas on a summer's evening in his tent, that day he overcame the nervii. look, in this place ran cassius' dagger through. through this the well-belovèd brutus stabbed. and as he plucked his cursèd steel away, mark how the blood of caesar followed it, as rushing out of doors, to be resolved for brutus, as you know, was caesar's angel. judge, o you gods, how dearly caesar loved him! this was the most unkindest cut of all. for when the noble caesar saw him stab, quite vanquished him. then burst his mighty heart, and, in his mantle muffling up his face, even at the base of pompey's statue, which all the while ran blood, great caesar fell. then i, and you, and all of us fell down, whilst bloody treason flourished over us. oh, now you weep, and, i perceive, you feel the dint of pity. these are gracious drops. our caesar's vesture wounded? look you here, here is himself, marred, as you see, with traitors. (lifts up caesar's mantle)
but pearls are fair, and the old saying is, black men are pearls in beauteous ladies' eyes.
o piteous spectacle!
[aside] 'tis true, such pearls as put out ladies' eyes, for i had rather wink than look on them.
o noble caesar!
how likes she my discourse?
o woeful day!
ill, when you talk of war.
o traitors, villains!
but well when i discourse of love and peace?
o most bloody sight!
[aside] but better, indeed, when you hold your peace.
we will be revenged.
what says she to my valor?
revenge! about! seek! burn! fire! kill! slay! let not a traitor live!
o, sir, she makes no doubt of that.
stay, countrymen.
[aside] she needs not, when she knows it cowardice.
peace there! hear the noble antony.
what says she to my birth?
we'll hear him. we'll follow him. we'll die with him.
that you are well derived.
good friends, sweet friends! let me not stir you up to such a sudden flood of mutiny. they that have done this deed are honorable. that made them do it. they are wise and honorable, and will, no doubt, with reasons answer you. i come not, friends, to steal away your hearts. i am no orator, as brutus is, that love my friend. and that they know full well that gave me public leave to speak of him. for i have neither wit nor words nor worth, action nor utterance nor the power of speech, i tell you that which you yourselves do know, show you sweet caesar's wounds, poor poor dumb mouths, and bid them speak for me. but were i brutus, and brutus antony, there were an antony in every wound of caesar that should move the stones of rome to rise and mutiny.
[aside] true; from a gentleman to a fool.
we'll mutiny.
considers she my possessions?
we'll burn the house of brutus.
o, ay, and pities them.
away, then! come, seek the conspirators.
wherefore?
yet hear me, countrymen. yet hear me speak.
[aside] that such an ass should owe them.
peace, ho! hear antony. most noble antony!
that they are out by lease.
why, friends, you go to do you know not what. wherein hath caesar thus deserved your loves? alas, you know not. i must tell you then.
here comes the duke.
most true. the will! let's stay and hear the will.
how now, sir proteus? how now, thurio? which of you saw sir eglamour of late?
here is the will, and under caesar's seal to every roman citizen he gives, to every several man, seventy-five drachmas.
not i.
most noble caesar! we'll revenge his death.
nor i.
o royal caesar!
saw you my daughter?
hear me with patience.
neither.
peace, ho!
why then, she's fled unto that peasant valentine, and eglamour is in her company. as he in penance wandered through the forest. him he knew well, and guessed that it was she, but, being masked, he was not sure of it. besides, she did intend confession these likelihoods confirm her flight from hence. therefore, i pray you, stand not to discourse, but mount you presently, and meet with me upon the rising of the mountain foot dispatch, sweet gentlemen, and follow me.
moreover, he hath left you all his walks, his private arbors and new-planted orchards, on this side tiber. he hath left them you to walk abroad and recreate yourselves. here was a caesar! when comes such another?
why, this it is to be a peevish girl, that flies her fortune when it follows her. i'll after, more to be revenged on eglamour
never, never., come, away, away! we'll burn his body in the holy place, take up the body.
and i will follow, more for sylvia's love than hate of eglamour that goes with her.
go fetch fire.
and i will follow, more to cross that love than hate for sylvia, that is gone for love.
pluck down benches.
come, come, be patient. we must bring you to our captain.
pluck down forms, windows, anything.
a thousand more mischances than this one have learned me how to brook this patiently.
now let it work. mischief, thou art afoot.
come, bring her away.
how now, fellow?
where is the gentleman that was with her?
sir, octavius is already come to rome.
being nimble-footed, he hath outrun us, but moses and valerius follow him. go thou with her to the west end of the wood; the thicket is beset; he cannot scape.
where is he?
come, i must bring you to our captain's cave. fear not; he bears an honorable mind and will not use a woman lawlessly.
he and lepidus are at caesar's house.
o valentine, this i endure for thee!
and thither will i straight to visit him. and in this mood will give us anything.
how use doth breed a habit in a man! this shadowy desert, unfrequented woods, i better brook than flourishing peopled towns. here can i sit alone, unseen of any, tune my distresses and record my woes. o thou that dost inhabit in my breast, leave not the mansion so long tenantless, lest, growing ruinous, the building fall repair me with thy presence, sylvia; thou gentle nymph, cherish thy forlorn swain!
i heard him say, brutus and cassius are rid like madmen through the gates of rome.
what halloing and what stir is this to-day? these are my mates, that make their wills their law, they love me well, yet i have much to do to keep them from uncivil outrages. withdraw thee, valentine. who's this comes here?
belike they had some notice of the people
madam, this service i have done for you, to hazard life and rescue you from him that would have forced your honor and your love. vouchsafe me, for my meed, but one fair look; a smaller boon than this i cannot beg,
i dreamt tonight that i did feast with caesar, and things unlucky charge my fantasy. i have no will to wander forth of doors, yet something leads me forth.
[aside] how like a dream is this i see and hear! love, lend me patience to forbear awhile.
what is your name?
o miserable, unhappy that i am!
whither are you going?
unhappy were you, madam, ere i came;
where do you dwell?
by thy approach thou mak'st me most unhappy.
are you a married man or a bachelor?
[aside] and me, when he approacheth to your presence.
answer every man directly.
had i been seizèd by a hungry lion, i would have been a breakfast to the beast o, heaven be judge how i love valentine, whose life's as tender to me as my soul! and full as much, for more there cannot be, i do detest false, perjured proteus.
ay, and briefly.
what dangerous action, stood it next to death, would i not undergo for one calm look? o, 'tis the curse in love, and still approved, when women cannot love where they're beloved!
ay, and wisely.
read over julia's heart, thy first, best love, for whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith into a thousand oaths, and all those oaths descended into perjury, to love me. and that's far worse than none. better have none than plural faith, which is too much by one. thou counterfeit to thy true friend!
ay, and truly, you were best.
in love,
what is my name? whither am i going? where do i dwell? am i a married man or a bachelor? then, to answer every man directly and briefly, wisely and truly, wisely i say, i am a bachelor.
all men but proteus.
that's as much as to say they are fools that marry. you'll bear me a bang for that, i fear. proceed, directly.
nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words can no way change you to a milder form, i'll woo you like a soldier, at arms' end,
directly, i am going to caesar's funeral.
o heaven!
as a friend or an enemy?
[assailing her] i'll force thee yield to my desire.
as a friend.
[coming forward] ruffian, let go that rude uncivil touch, thou friend of an ill fashion!
that matter is answered directly.
valentine!
for your dwelling, briefly.
thou common friend, that's without faith or love! for such is a friend now. treacherous man, thou hast beguiled my hopes. naught but mine eye could have persuaded me. now i dare not say who should be trusted, when one's right hand is perjured to the bosom? proteus, i am sorry i must never trust thee more, but count the world a stranger for thy sake. 'mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst!
briefly, i dwell by the capitol.
my shame and guilt confounds me. forgive me, valentine. if hearty sorrow be a sufficient ransom for offence, as e'er i did commit.
your name, sir, truly.
then i am paid, and once again i do receive thee honest. who by repentance is not satisfied by penitence the eternal's wrath's appeased; and, that my love may appear plain and free, all that was mine in sylvia i give thee.
truly, my name is cinna.
o me unhappy!
tear him to pieces. he's a conspirator.
look to the boy.
i am cinna the poet. i am cinna the poet.
why, boy! why, wag! how now? what's the matter? look up. speak.
tear him for his bad verses! tear him for his bad verses!
[recovering] o good sir, my master charged me to deliver a ring to madam sylvia, which, out of my neglect, was never done.
i am not cinna the conspirator.
where is that ring, boy?
it is no matter. his name's cinna. pluck but his name out of his heart and turn him going.
[giving her own ring] here 'tis. this is it.
tear him, tear him!
why, this is the ring i gave to julia.
come, brands, ho, firebrands. to brutus', to cassius', burn all. some to decius' house and some to casca's. some to ligarius'. away, go!
o, cry you mercy, sir, i have mistook. this is the ring you sent to sylvia.
these many, then, shall die. their names are pricked.
but how cam'st thou by this ring?
(to lepidus) your brother too must die. consent you, lepidus?
and julia herself did give it me; and julia herself have brought it hither.
i do consent, 
how? julia?
prick him down, antony.
behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths how oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root! o proteus, let this habit make thee blush! be thou ashamed that i have took upon me such an immodest raiment, if shame live it is the lesser blot, modesty finds, women to change their shapes than men their minds.
who is your sister's son, mark antony.
than men their minds! 'tis true. o heaven! were man but constant, he were perfect. that one error inconstancy falls off ere it begins. what is in sylvia's face but i may spy more fresh in julia's with a constant eye?
he shall not live. look, with a spot i damn him. but, lepidus, go you to caesar's house. fetch the will hither, and we shall determine
come, come, a hand from either. 'twere pity two such friends should be long foes.
what, shall i find you here?
bear witness, heaven, i have my wish forever.
or here, or at the capitol.
and i mine.
this is a slight, unmeritable man, meet to be sent on errands. is it fit, one of the three to share it?
a prize, a prize, a prize!
so you thought him. and took his voice who should be pricked to die in our black sentence and proscription.
forbear, forbear, i say! it is my lord the duke.
octavius, i have seen more days than you. to ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads, he shall but bear them as the ass bears gold, to groan and sweat under the business, either led or driven, as we point the way. then take we down his load and turn him off, like to the empty ass, to shake his ears and graze in commons.
your grace is welcome to a man disgraced, banishèd valentine.
you may do your will, but he's a tried and valiant soldier.
sir valentine!
i do appoint him store of provender. it is a creature that i teach to fight, to wind, to stop, to run directly on, his corporal motion governed by my spirit, he must be taught and trained and bid go forth, a barren-spirited fellow, one that feeds on objects, arts, and imitations, which, out of use and staled by other men, but as a property. and now, octavius, listen great things. brutus and cassius are levying powers. we must straight make head. therefore let our alliance be combined,
[advancing] yonder is sylvia, and sylvia's mine.
and let us presently go sit in council how covert matters may be best disclosed, and open perils surest answered.
come not within the measure of my wrath. do not name sylvia thine; if once again, verona shall not hold thee. here she stands. take but possession of her with a touch;
let us do so. for we are at the stake and some that smile have in their hearts, i fear, millions of mischiefs.
sir valentine, i care not for her, i. i hold him but a fool that will endanger his body for a girl that loves him not. i claim her not, and therefore she is thine.
stand, ho!
to make such means for her as thou hast done and leave her on such slight conditions. now, by the honor of my ancestry, i do applaud thy spirit, valentine, know then, i here forget all former griefs, cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again, plead a new state in thy unrivalled merit, to which i thus subscribe: sir valentine, take thou thy sylvia, for thou hast deserved her.
give the word, ho, and stand.
i thank your grace. the gift hath made me happy. i now beseech you, for your daughter's sake, to grant one boon that i shall ask of you.
what now, lucillius? is cassius near?
i grant it for thine own, whate'er it be.
he is at hand, and pindarus is come
these banished men, that i have kept withal, are men endued with worthy qualities. forgive them what they have committed here, and let them be recalled from their exile. and fit for great employment, worthy lord.
he greets me well., your master, pindarus, in his own change or by ill officers hath given me some worthy cause to wish things done, undone. but if he be at hand
thou hast prevailed; i pardon them and thee. dispose of them as thou know'st their deserts. come, let us go. we will include all jars
i do not doubt but that my noble master will appear such as he is, full of regard and honor.
and, as we walk along, i dare be bold with our discourse to make your grace to smile. what think you of this page, my lord?
he is not doubted., a word, lucillius. (takes lucillius aside)
i think the boy hath grace in him. he blushes.
with courtesy and with respect enough. but not with such familiar instances nor with such free and friendly conference as he hath used of old.
i warrant you, my lord, more grace than boy.
thou hast described when love begins to sicken and decay, it useth an enforcèd ceremony. there are no tricks in plain and simple faith. but hollow men, like horses hot at hand,
what mean you by that saying?
but when they should endure the bloody spur, they fall their crests and, like deceitful jades, sink in the trial. comes his army on?
please you, i'll tell you as we pass along, that you will wonder what hath fortunèd., come, proteus, 'tis your penance but to hear that done, our day of marriage shall be yours: one feast, one house, one mutual happiness.
they mean this night in sardis to be quartered. are come with cassius.
hark! he is arrived. march gently on to meet him.
stand, ho!
stand, ho! speak the word along.
stand!
stand!
stand!
most noble brother, you have done me wrong.
judge me, you gods! wrong i mine enemies?
brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs. and when you do them, 
cassius, be content. speak your griefs softly. i do know you well. before the eyes of both our armies here, let us not wrangle. bid them move away. then in my tent, cassius, enlarge your griefs, and i will give you audience.
pindarus, bid our commanders lead their charges off
lucillius, do you the like. and let no man come to our tent till we have done our conference. let lucius and titinius guard our door.
that you have wronged me doth appear in this: you have condemned and noted lucius pella for taking bribes here of the sardians, wherein my letters, praying on his side
you wronged yourself to write in such a case.
in such a time as this it is not meet that every nice offense should bear his comment.
let me tell you, cassius, you yourself to sell and mart your offices for gold to undeservers.
i "an itching palm"! you know that you are brutus that speak this, or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
and chastisement doth therefore hide his head.
chastisement!
remember march, the ides of march remember. did not great julius bleed for justice' sake?
and not for justice? what, shall one of us that struck the foremost man of all this world but for supporting robbers, shall we now contaminate our fingers with base bribes, for so much trash as may be graspèd thus? i had rather be a dog and bay the moon than such a roman.
brutus, bait not me. i'll not endure it. you forget yourself older in practice, abler than yourself to make conditions.
go to. you are not, cassius.
i am.
i say you are not.
urge me no more, i shall forget myself. have mind upon your health, tempt me no further.
away, slight man!
is 't possible?
must i give way and room to your rash choler? shall i be frighted when a madman stares?
o ye gods, ye gods, must i endure all this?
"all this"? ay, more. fret till your proud heart break. and make your bondmen tremble. must i budge? must i observe you? must i stand and crouch under your testy humor? by the gods, you shall digest the venom of your spleen, i'll use you for my mirth, yea, for my laughter, when you are waspish.
is it come to this?
you say you are a better soldier. let it appear so. make your vaunting true, i shall be glad to learn of noble men.
you wrong me every way. you wrong me, brutus. i said an elder soldier, not a better. did i say "better"?
if you did, i care not.
when caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.
peace, peace! you durst not so have tempted him.
i durst not!
no.
what, durst not tempt him?
for your life you durst not.
do not presume too much upon my love. i may do that i shall be sorry for.
you have done that you should be sorry for. for i am armed so strong in honesty that they pass by me as the idle wind, which i respect not. i did send to you for certain sums of gold, which you denied me, by heaven, i had rather coin my heart and drop my blood for drachmas than to wring from the hard hands of peasants their vile trash by any indirection. i did send which you denied me. was that done like cassius? should i have answered caius cassius so? when marcus brutus grows so covetous to lock such rascal counters from his friends, dash him to pieces!
i denied you not.
you did.
i did not. he was but a fool that brought my answer back. brutus hath rived my heart. a friend should bear his friend's infirmities,
i do not, till you practice them on me.
you love me not.
i do not like your faults.
a friendly eye could never see such faults.
a flatterer's would not, though they do appear
come, antony, and young octavius, come, revenge yourselves alone on cassius, for cassius is aweary of the world, hated by one he loves; braved by his brother; set in a notebook, learned, and conned by rote to cast into my teeth. oh, i could weep my spirit from mine eyes. (offers brutus his bared dagger) there is my dagger. dearer than plutus' mine, richer than gold. if that thou beest a roman, take it forth. i, that denied thee gold, will give my heart. strike, as thou didst at caesar. for i know than ever thou lovedst cassius.
sheathe your dagger. be angry when you will, it shall have scope. do what you will, dishonor shall be humor. o cassius, you are yokèd with a lamb who, much enforcèd, shows a hasty spark and straight is cold again.
hath cassius lived to be but mirth and laughter to his brutus, when grief and blood ill-tempered vexeth him?
when i spoke that, i was ill-tempered too.
do you confess so much? give me your hand.
and my heart too.
o brutus!
what's the matter?
have not you love enough to bear with me, when that rash humor which my mother gave me
yes, cassius. and from henceforth when you are over-earnest with your brutus, he'll think your mother chides and leave you so.
(within) let me go in to see the generals. there is some grudge between 'em. 'tis not meet
(within) you shall not come to them.
(within) nothing but death shall stay me.
how now? what's the matter?
for shame, you generals! what do you mean? for i have seen more years, i'm sure, than ye.
ha, ha, how vilely doth this cynic rhyme!
(to poet) get you hence, sirrah. saucy fellow, hence!
bear with him, brutus. 'tis his fashion.
what should the wars do with these jigging fools? , companion, hence!
away, away, be gone.
lucillius and titinius, bid the commanders prepare to lodge their companies tonight.
immediately to us.
(calls off) lucius, a bowl of wine!
i did not think you could have been so angry.
o cassius, i am sick of many griefs.
of your philosophy you make no use
no man bears sorrow better. portia is dead.
ha, portia?
she is dead.
how 'scaped i killing when i crossed you so? upon what sickness?
impatient of my absence, and grief that young octavius with mark antony have made themselves so strong, for with her death that tidings came, with this she fell distract
and died so?
even so.
o ye immortal gods!
speak no more of her., give me a bowl of wine., in this i bury all unkindness, cassius. (drinks)
fill, lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup. i cannot drink too much of brutus' love. (drinks)
come in, titinius., welcome, good messala! and call in question our necessities.
portia, art thou gone?
no more, i pray you. , messala, i have here receivèd letters that young octavius and mark antony bending their expedition toward philippi.
myself have letters of the selfsame tenor.
with what addition?
that by proscription and bills of outlawry, have put to death an hundred senators.
therein our letters do not well agree. mine speak of seventy senators that died by their proscriptions, cicero being one.
cicero one?
cicero is dead, and by that order of proscription. (to brutus) had you your letters from your wife, my lord?
no, messala.
nor nothing in your letters writ of her?
nothing, messala.
that methinks is strange.
why ask you? hear you aught of her in yours?
no, my lord.
now, as you are a roman, tell me true.
then like a roman bear the truth i tell.
why, farewell, portia. we must die, messala. with meditating that she must die once, i have the patience to endure it now.
even so great men great losses should endure.
but yet my nature could not bear it so.
well, to our work alive. what do you think of marching to philippi presently?
i do not think it good.
your reason?
this it is: so shall he waste his means, weary his soldiers, doing himself offense, whilst we, lying still, are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness.
good reasons must of force give place to better. do stand but in a forced affection, for they have grudged us contribution. the enemy, marching along by them, by them shall make a fuller number up, from which advantage shall we cut him off if at philippi we do face him there, these people at our back.
hear me, good brother, 
under your pardon. you must note beside, our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe. the enemy increaseth every day. we, at the height, are ready to decline. there is a tide in the affairs of men, omitted, all the voyage of their life is bound in shallows and in miseries. on such a full sea are we now afloat, and we must take the current when it serves
then, with your will, go on. we'll along ourselves, and meet them at philippi.
the deep of night is crept upon our talk, and nature must obey necessity, which we will niggard with a little rest.
no more. good night. early tomorrow will we rise and hence.
lucius!
my gown.
farewell, good messala., good night, titinius., noble, noble cassius, good night and good repose.
o my dear brother, never come such division 'tween our souls. let it not, brutus.
everything is well.
good night, my lord.
good night, good brother.
good night, lord brutus.
farewell, everyone.
give me the gown. where is thy instrument?
here in the tent.
what, thou speak'st drowsily? poor knave, i blame thee not. thou art o'erwatched. call claudio and some other of my men.
varrus and claudio!
calls my lord?
i pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep. it may be i shall raise you by and by on business to my brother cassius.
so please you, we will stand and watch your pleasure.
i will not have it so. lie down, good sirs. it may be i shall otherwise bethink me. , look, lucius, here's the book i sought for so. i put it in the pocket of my gown.
i was sure your lordship did not give it me.
bear with me, good boy, i am much forgetful. canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile, and touch thy instrument a strain or two?
ay, my lord, an 't please you.
it does, my boy.
it is my duty, sir.
i should not urge thy duty past thy might. i know young bloods look for a time of rest.
i have slept, my lord, already.
i will not hold thee long. if i do live, i will be good to thee.
this is a sleepy tune. o murderous slumber, layst thou thy leaden mace upon my boy i will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee. if thou dost nod, thou break'st thy instrument. i'll take it from thee. and, good boy, good night. , let me see, let me see. is not the leaf turned down
how ill this taper burns!, ha, who comes here? i think it is the weakness of mine eyes that shapes this monstrous apparition. it comes upon me., art thou any thing? that makest my blood cold and my hair to stare? speak to me what thou art.
thy evil spirit, brutus.
why comest thou?
to tell thee thou shalt see me at philippi.
well, then i shall see thee again?
ay, at philippi.
why, i will see thee at philippi, then.
now i have taken heart thou vanishest. ill spirit, i would hold more talk with thee. , claudio!
the strings, my lord, are false.
he thinks he still is at his instrument. lucius, awake.
my lord?
didst thou dream, lucius, that thou so criedst out?
my lord, i do not know that i did cry.
yes, that thou didst. didst thou see any thing?
nothing, my lord.
(to varrus) fellow thou, awake!
my lord?
my lord?
why did you so cry out, sirs, in your sleep?
did we, my lord?
ay. saw you anything?
no, my lord, i saw nothing.
nor i, my lord.
go and commend me to my brother cassius. bid him set on his powers betimes before, and we will follow.
it shall be done, my lord.
now, antony, our hopes are answerèd. you said the enemy would not come down but keep the hills and upper regions. it proves not so. their battles are at hand. answering before we do demand of them.
tut, i am in their bosoms, and i know wherefore they do it. they could be content to visit other places, and come down to fasten in our thoughts that they have courage. but 'tis not so.
prepare you, generals. the enemy comes on in gallant show. their bloody sign of battle is hung out,
octavius, lead your battle softly on, upon the left hand of the even field.
upon the right hand i. keep thou the left.
why do you cross me in this exigent?
i do not cross you. but i will do so.
they stand and would have parley.
stand fast, titinius. we must out and talk.
mark antony, shall we give sign of battle?
no, caesar, we will answer on their charge.
(to his army) stir not until the signal.
words before blows. is it so, countrymen?
not that we love words better, as you do.
good words are better than bad strokes, octavius.
witness the hole you made in caesar's heart, crying "long live, hail, caesar!"
antony, the posture of your blows are yet unknown. but for your words, they rob the hybla bees
not stingless too?
oh, yes, and soundless too. for you have stol'n their buzzing, antony, and very wisely threat before you sting.
hacked one another in the sides of caesar. you showed your teeth like apes, and fawned like hounds, and bowed like bondmen, kissing caesar's feet, whilst damnèd casca, like a cur, behind
flatterers?, now, brutus, thank yourself. this tongue had not offended so today if cassius might have ruled.
come, come, the cause. if arguing make us sweat, (draws his sword) look, i draw a sword against conspirators. when think you that the sword goes up again? never, till caesar's three and thirty wounds be well avenged, or till another caesar
caesar, thou canst not die by traitors' hands unless thou bring'st them with thee.
so i hope. i was not born to die on brutus' sword.
o, if thou wert the noblest of thy strain,
a peevish schoolboy, worthless of such honor, joined with a masker and a reveler!
old cassius still.
come, antony, away., defiance, traitors, hurl we in your teeth. if not, when you have stomachs.
why, now, blow wind, swell billow, and swim bark! the storm is up and all is on the hazard.
ho, lucillius, hark, a word with you.
my lord?
messala!
(stands forth) what says my general?
messala, this is my birthday, as this very day was cassius born. give me thy hand, messala. as pompey was, am i compelled to set upon one battle all our liberties.
you know that i held epicurus strong and his opinion. now i change my mind, coming from sardis, on our former ensign two mighty eagles fell, and there they perched, gorging and feeding from our soldiers' hands, who to philippi here consorted us. and in their steads do ravens, crows, and kites fly o'er our heads and downward look on us as we were sickly prey. their shadows seem a canopy most fatal, under which
believe not so.
i but believe it partly, for i am fresh of spirit and resolved to meet all perils very constantly.
(returning with lucillius) even so, lucillius.
now, most noble brutus, lovers in peace, lead on our days to age. but since the affairs of men rest still incertain, let's reason with the worst that may befall. if we do lose this battle, then is this what are you then determinèd to do?
even by the rule of that philosophy by which i did blame cato for the death which he did give himself (i know not how, for fear of what might fall, so to prevent the time of life), arming myself with patience to stay the providence of some high powers that govern us below.
then if we lose this battle thorough the streets of rome?
no, cassius, no. think not, thou noble roman, that ever brutus will go bound to rome. he bears too great a mind. but this same day and whether we shall meet again i know not. therefore our everlasting farewell take. forever and forever farewell, cassius. if we do meet again, why, we shall smile.
forever and forever farewell, brutus. if we do meet again, we'll smile indeed. if not, 'tis true this parting was well made.
why then, lead on. oh, that a man might know but it sufficeth that the day will end, and then the end is known., come, ho! away!
ride, ride, messala, ride, and give these bills unto the legions on the other side.
let them set on at once, for i perceive but cold demeanor in octavius' wing, ride, ride, messala. let them all come down.
o, look, titinius, look, the villains fly! myself have to mine own turned enemy. this ensign here of mine was turning back. i slew the coward and did take it from him.
o cassius, brutus gave the word too early, who, having some advantage on octavius, took it too eagerly. his soldiers fell to spoil, whilst we by antony are all enclosed.
mark antony is in your tents, my lord. fly, therefore, noble cassius, fly far off.
this hill is far enough., look, look, titinius. are those my tents where i perceive the fire?
they are, my lord.
titinius, if thou lovest me, mount thou my horse, and hide thy spurs in him till he have brought thee up to yonder troops and here again, that i may rest assured whether yond troops are friend or enemy.
i will be here again, even with a thought.
go, pindarus, get higher on that hill. my sight was ever thick. regard titinius, and tell me what thou notest about the field.
this day i breathed first. time is come round, my life is run his compass. (to pindarus) sirrah, what news?
(above) o my lord!
what news?
with horsemen, that make to him on the spur. yet he spurs on. now they are almost on him. now, titinius. now some light. oh, he lights too. he's ta'en.
and, hark! they shout for joy.
come down, behold no more. oh, coward that i am, to live so long to see my best friend ta'en before my face!
come hither, sirrah. in parthia did i take thee prisoner. that whatsoever i did bid thee do, thou shouldst attempt it. come now, keep thine oath. (gives his sword to pindarus) now be a free man, and with this good sword stand not to answer. here take thou the hilts and, when my face is covered, as 'tis now, guide thou the sword.
caesar, thou art revenged, even with the sword that killed thee.
so i am free. yet would not so have been, durst i have done my will. o cassius, far from this country pindarus shall run, where never roman shall take note of him.
is overthrown by noble brutus' power, as cassius' legions are by antony.
these tidings will well comfort cassius.
where did you leave him?
all disconsolate,
is not that he that lies upon the ground?
he lies not like the living. o my heart!
is not that he?
no, this was he, messala, but cassius is no more. o setting sun, so in his red blood cassius' day is set. the sun of rome is set. our day is gone. clouds, dews, and dangers come! our deeds are done. mistrust of my success hath done this deed.
o hateful error, melancholy's child, why dost thou show to the apt thoughts of men the things that are not? o error, soon conceived, thou never comest unto a happy birth
what, pindarus! where art thou, pindarus?
seek him, titinius, whilst i go to meet the noble brutus, thrusting this report into his ears. i may say "thrusting" it, shall be as welcome to the ears of brutus as tidings of this sight.
hie you, messala, and i will seek for pindarus the while.
why didst thou send me forth, brave cassius? put on my brows this wreath of victory and bid me give it thee? didst thou not hear their shouts? alas, thou hast misconstrued everything! but, hold thee, take this garland on thy brow. will do his bidding. (lays wreath on cassius's head) brutus, come apace, and see how i regarded caius cassius. , by your leave, gods, this is a roman's part. (stabs himself with cassius's sword and dies)
where, where, messala, doth his body lie?
lo, yonder, and titinius mourning it.
titinius' face is upward.
he is slain.
thy spirit walks abroad and turns our swords in our own proper entrails.
brave titinius!, look whe 'er he have not crowned dead cassius.
are yet two romans living such as these? it is impossible that ever rome should breed thy fellow., friends, i owe more tears to this dead man than you shall see me pay. , i shall find time, cassius, i shall find time. his funerals shall not be in our camp, lest it discomfort us., lucillius, come., and come, young cato. let us to the field. , labio and flavio, set our battles on. we shall try fortune in a second fight.
yet, countrymen, o, yet hold up your heads!
what bastard doth not? who will go with me? i will proclaim my name about the field. i am the son of marcus cato, ho! i am the son of marcus cato, ho!
and i am brutus, marcus brutus, i! brutus, my country's friend. know me for brutus!
o young and noble cato, art thou down? and mayst be honored, being cato's son.
(to lucillius) yield, or thou diest.
only i yield to die. there is so much that thou wilt kill me straight. kill brutus, and be honored in his death.
we must not. a noble prisoner!
room, ho! tell antony brutus is ta'en.
i'll tell the news. here comes the general. , brutus is ta'en, brutus is ta'en, my lord.
where is he?
i dare assure thee that no enemy shall ever take alive the noble brutus. the gods defend him from so great a shame! when you do find him, or alive or dead,
(to soldiers) this is not brutus, friend, but, i assure you, a prize no less in worth. keep this man safe. give him all kindness. i had rather have such men my friends than enemies. go on, and bring us word unto octavius' tent how everything is chanced.
come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.
statilius showed the torchlight but, my lord, he came not back. he is or ta'en or slain.
sit thee down, clitus. slaying is the word. (whispers to clitus)
what, i, my lord? no, not for all the world.
peace then! no words.
i'll rather kill myself.
hark thee, dardanius.
shall i do such a deed?
o dardanius!
o clitus!
(aside to dardanius) what ill request did brutus make to thee?
to kill him, clitus. look, he meditates.
(aside to dardanius) now is that noble vessel full of grief, that it runs over even at his eyes.
come hither, good volumnius. list a word.
what says my lord?
why this, volumnius: the ghost of caesar hath appeared to me two several times by night. at sardis once, and this last night here in philippi fields. i know my hour is come.
not so, my lord.
thou seest the world, volumnius, how it goes. our enemies have beat us to the pit.
it is more worthy to leap in ourselves than tarry till they push us. good volumnius, even for that our love of old, i prithee, hold thou my sword hilts, whilst i run on it.
that's not an office for a friend, my lord.
fly, fly, my lord. there is no tarrying here.
, strato, thou hast been all this while asleep. farewell to thee too, strato., countrymen, my heart doth joy that yet in all my life i found no man but he was true to me. more than octavius and mark antony by this vile conquest shall attain unto. so fare you well at once, for brutus' tongue hath almost ended his life's history. that have but labored to attain this hour.
fly, my lord, fly.
hence. i will follow.
i prithee, strato, stay thou by thy lord. thou art a fellow of a good respect. hold then my sword and turn away thy face while i do run upon it. wilt thou, strato?
give me your hand first. (holds brutus' sword) fare you well, my lord.
(runs on his sword) caesar, now be still. i killed not thee with half so good a will. (dies)
what man is that?
my master's man., strato, where is thy master?
the conquerors can but make a fire of him. for brutus only overcame himself, and no man else hath honor by his death.
so brutus should be found., i thank thee, brutus,
all that served brutus, i will entertain them. , fellow, wilt thou bestow thy time with me?
ay, if messala will prefer me to you.
do so, good messala.
how died my master, strato?
i held the sword and he did run on it.
octavius, then take him to follow thee, that did the latest service to my master.
this was the noblest roman of them all. all the conspirators save only he he only in a general honest thought and common good to all, made one of them. his life was gentle, and the elements so mixed in him that nature might stand up
according to his virtue let us use him, with all respect and rites of burial. within my tent his bones tonight shall lie most like a soldier, ordered honorably. to part the glories of this happy day.
