Jennifer Chong Schneider considers what it is to be Asian, maligned, and fetishized in dating — and questions her own desire when she dates someone of her own ethnicity for the first time.Jennifer Chong Schneider | Longreads | December 2018 | 15 minutes (3,673 words)Last summer, my friend and fellow English professor, Danielle, was punched in the face by a white man. When she called the police on him, she was arrested for fighting. She sent me this information in an email, and later I saw pictures of her bloody nose, split lip, fractured teeth. She is a black woman, and I can think of no other reason for her arrest.After this episode of violence, before she left the country for good, fed up with America and its racist antics, Danielle gathered her friends to say goodbye. We were at a bar and there was only one white woman at the table, a salacious marketing peon who regaled us with sex stories in the style of a late 1990’s HBO show. She told us about her current sexual conquest, a Puerto Rican man who is muscular and masculine. Then she looked at Danielle and said she also loves to have sex with black men, adding that all black men have huge dicks, Puerto Ricans are next in line, and Asians have the smallest dicks, because she slept with an Asian person once. She insisted white men were the only group with any diversity. “White men are unpredictable,” she said, “there’s no rhyme or reason.”I stood up, put my hands on the edge of the table and considered flipping it over, but decided to just leave. Danielle followed me out and asked if I was upset. I told her I was leaving to go have sex with an Asian man with a huge dick, and the anger rose inside of me for a reason I couldn’t articulate at the moment.In the morning, Danielle forwarded me a pages-long email from the white woman, prefacing it by saying she and another black professor at the table spent hours berating the white woman until she cried; but she cried not about her sexual racism, but because she liked me and now I’ll never be her friend. I read Danielle’s message and deleted the other.
***Question: When was the last time you slept with someone of your own ethnicity?I am the only Korean in my introductory Korean class, other than the teacher. The teacher dedicates part of every class to talking about Korean culture. She says that she can’t in good conscience tell us about Korea without mentioning how racist and patriarchal it is. She points at me and says, “Do not think they will be kind to biracial people.” My teacher, in a motorized wheelchair, adds, “People with disabilities are not regarded as full people there. I could never live in Korea again.” She motions to the woman in front of me, who is Nigerian, and says, “Darker skin, no. Not kind.”A few days ago I started sleeping with a Korean man who lives close to me — the first Korean person I’ve ever had sex with.I raise my hand and ask, “My mother once walked out of a Korean movie because she said that all the men were addressing the women by their first names, but all the women were addressing the men with honorifics. Is Korea more patriarchal than the US?” The teacher laughs until her face is pink, then says, “Do you think the US is patriarchal?“Korean women are taught from birth to be submissive,” she continues “Korean men rule all aspects of society. Women’s rights are in their infancy in Korea. When I have spoken to Korean women about this, they often tell me that I am the first person who has ever noticed or mentioned their submissiveness to them.”I raise my hand again and ask, “My mother is the oldest daughter in her family, and she said that when she was 13, she had to drop out of school to work and take care of the other children, and that her mother essentially ‘retired’ at that point. Was that common?” The teacher looks confused. She maneuvers her motorized wheelchair a little closer to me. “How old are you,” she asks. I feel slightly violated.“35,” I say.“You don’t look 35,” she says.“Well,” I joke, “I am half-Korean.”She wheels back to the chalkboard. “Your mother must have come from a very conservative family, like the Tea Party in this country. Right of the right wing. But also she is a war baby, and her generation was very conservative. Even ten years later, daughters were already finishing school and attending college.” I think about my father, a white, abusive, racist farm boy from Iowa who joined the service after failing at everything else. He was even dishonorably discharged from the service. The worst white American man must have been miles better than the Korean men my mother had to choose from. When I was older, in college, in my first adult relationships, my mother told me that she would disown me if I ever dated a Korean man. I only now understand what she meant. A few days ago I started sleeping with a Korean man who lives close to me — the first Korean person I’ve ever had sex with. I am already deeply infatuated with him, and I realize that I have much deeper relationships with any person who is not a white man, whose face does not, or cannot, resemble my father’s.I raise my hand and all the other students in the class are now looking at me. “If Korea is so patriarchal, and the men hold all the power, and they are the normalizing force, and women are submissive, what does it mean when Korean men come to America, and are feminized and marginalized by the white patriarchy here?” A Thai man and a white male teenager sit off to my left. They both look down at their books.“How would I know,” the teacher responds, “I’m not a Korean man.”***Question: Who taught you how to date? My Korean mother watches people whenever we go somewhere new. She studies what they do, how they move, what they say to each other. Because I grew up with her, I forget she is a foreigner. But she is. She struggles. She loves eating at buffets, and some of my earliest memories were of following her through aisles of steam tables in some Midwestern Golden Corral with a tray of miscellaneous food. When I was older, visiting from college, she asked where I wanted to eat lunch and I said I wanted to try a sit-down American cafe that had opened recently. We went and my mother opened the menu, sighed, closed it. It took me so long to realize how tiring it must be for her to order food from a waiter – someone who might not understand her accent – off of a menu written in an inscrutable font with euphemistic descriptions. It took me years, adulthood, a master’s degree, five years teaching immigrant students in New York, to start to understand how hard my mother’s life was.Starting when I was 3 years old, my mother instructed me to rip the testicles off of the body of any man who tried to have sex with me. She taught me that all men were untrustworthy perverts, perhaps not knowing that I would eventually queer towards women. I was not allowed to attend middle school sleepovers at the houses of my friends unless they had single moms; there were only two girls whose fathers had abandoned their families in our rural town. Each of these girls was relentlessly horny. One of them showed me a drawerful of dildos and her mom’s sextape. The other was pregnant by age 14. Still today, I am in my 30s and my mother is in her 60s, and before she hangs up the phone, she says, “Good-bye, Jenny-fur, trust no one!”***Question: Who is the person you’re most generous with?The Korean man tells me that he doesn’t know if he likes me. He says he can’t commit to anything. He says he’s a coward and fears a break-up. I hear him say the exact things I have said to so many people: I’m not the relationship type, don’t get your hopes up, I’m flighty and mercurial, I do not want to be your girlfriend. My last partner, a Pinoy, listened to these excuses and replied, “Those are all dumb reasons not to date. If you want to date me, I want you to be my girlfriend, and I will want to call you my girlfriend because we will be in a committed relationship.” Without that experience, I would not know that the opposite of commitment is not infidelity, but fear and shame.Kickstart your weekend reading by getting the week’s best Longreads delivered to your inbox every Friday afternoon.Sign upThe Korean man invites me to his ex-girlfriend’s house, a single mother ten years his senior. She’s gone; he’s sitting the cats they bought together as kittens. I run my hands over the items in her house and remember that people can’t be known. The thought is huge and almost immobilizing. He takes out her garbage and cleans her house, unaware that I would ever feel uncomfortable being in their space. He invites me to sleep with him in her bed. I decline and wonder what he could possibly be thinking. He resists relationships because he fears failure, because someone leaving him might destroy the little self-value he’s built up. I resist relationships because I know deep inside of me that I cannot know someone, that I’m not perceptive enough to read their signals, because my parents were not logical or transparent people and often I found their behavior puzzling and harsh.When the Korean man says he will come over, I buy fruit at the store, I make food in the morning, I prepare my house to receive him. He cancels and I can’t bring myself to tell him how much time I wasted in service of his absence.He says he’s trustworthy, but what he means is that he’s transparent. He answers my questions with candor. To me, trust doesn’t mean candor; trust means that a person will take care with your feelings, and they will do it without effort. That they will consider whether their words will hurt you, and try to soften the blow when they give you bad news. That they will think about how their behavior will affect you at the moment and in the future. He talks about white women in a careless, aspirational way to me, as if what we both desire most is to date white women. He makes unconsidered, insensitive comments about my appearance and family. When I ask him about his feelings for me, he wavers, unable to see how his hesitation hurts me, especially if he backtracks and later says he likes me. My friend Danielle writes me from her new home outside of America, “I’m happy you’re still seeing him, and I hope you’re enjoying yourself. He’s letting you know he will leave you. Are you ok with that?” She softens the blow, even in email, because she really cares for me.My mother was a sacrificial child, born into the unlucky birth position of eldest daughter. She was expected to give up her schooling and independence in order to take care of everyone else. Unwittingly, she passed that on to me. I don’t think sacrifice is romantic, I think it’s despicable, but I can’t stop doing it. When the Korean man says he will come over, I buy fruit at the store, I make food in the morning, I prepare my house to receive him. He cancels and I can’t bring myself to tell him how much time I wasted in service of his absence. In our first week of dating, he tells me, “I’m so empathetic, I will disgust you.” Almost three months later, he texts, “Please write down all the ways I have hurt you and why they hurt you.”***Question: Why are you single?Everyone in New York who is single, is single for a reason. I went on a date with an attorney who couldn’t get erections because of his dose of Lexapro. He cut his dosage and ended up kicking my best friend’s dog and screaming at me. I went on another date with an editor who started out by telling me about his loneliness and need to leave the house, then he showed up an hour and fifteen minutes late to our last lunch date. He said he was at the grocery store. Everyone is single for a reason: that reason is that they want to be single.I’m included in that statement. I love being single.Reclaiming my time. Reclaiming my time. Reclaiming my time. Other Asians have been among the meanest people on dates. I showed up to drinks with an Indian man who said I looked white in my pictures, but since I was here and half-Asian, he needed to tell me that he doesn’t date Asian women. “I like redheads,” he said, clearly a euphemism for white women. At work, in the breakroom, I tell Danielle about his comment and she gets super irritated that I didn’t think some black people have naturally red hair. Then she offers to help me burn down his house for saying he categorically doesn’t date Asian women.I go on a date with an Asian man of unknown ethnicity (I don’t ask because I don’t want to make it seem like it matters) and he disappointedly tells me that he thought I was Jewish from my profile pictures.I go on a date with a white man who is an Instagram celebrity. He spends the first twenty minutes of our date gleefully guessing what mix I might be.I go on a date with a white man who tells me a story about how he hates racists, and in the story he loudly uses the n-word. When I chastise him, he says, “I can’t be racist, I went on a date with a Chinese girl once.” I tell him some of the most racist people will only date Asian women, and in the uncomfortable silence, I try not to think of my dad.I go on a date with a white man, a former reporter for a conservative but mainstream newspaper. I tell him my parents are immigrants and that I’m mixed, and he says, “Oh, that’s ok, you can pass for white, no problem!” His eyes move over me and I imagine him re-styling me to emphasize what he thinks are my whitest qualities.***Question: Are your desires shaped internally or externally?In an undergraduate Women and Literature class at Iowa, we are assigned the Adrienne Rich essay, “Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence.” The author argues that many women who identify as heterosexual have actually been socialized out of lesbian behavior from a young age, and that a lot of second-wave feminism doesn’t make room for queerness. Rich points to a slew of women-centered interactions ranging from breastfeeding to secret sharing to hand holding, and she says that women engage in normal, intimate lesbian behaviors, and that many of those are the foundation to queer attraction, but parents and culture will redirect their daughters’ attentions to boys. During classroom discussion of the essay, a white blonde student with a nose ring starts breathing heavily until she explodes with, “I’m not a lesbian! My boyfriend is a football player. This woman knows nothing about me. This discussion is an insult to women,” and she storms out. “She’s gay,” someone says when a few of us joke about it after class.Her reaction is to the idea that her sexual tastes are shaped by outside forces; it is too confrontational for her to process.***Question: How are your desires shaped?Growing up in rural Iowa, I was told that every Asian person I met was my cousin, grandma, sister, brother, etc. There was an older Korean woman who lived close by; my mother called her “Kitty’s grandma.” I called her Kitty’s grandma. Kitty was another Asian woman in town. I believed I was blood related to them for years, but when I was older, I found out that they weren’t even blood related. Calling someone “grandma” is a form of honorific that my mother couldn’t really translate for me.There was a half-Korean, half-Chinese boy in my grade at school; his parents owned the Chinese restaurant in town called The Great Wall. My older brother worked there when he was in high school. I was friends with the son, Jeremy, and we went to high school homecoming together sophomore year. Before I left the house for the dance, my mother said, “I’m so glad you’re going to homecoming with your friend, Jeremy. He is your cousin.” He was not my cousin.I go on a date with a white man who tells me a story about how he hates racists, and in the story he loudly uses the n-word. I tell him some of the most racist people will only date Asian women, and in the uncomfortable silence, I try not to think of my dad.Years later in Seattle, I was friends with a half-Japanese woman who was struggling with mental illness. She was hypersexual, a sex addict. She slept with hundreds of men and women but never had orgasms with them; she liked the power dynamics of sex. She watched me shower at her house, sitting in a chair in her bathroom like a paying john inspecting the goods. I told her it was hard for me to sexualize Asian people because of the way I was brought up and she said that she learned that if she wants to sleep with hundreds of people, she can’t be choosy about it.***Question: How are your desires shaped?White aspirationalism is a term that describes the way non-white individuals, many of them immigrants, are susceptible to an overpowering urge to assimilate into whiteness as a practice of self-betterment. This can include wearing Tommy Hilfiger shirts and dating white people. White people, only subconsciously aware of their own social position, will reassure me that I “look white” enough, and that they can “barely tell” or it “doesn’t matter.”***Question: Why are you single?I don a short dress and red lipstick for a party, then get on the subway in Brooklyn. Two men, one visibly drunk, tells me to SMILE. I scowl at him. He hisses at me, “Who ruined you, you bitch?”“My father,” I reply.***Question: How are your desires shaped?The Korean man’s parents were not war babies; they are war survivors, ten years older than my mom. One night I meet him at a bar, and he’s on the phone with his mother. He stoically says, “Uh huh, ok, yes, ok, ok, yes.” He hangs up and says, “My mother says she wants to die. She was sobbing and crying, I don’t really know why. Some fight with my sister.” I recognize this as a survival tactic he and I share: I cannot engage with or take seriously the emotional or manipulative abuse of my parents, and consequently, of anyone else. Growing up, I needed to isolate my feelings in order to function on a basic level. The trade-off is that I can’t always access those emotions naturally, or when I want, and it’s too easy to disengage from any emotional situation, whether I want to or not. Years ago, his parents stole his identity and bilked him for thousands of dollars. He cut off contact for decades until his sister had a child. Now his parents call and ask for money on a nearly weekly basis. “What do they spend it on?” I ask him. “They have to have the nicest brands of clothes — Tommy Hilfiger, Izod, everything perfect. They don’t have money for rent, but when they met my sister’s husband’s family, they took out a loan to rent a fancy car for the night.” If you can’t trust your parents, how will you trust anyone?***Question: Who taught you how to date?Danielle is the only daughter in her brood; she has three brothers, who all got The Talk. Danielle eavesdropped with intensity. Her father gathered around her brothers and told them the story of how he met their mother. “I asked seven different girls to the dance, then your mother said yes, and we’ve been together ever since. That’s my number: 7. Each of you have a number. It might be 7, or 15, or 30, but all you have to do is keep asking until you figure out your number, and then you’ll know.”I must remind the Korean man a bit of the Korean women in his family in the way that every single white man looks like he might be my in-law, backwater, inbred cousin; in the way that white people claim to not be able to tell Asians apart, I also can’t tell white people apart; in the way I thought Ben Affleck and Jennifer Garner were brother and sister instead of husband and wife. People say we are not born into racism, that it is learned, but maybe it’s a little of both.***Question: Do white people think about it this much? When a Ben Affleck type meets his Jennifer Garner type, is it a racially fraught decision?The Korean man has partnered with tall, white women with light colored hair and a lack of personal focus. He keeps mentioning how tall, white, thin, and big-titted they were. I don’t think it’s malicious, but I notice it’s kind of like a collector’s fetish. When I sleep with white men, a practice I rarely engage in anymore, they comment on my “perfect” body, intense face, full mouth — exoticizing my normal. I feel that the Korean man and I are approaching something like equals; as a result, I think he doesn’t find me physically attractive. Being a fetishized object is marginalizing, but it can feel good to be seen as an object, to hide your humanity away, to please someone with your ethnicity, something you have absolutely no control over. I imagine a lot of women have grown used to it as well. It’s rare to find a man who can find his equal attractive instead of diminishing.***Question: Danielle, I’m writing an essay on intraracial dating. What do you think?Danielle says: It’s fraught. Black people tell me I don’t talk the way they do. We can be so cruel to each other, like we’re already family, like we already know each other, like we already see each other, like we are in each other’s experiences, and we can feel known, and we can feel discarded. It hurts, and it’s too much like family.* * *Jennifer Chong Schneider lives and works in New York City. She studied writing in Iowa and Wyoming.
Editor: Sari Botton
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
Inside music journalism post-2008 recession, and how media consumption in the 21st century offers a road map for the continuation of the once-robust medium. Aaron Gilbreath| Longreads | December 2018 | 25 minutes (6,357 words)When other writers and I get together, we sometimes mourn the state of music writing. Not its quality — the music section of any good indie bookstore offers proof of its vigor — but what seems like the reduced number of publications running longer music stories.In the United States, music coverage now often comes in the form of “20 songs you need right now.” Websites offer features that masquerade as listicles detailing “10 reasons you should listen to so-and-so” or brief posts built around new singles, new videos, artistic feuds, and trending memes. Don’t get me wrong — I need music news, and I love a good list ranking ABBA’s 25 best songs, which is 23 more than I knew existed. I also love being whisked away in a story. Music is the thing that unites all people, and immersive music writing can provide as pleasurable an experience as an hour alone with your streaming service.This isn’t a uncommon opinion: Many people I know enjoy reading and writing narratives about bands old and new. We love stories about memorable tours, obscure historical incidents, influential songs, personal obsessions, and overlooked music, like Julian Brimmers’s oral history of the short-lived genre Chipmunk Soul. We love career retrospectives and in-depth examinations of gender, race, culture, and our own identities as listeners; same for stories about lost albums, underappreciated musicians, and personalized political pieces like Ellen Willis’s “Beginning to See the Light,” an important dissection of feminism, fandom, and punk rock. These narratives aren’t pegged to a local show, or built around an upcoming album release or Super Bowl performance, which then highlights an increasingly relevant question: Without these news pegs, where do writers send them? For those of us who will likely never write for big slicks like The New Yorker or GQ, and who can’t just write books about the music we want, it’s very difficult to find nationally distributed magazines willing to publish unpegged longform music pieces. Many stories are important enough for us to try to tell, but American newsstands are now practically devoid of music magazines. Where did they go? Assessing the state of music writing requires a look at recent history, which can easily seduce you into discouraging nostalgia.***American music journalism started in the 1960s at the Village Voice and Crawdaddy but quickly became so popular that, in 1968, The New Yorker hired Ellen Willis as its first pop music critic. The decade saw an explosion in the genre’s exploration, thriving at newly established titles like Rolling Stone, Creem, Bomp!, and Cheetah, a proliferation which continued well into the 1970s. By the 1980s, it crossed from outlets like the original Bitch: The Woman’s Rock Mag with Bite into the mainstream at Spin, Hullabaloo, The Face, Right On!, MTV, and Black Beat, and at Option, Chunklet, Ray Gun, BAM, and The Rocket in the ’90s. While Rolling Stone first began in the attic of a printing press, nearly going bankrupt within its initial five years, music journalism proved to be extremely profitable.You didn’t have to search long to find the zine-like Maximumrocknroll and Punk Planet, both as punk in their editorial independence as their musical tastes. If you went to Tower Records, you could pick up their free magazine Pulse!. Even the skate mag Thrasher published band profiles and music news. (One 1989 issue reported: “Rumor from Texas tells of a New Kids on the Block gig gone awry when Kerry King of Slayer threw beer on the New Kids’ lead singer. Kerry and Kid then proceeded to beat each other up while security held the other New Kids back.”) The Source and Vibe were the rap scene’s ultimate taste arbiters, and artists featured in The Source’s “Unsigned Hype” column often became some of the generation’s leading hitmakers, from Notorious BIG to Big Pun and DMX. But hip-hop magazines also featured those bubbling in the underground, rappers that received acclaim in Rap Pages, Stress, Straight No Chaser, and The Bomb Hip-Hop Magazine.We can’t forget the Beastie Boys’ eclectic six-issue run with Grand Royal, and of course, all the fan zines across the decades, from Flipside and Forced Exposure to Chemical Imbalance. To me, this list of titles shows an unwavering appreciation for music news and stories. As one of Tower Records’ old slogans put it: “No Music, No Life.”In hindsight, the 1990s and early aughts now resemble the salad days of traditional magazine publishing. It was a time when a writer like Ann Powers could reasonably hope to work as a pop music critic at the Los Angeles Times, and hip-hop journalists could launch their own print magazines like Sacha Jenkins’s ego trip. Da Capo Press’ beloved Best Music Writing anthology was an annual mainstay, and chain bookstores everywhere from Manhattan to Bakersfield stocked a wealth of glossy titles. Spin, Blender, Harp, Magnet, Paste, FILTER, The Big Takeover, Under the Radar, Alternative Press, and Rolling Stone covered rock and pop. The Source, Vibe, Wax Poetics, The Fader, Mass Appeal, XXL, and URB covered hip-hop, soul, jazz, electronic, and R&B. Decibel did metal. Relix did live, improvisational music, No Depression roots music, and Down Beat and JazzTimes sat alongside British stalwarts The Wire and NME.Hell, there was even a magazine called Ferret Fancy ─ which I read! It had nothing to do with music, but its niche focus embodied these vibrant times. The quality of stories wasn’t universally high, but at least these titles formed a diverse journalistic ecosystem. Alt-weeklies like Chicago Reader, Washington City Paper, and Minnesota City Pages didn’t limit themselves to short criticism or Q&As, and they continued to publish solid music stories, while The Believer loved music so much it eventually launched an annual music issue, following the Oxford American’s lead, which had been publishing music issues with CDs since its 16th issue in 1997. The OA itself followed the lead of CMJ New Music Monthly, which was the first print pub to include a free CD. Stories from many of these publications got reprinted or noted in Best Music Writing.And though mainstream general interest magazines like Vanity Fair and Esquire, equipped with a greater reach than music magazines, often published what seemed like PR pieces disguised as profiles, they could also surprise you. Vanity Fair contributor David Kamp wrote vividly about L.A.’s infamous Whisky A-Go-Go in 2000. Elizabeth Gilbert profiled Tom Waits for GQ in 2002. For Vibe, Karen R. Good wrote about groupies, materialism, and misogyny in hip-hop in 1999. Mary Gaitskill wrote about her complex attraction to sexist Axl Rose for Details back in 1992. I had barely learned how to pitch magazine stories by 2007, yet it was a glorious time to read and write about music. Then the 2008 recession hit.You know the details: Residential construction ground to a halt. Manufacturing jobs got cut. Wall Street spiraled into chaos, and Main Street footed the bill. Amid the financial carnage, magazine advertising revenues plummeted. Total ad pages dropped from 255,667 in 2007 to 172,240 by 2010. Magazine newsstand sales had been declining before the recession, but magazines’ advertising revenues precipitously fell from $13.9 billion in 2008 to $10 billion in 2009, in part because online ad revenue kept cutting into print revenue — 31 percent from 22.3 million in 2002 to 15.4 million in 2008. Ad sales in U.S. national magazines fell over 20 percent compared to the previous year during the first quarter of 2009 alone. When advertising shrunk, magazine budgets shrunk. Once reliable publications like Rolling Stone cut back their page numbers, not to mention dimensions. Others like Harp and Blender flat out died. To streamline operations, magazines restructured sales departments and reduced print schedules and staff. Vibe briefly shuttered in 2009, then resumed publishing just six issues a year. Others, like URB, converted from a print to an online magazine. Paste traded print for web in 2010 in an effort to stave off its demise, but only after first installing a failed pay-what-you-wish subscription system modeled after the one Radiohead used for its 2007 album In Rainbows. Spin stayed with its print model until 2012, the year Spin Media’s new CEO laid off 11 editorial staffers and reframed the magazine as “a media company with a print property,” further distancing themselves from print journalism. When the recession’s dust settled, after a period of almost two years, newsstands looked very different, and that’s largely how they’ve remained.Magazines rise and fall. They lose relevance, their founders move on, or get revamped or shut down by new owners. Some speak for their generation, then the next generation finds a way to speak for themselves. The internet has shaped how current generations speak about music.***Before the internet, when people bought records, tapes, and CDs, they found new music from professional music critics, record store clerks, MTV, and word of mouth. This meant that record labels needed magazines to advertise their newest offerings. Labels hung big promotional posters in record stores, and chains like Tower and Virgin had sizeable magazines racks. As music critic Simon Reynolds described that era: “All music and most information were things you literally got your hands on: they came only an analogue form, as tangible objects like records or magazines.” If you wanted to discover records by the loud scuzzy garage bands that mainstream media ignored, like Nights and Days, you read a zine like Jay Hinman’s Superdope. If you wanted to know if the mainstream albums that just came out were good, you read Option, which ran hundreds of reviews. One 1988 issue I have contains 37 pages of album reviews, five pages dedicated to cassette reviews, and a six-page ad from SST records! “The net destroyed the model,” editor Jack Rabid told me via email.Kickstart your weekend reading by getting the week’s best Longreads delivered to your inbox every Friday afternoon.Sign upRabid has run his rock magazine The Big Takeover since 1980, and he believes the mainstream adoption of the internet in the mid 1990s irrevocably changed our listening habits. Instead of buying albums, we could listen to songs online and download them on file-sharing sites. It was fantastic, but it also crippled the music industry: Album sales declined and record label budgets plummeted, which meant they had less to spend on print ads for promotion. The listening public quickly got used to getting music and news for free, and many became less willing to regularly pay for things. As Justin Timberlake’s Sean Parker remarked in The Social Network upon being told the record companies defeated Napster in court, “You want to buy a Tower Records?”“Because the more content that could be accessed for free on the net,” Rabid told me, “the less people were willing to keep buying physical mags as they had in the past, no matter how good. And that not only hurt mags; most of all, it hurt the stores we counted on to sell us, especially the sort of indie book and record stores and magazine racks all over the country that went out of business the last 20 years. That was our other lifeblood and it’s nearly all gone now. We lost half our sales over the last 15–20 years to such closings, half of them to Tower, Virgin, Hastings, etcetera, and most of all Borders, but the other half to little mom and pop concerns that were the lifeblood of their communities and offered something more tangible culturally and socially than the more passive net.” He called it “an endless loop of deterioration of the funding and structure.”To freelance journalist Annie Zaleski, the hyperabundance of digital entertainment has lessened music’s popularity and cut into magazine readership. Even though Zaleski, who has contributed to Billboard and Rolling Stone, subscribes to the print editions of Entertainment Weekly and Guitar World, she sees music playing less of a role in people’s lives. “There is simply so much media competing with music,” she says. “TV, movies, video games, even social media itself — that music isn’t as central to the lives of many people, so it follows that there are fewer music-only publications. People’s cultural consumption habits tend to be broader today, simply because there is so much great, creative art to seek out and enjoy — and so much of this art is available online and accessible to more people.”The internet freed information from specialists. Why do you need a magazine to tell you what Wikipedia and blogs can for free? “An interview with your favorite artist used to be sacred but now it’s mundane,” Brian DiGenti, the cofounder of Wax Poetics, told me. “The idea of people being excited about finding out the tracklist of an upcoming album is now absurd. As is waiting months for a new album to drop.”
Amy Linden, who wrote prolifically about hip-hop during the ’90s, recognized similar issues with readers’ desires and attention spans. “I don’t think people are curious they way that they used to be,” Linden told Pitchfork in an epic piece about hip-hop journalism. “How can we expect thoughtfulness when we’re interested in hashtags and tweets and fast thoughts?”Some of those I spoke with for this piece, like DiGenti, also believe digital natives read less in general. Caryn Rose writes extensively about music, but she’s also beholden to new music journalism, having recently published a thrillingly exhaustive “All 218 U2 Songs, Ranked From Worst to Best” at Vulture. “The challenge is that while more people than ever listen to popular music, its ubiquity means that less people than ever want to do the deep dive.” Back in the analogue era, acquiring information and music required effort. You had to visit record stores to hunt for it or ask your cool older sister for recommendations, fleeing when she caught you pillaging her record collection while she was in the shower. “We didn’t really need gatekeepers anymore,” Amos Barshad wrote in Slate. “The monoculture weakened; a million little tribes sprung up in its place. How could any one person claim a universal authority over all of that?”Back when we needed specialists, music magazines provided part of readers’ identities. We find our people and identify with a group, and music provides a particular plumage to advertise our tastes and tribal affiliation — be it punk or pop or hip-hop. When you’re young, you need to be in the know to earn cred. Jonah Weiner captured this well: “Picture that mythical orange-haired girl walking around a nowheresville suburb in 1994 with a rolled-up Spin in her back pocket — it’s not just a magazine but a badge, an amulet, a pipeline to a world far removed from her local food court.” Journalist and Longreads editor Danielle Jackson was one of those teenagers.“For a long time I decorated my walls with different artists pulled from the magazines,” Jackson recalled, “like Word Up! and Right On!. Then in high school I had a group of girlfriends who were all very invested in what was happening in music at the time, and we wrote and performed poetry different places. It was a thing in the mid ’90s, and it was bad stuff. When a new Vibe came out, we’d have sleepovers or these long phone calls to dissect pieces and turn around the arguments with each other. It was nurturing to be around other people who took art, music and writing seriously, and the writers we read taught us that we weren’t weird to care so much.” This intense relationship with the printed word helped cultivate her affinity for pop culture and stories, which proved essential to how she built her career into the kind of journalist and cultural critic she once read as a teen.Online chat rooms, Twitter, Facebook, and blogs reduced the role magazines played in exchanging information and constructing identities. As Weiner wrote in 2009, “Music magazines were an early version of social networking. But now there’s this thing called ‘social networking.’”“Pop music used to be something people had to seek out: Find the right FM station, watch [the TV variety show] Midnight Special late at night, drive to a venue and buy a concert ticket,” former Blender music editor and Rolling Stone contributing editor Rob Tannenbaum told me by email. “Now, music is everywhere. It’s mobile, it’s accessible, it’s ever-present, it’s playing at Walgreens. It’s possible we’re so full of music, and surrounded by it so continuously, that we take it for granted. Music is air. Reading a music magazine, at this point, might be like reading about air, and no one would do that.”But even for those of us who still liked reading about air, reading habits have changed, and print struggled to compete with expanding online coverage.Access to personal computers became more common in the early 1990s, and people began reading more online. Some magazines were quick to transition. Ex–Rolling Stone staffer Michael Goldberg capitalized on this shift by launching the first online multimedia music magazine Addicted to Noise in his bedroom in 1994. “Rock journalism had just dried up,” the forward-thinking Goldberg told MTV News. “Most of the stuff was professional but soulless. Reviews had become consumer reports. Interviews that got the artist to open up and talk about their work and what they were trying to do and what it was about just weren’t there. … I also felt like a whole piece of rock ‘n’ roll wasn’t being documented — the kind of music that is eccentric, underground or overground, but has a spirit in it. I wanted that.” ATN went deep, and was a harbinger — by the time it folded in 2000, others had started experimenting with digital publishing to create the sorts of websites they wanted to read and to capture the readership that was migrating online. One such adopter was Ryan Schreiber, a recent high school graduate who founded Pitchfork in 1996 as a music news and reviews site. Another was Sara Zupko founded PopMatters in 1999 to cover all forms of culture.But by the Great Recession, many web-savvy tastemakers had expanded upon the medium, launching music blogs — aka audioblogs or mp3 blogs — like Fluxblog, Stereogum, Aquarium Drunkard, Brooklyn Vegan, Gorilla vs. Bear, and Tiny Mix Tapes. Bloggers could respond to breaking news and post reviews more quickly than print journalists. Rather than a business, this was often pleasure; many blogs eschewed advertising completely, and the model was dependent on creating communities explicitly through sharing favorite songs. Besides a new publishing model, one unique thing blogs offered was music itself.Sites like Aquarium Drunkard could post rare live recordings that bands hadn’t released, creating niches even more unique than rock or rap magazines. The web specializes in immediacy, and with fewer print publications to promote bands’ music, publicists sent music bloggers songs to share, making some blogs so popular that a posted song functioned the way a band’s single had in previous decades. Blogs’ curation served listeners the way record stores once did. The internet had become, as Nick Hornby put it, “one giant independent record shop.” Most blogs were for music, though, not for longform music writing.The internet created a frontier where consumer desires were no longer clear. Did people want stories anymore or just brief posts? Did they want playlists instead of album reviews?As reading habits changed during the early 2000s, the issue of what exactly people will pay for emerged. So did the issue of how we read online, for free or not. Theorists feared technology had ruined us. Some cultural critics diagnosed us all with ADHD, no longer able to focus on stories. The generalization was unfair: The way we consume and digest information in print differs greatly from the way we do online, and that affected music magazines’ performance. Simon Reynolds, who grew up reading England’s music weeklies like NME and Melody Maker, articulated the different reading experiences perfectly: “Concentration of a different kind was involved in reading the frequently very long features. It’s perfectly possible, of course, to flick desultorily through a printed magazine in just the same way one drifts shiftlessly across the infosphere. But something about the bound nature of the magazine encourages getting pulled into a story, and staying with it until the end.”This isn’t to say the past was some high point in music literature. I reread a bunch of long stories from CMJ New Music Monthly, Option, Spin, Under the Radar, and DownBeat. I found lots of amateurish sentences, bland takes, adolescent humor, insider jargon, and writers rehashing the narrative that publicists sent. I did find some jewels: Eve Babitz on the death of Gram Parsons; Gina Arnold on Nirvana in 1991, right before they broke; Mark Kemp on Meat Puppets in 1995. But just like today, story quality varied. Sure, there were more of them, but the fluff was abundant.So then what is the function of a music magazine now? Album reviews? Profiles or best-of lists? “I think many companies are still trying to figure this out,” DiGenti told me.”I’d like to believe that people still want what music magazines provided best,” Rose said, “which was providing more information through which you could appreciate a band or a song or a record.”***One thing that the internet hasn’t erased are album reviews. As evidenced by Pitchfork’s growth since the site launched in 1996, people still seek music critics’ guidance. Following the site’s debut, when it was known as Turntable, readers came to expect articulate and compelling album reviews and insightful monthly interviews. Schreiber’s background spoke to the music journalism ethos established by Paul Williams, Jann Wenner, and others: in his late teens, Schreiber was doubly influenced by zines and the musical history of his native Minneapolis. Upon moving to Chicago, Pitchfork expanded into a hub of daily music news and album reviews, focusing on indie and underground music; while the writing was occasionally snarky, it’s decisive tone and cutting edge taste helped establish Pitchfork as the internet’s most influential source of music criticism. Eventually, the site began publishing in-depth features like Aaron Leitko’s 2012 profile of the tireless Ty Segall. I read music magazines for lively stories like Leitko’s, and Pitchfork amplified the reading experience by floating images and text on top of each other using parallax scrolling, something magazines could only do online.In the fall of 2013, the site further tested the limits of longform and launched a quarterly magazine called The Pitchfork Review. Despite the challenges of print journalism, it was an ambitious experiment — one website referred to the quarterly as “New Yorker meets Paris Review meets Adbusters.” Newsstand copies cost $19.96 — a nod to the year of Pitchfork’s founding — and focused on long stories about everything from Otis Redding to English music weeklies to the history of the jukebox.It was a bold move, but the Review wasn’t recreating early music magazines. It was tweaking the model to see what it could still do, and to gauge if readers wanted the journalistic equivalent of slow food in a fast-paced era. The site handled breaking news and first takes, while print shined through the thoughtful handling of stories like a profile of Kansas’ infamous DIY venue, The Outhouse. In Issue 2, editor J.C. Gabel clarified the magazine’s mission: “We love the speed and community of the internet, but there’s so much noise (and far too few filters) that important stories can get lost.”By Issue 5, the Review had hired its first official editor in chief — Jessica Hopper, who had previously been a staff editor. The move was insightful: Hopper started her own music zine, Hit It Or Quit It, at age 15, only to begin freelancing for an alt-weekly a year later. She then launched a PR company around the time Pitchfork debuted, representing both bands and labels, so when she was hired as EIC, Hopper was one of the most visible, versatile, and dynamic music journalists working.For the Review, she said she planned to publish “stuff that’s not even doable anymore because it doesn’t fit into people’s verticals,” like a 20,000-word oral history of the band Jawbreaker, as well as “longer pieces on contemporary artists that we think are going to be canonical.” She wanted it to be “the kind of magazine where you pull it off the shelf in 10 years and you know who everybody is.”***When I visited Powell’s Books in Portland, Oregon, this July, the rack had 14 music magazines. Of course Rolling Stone was there, now under new ownership for the first time since its 1967 founding, but most titles at the world’s largest new and used bookstore targeted working musicians and industry professionals rather than the curious listener: Guitar World, Fretboard Journal, DRUM!, Sound on Sound, Future Music, American Songwriter, and Tape Op. It was weird. DownBeat stood near JazzTimes, both as thin as tourist brochures. For a splash of rock and pop culture, it had Maximumrocknroll, The FADER, and The Big Takeover. By chance, The Believer had just released its newest Music Issue. It included one of the best pieces of music writing I’d seen all year: Steve Silberman’s essay about jazz pianist Bill Evans’s enormous and tragic talent.Sadly, The Pitchfork Review was no longer among them. It folded in 2016, after just 11 issues. The Review wasn’t a failure. Just as Pitchfork had proven that some people still wanted album reviews, their print experiment confirmed that a handful of hardcore folks still wanted to read about music in a beautiful literary object, just maybe not enough of us to keep that object alive.“I really miss doing the Review,” Hopper told me, “making a thing with the cool cabal of those three women (and my longtime collaborator Michael Catano). It was hard, but not for any of the typical reasons. I do not know why it folded, that was after my time, but I think about it a few times a month, and at events I hear from people who loved it or found it educational or meaningful. That’s what mattered most to me, it being a seed, rather than an institution.”The Pitchfork Review believed that print music journalism wasn’t dead; it just needed to adapt to the times. What Tower Records’ old slogan said is still true: “No Music, No Life.” We still have music, and listeners didn’t lose our lives when magazines lost theirs. Music journalism survived by becoming niche, and by focusing its coverage, deepening our listening experience, and broadening our musical tastes. And as much as the internet has affixed media’s attachment to the news cycle, it has also allowed niche publications to detach themselves from that cycle, and rather focus on creating stories that are evergreen, stories whose subjects and themes exist, like the internet itself, in a realm beyond the bounds of time. They can just tell good stories.In a 2009 piece for Slate, Weiner points out another reason music writing often fails to engage a large general audience. “Many readers who are otherwise passionate about culture have little time for music writing, irritated that it speaks in abstract, jargon-stuffed language about ostensibly mainstream entertainment,” he wrote. “Music writers are charged with describing more ineffable things, and the frequent result is a pile-up of slang and shorthand references, purplish gushing, and tedious emphasis on lyrics.” As a consumer and creator of music writing, that’s expressly what I liked about the Review’s experiment, which wasn’t bound by an outdated subset of rules. It could be inventive in its voice and with a range of musical styles and approaches it chose to cover.When writers focus on musicians or their lives as listeners, they focus on the people who make or consume music, on the music’s historical context, its time and place, rather than on dissecting the music itself. That brings the abstract out of the abstract. By transporting characters and scenes in a concrete recognizable world, music stories draw readers into a narrative that appeals to a broader audience, one capable of reaching beyond the small cadre of hardcore music fans who speak jargon. Then we can think of music stories as another form of compelling entertainment — not necessarily music journalism, but good storytelling. That’s what the films 20 Feet from Stardom, The Last Waltz, Searching for Sugarman, and Stretch and Bobbito are: masterful, popular, human stories about people that also involve music. That’s also what the internet can do for music journalism — stories like J.P. Robinson’s incredibly original, absorbing feature about the mysterious hippie William Jellett, who danced for decades at countless rock shows in the U.K.Or that Red Bull’s sponsored online magazine has published some of the best online features about hip-hop, beats, and pop music around. During the past two years, British producer Kirk Degiorgio wrote about “The Roots of Dub,” and Benjamin Meadows-Ingram wrote about the way the Showboys’ 1986 song “Drag Rap” shaped Southern rap. But what’s fascinating about the funding from a lucrative global beverage company is the absence of #sponcon.The Powell’s newsstand’s biggest surprise was Ugly Things, a 35-year-old magazine dedicated to ’60s and ’70s rock, garage, and psyche, what it calls “Wild Sounds from Past Dimensions.” Born in England, Mike Stax started Ugly Things as a fanzine in San Diego in 1980, using, in his words, “an electric typewriter, Letraset, scissors, and glue.” It now prints 5,000 copies of each issue. (For comparison, Rolling Stone had a total circulation of roughly 1.5 million.) Ugly Things has endured partially because of its specialty. Nearly four decades of passionate examination of one musical niche has created a devoted readership. Second, it caters to a subset of readers who want long, thoughtful stories they can touch and return to. This type of reading appeals to people who enjoy listening to records: It’s tactile, slow, has arguably greater fidelity.”It’s like the difference between listening to music on vinyl verses streaming it online or downloading an mp3,” Stax told me. “Part of it is the possession of a physical artifact, a tactile embodiment of the work that went into its creation — the cover art, the layout, even the ads, are all part of it, and all help provide a personal connection between reader and writer. In the case of Ugly Things, it’s something our readers want to hold onto, keep on a bookshelf, and return to again and again.” Stax recognizes the unique advantages of online publishing, but he committed himself to offering a reading experience that the web cannot. “That is where I see print’s most important role. We can publish the kind of lengthy, deeply researched stories that you can’t find online. Storytelling is a huge part of what Ugly Things is all about. Our stories range from two or three thousand words up to thirty or forty thousand words. We’ve even serialized stories of up to one hundred thousand words. Some of these stories take years of research and detective work. You won’t find that kind of music writing anywhere online.” Jack Rabid at The Big Takeover has a similar perspective, explaining that the magazine’s survival depends on investing “a lot of thought, knowledge, experience and taste into something built to last longer and dig deeper.”He continues, “My proviso is that I never let our print content appear on the net, not only because I have never bought into the fallacious model that people will pay for what they can easily get for free, but also because I feel like people experience arguments and writing differently when they read it on a page than on a screen.”In a sense, digitization has made print media not only quaint, but a prestige item. As the world around both Ugly Things and The Big Takeover changed, it reframed their offering as a distinct art form enriched by an aura of vintageness, even craftsmanship, a rock ‘n’ roll version of small-batch coffee or hand-churned butter, one that particular people seek out since it’s no longer the default of day-to-day life. I like that about them, but I’m biased.Billboard and the redesigned Rolling Stone have since taken a similar approach to The Pitchfork Review, making themselves into collector’s items. Billboard prints its issues on thick, glossy stock to give them staying power and the sort of tactile, collectible appeal of vinyl records. ”The issues are more like keepsakes,” Zaleski says, “like a book you’d display on a coffee table or shelf.” As one grave New York Times article put it, print magazines “might eventually gain a cult following akin to the interest around other obsolete media, like vinyl records.” “Eventually, they’ll become like sailboats,” former New York magazine editor Kurt Andersen told the Times. “They don’t need to exist anymore. But people will still love them, and make them and buy them.”Those are the people DiGenti wants his magazine to appeal to. “My goal is to return Wax Poetics to its roots,” he told me, “where we again are a collectible journal — more like a book — something that’s fun to flip through.”And while collectability isn’t a new strategy — Rolling Stone and Vanity Fair have employed this business model for years with special issues that target baby boomer nostalgia by putting vintage bands, like The Who and the Beatles, on the cover over and over again — the print reading experience is different enough from the online experience that people seek it out. Aquarium Drunkard contributor Tyler Wilcox likes the way British print magazines mix old and new music with bold design and offer a way to consume information privately. “The physical, tactile experience is still important to me,” he said. “There’s also just a (primal? paranoid?) need to be offline from time to time that keeps me reading them. There’s nothing ‘tracking’ me when I’m flipping The Wire, it’s more of a private experience. Sites like Aquarium Drunkard I see as an evolution of the zine culture of the ’80s and ’90s — niche, free-form, immediate, low-key.”In an era where people just stream — and don’t own — music, collectible magazines may seem anachronistic, regardless of production values and subject matter. Ultimately, these publications endure because of their enduring, universal subject. “Music is something found in every country in the world,” said Rabid. “People need music; people make music, always have. It’s how we feel alive. It’s no secret that when people are happiest, like when they fall in love and it first hits them, they sing little songs to themselves, and music speaks to them the most… I sing to myself all the time. I know I am not alone.”In New York in 2001, DiGenti cofounded Wax Poetics. A friend had recognized that no magazines covered the culture of crate-digging, in which collectors search for old records to sample beats. As Andre Torres, DiGenti’s partner, told one interviewer, “No one was even touching jazz, soul, funk, or anything like that.” Wax Poetics reimagined music journalism by connecting vintage and contemporary jazz, soul, reggae, and hip-hop, carving a niche that showed the ingenious ways present-day musicians used vintage music to create a completely new art form.”It’s like a time machine. You use hip-hop to travel back and pick up on everything that’s happened before,” Torres told Current TV. Wax Poetics was also designed like a book: to last. “I wanted to create something that, when you finished reading it, there would be no way that you would ever think about putting it in the trash.”Their formula worked. “People held onto them as research material. Kept them in crates next to their records,” DiGenti told me. “We were either too obscure or too smart for the masses. But we thrived within our niche. And we had the music industry on our side. Our buzz was always hot because musicians, producers, DJs, and labels loved us. Even other magazines respected us.”T: The New York Times Style Magazine called Wax Poetics “the best and most exquisitely laid-out music bimonthly in America.” They published anthologies, released records, and introduced readers to classics through each issue’s regular “re:Discovery” feature. But in 2016, Torres left to work at Universal Music Enterprises. “Hip-hop is now 40 years old,” he told Billboard. “With that data, we can clearly see there’s a group of fans out there who have been underserved out there. There is a desire for deluxe packaging, creative marketing campaigns around catalog.” The magazine hasn’t fared well since his departure.In early 2018, Wax Poetics subscribers received a terse email: “After sixteen years in print, we will cease being a traditional newsstand publication.” The email detailed how financial issues forced the magazine to restructure and relaunch with print-on-demand issues. They apologized that they couldn’t fulfill existing subscriptions, but they promised what other music magazines had before: that their new business model would let them to stay committed to in-depth music writing.Maybe in the end, most music publications are ephemeral expressions of their time and place, rather than fixtures. Maybe it’s best that music magazines be like the timeless musicians they cover: bright, brilliant flashes that grace the earth for only a brief amount of time rather than overstay their welcome, more Iguanas and MC5 than The Rolling Stones.In 2008, music blogger Jace Clayton spoke with The Guardian about early mp3 blogs. He created one titled Mudd Up!, where he covered music and other topics, including his own recordings. What he said remains relevant a decade later: “Maybe the album is dead, but people love songs more than ever and hold them closer to their heart. That’s what makes this pursuit seem worthwhile.” The same is true of music writing. The print magazine might be dead, but music journalism is continually evolving, impacting listeners on various levels. People will always hold music and stories close to their hearts, which makes storytelling eternally relevant, no matter the medium. But before music writing can thrive, music must be valued, not just heard. Jason Pierce, of Spacemen 3, put it well: “I mean, now we can download the whole Neu! or Steve Reich catalogue immediately. People can have their lives stuffed with music, but that’s not the same as it knocking you sideways and becoming part of who you are.”***Aaron Gilbreath has written for Harper’s, Kenyon Review, Virginia Quarterly Review, Oxford American, Saveur and Brick. He’s the author of the books This Is: Essays on Jazz and Everything We Don’t Know: Essays. He’s working on books about California’s rural San Joaquin Valley and about Japan.Editor: Matt Giles
Fact-checker: Ethan Chiel
Copy editor: Jacob Gross 
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
An incomplete nostalgia still undergirds parts of American life. Danielle A. Jackson | Longreads | December 2018 | 9 minutes (2,360 words) A few days after my father’s funeral, I rented an Airbnb on Memphis’s Second Street, two avenues over from the Mississippi Riverfront. From one window, in the mornings, I could see riverboats slowly slinking by. From the other, a view of the Hernando de Soto Bridge. Named after the conquistador who arrived from Florida in 1541 in search of gold, the bridge was constructed in 1982. It connects Tennessee to Arkansas and is in many ways a dividing line between America’s east and west coasts.During their heady romance, my father drove the length of that bridge from West Memphis, Arkansas to court my mother. She once told me they’d ended their relationship in a teary conversation while driving across. The night of my first date, at 16, I parked and walked along Riverside Drive, just south of the Memphis entrance to the bridge. It was late in August, the dog days of summer, the start of my junior year in high school. The air was sticky and sweet, mosquitoes nipped at my shoulders. I had a feeling of expectation in my heart, an idea of a future that I could construct.The Mississippi River is a marvel. It is filthy, contaminated, and mostly unsuitable for swimming, drinking, or fishing. It is also, for me, steadying and grounding. It is a site of many beginnings, and something told me it was where I could grieve my father privately after many days of public ceremony. About a year before he died, I’d started missing home and made plans to go back for an extended time, for longer than a visit. In my longing, the reasons I left nearly 20 years before seemed a nebulous mix of striving and progress and running from something, or some things, I was not yet ready to name.Memphis is a place where, if you’re Black, and you can, you leave. It is a proud majority Black city, and Blacks have power, but it was and is a tenuous kind of power, slow-coming and distributed in a scattershot way among a selected few. We elected our first Black mayor during my lifetime, in 1991, nearly 20 years after Atlanta. And I remember when white students left my school by the dozens and how my mother labored to enroll me in another school, to follow the current of good teachers to a better place.My mother grew up and raised all of her children in Memphis, but five years ago, she, too, left, to live out her retirement elsewhere. In the years since, I heard a lot about a “reverse migration” where young Blacks, disappointed and frustrated by the urban North, went back to the Southern states of their ancestors for better weather and lower costs of living. Last December, Memphis’s monument to Nathan Bedford Forrest, a Confederate general responsible for the brutal Fort Pillow Massacre and an early leader of the Ku Klux Klan, came down. This year, a new cadre of progressive leaders like Tami Sawyer, London Lamar, and Lee Harris became elected officials. My dread about home and my longing for it began to work on me anew.Kickstart your weekend reading by getting the week’s best Longreads delivered to your inbox every Friday afternoon.Sign up* * *“Americans do not share a common memory of slavery,” Blain Roberts and Ethan Kytle write in Denmark Vesey’s Garden: Slavery and Memory in the Cradle of the Confederacy,  a powerful account that uses the history of Charleston, South Carolina, the “cradle of the Confederacy,” or “slavery’s capital,” to trace the origins of the nation’s competing visions of slavery. One view, of slavery as “benevolent and civilizing,” say Roberts and Kytle, supported by “former slaveholders and their descendants” is “a whitewashed memory,” ignoring or minimizing how brutal it was when human beings were chattel, and how central slavery is to our nation’s history. The other vision, maintained in memories and ritual by “former slaves, their progeny, and some white and black allies,” has a gorier truth.Memphis, founded as it was, on the Mississippi River, situated at the borders of Arkansas and Mississippi, has long been a commercial port. Americans purchased the land from the Chickasaw Nation in 1818, and the city incorporated in 1826; soon after, it became a point to transport and sell Mississippi Delta cotton. It also became an important slave market, and trading in slaves was how Nathan Bedford Forrest made his name.  He was, according to scholar Court Carney, “one of the largest slave traders on the Mississippi River,” and a two-term city alderman before enlisting in the army. Tennessee was the eleventh and last state to secede from the Union. Its mountainous eastern end, far away from cotton country and less dependent upon slavery, retained pro-Union sentiments throughout the war.According to Kytle and Roberts, the myth of the “Lost Cause,” a term coined in 1866, took root among former Confederates in the decades after their loss. It emphasized the valor of the Confederate army and how’d they’d been outmatched by better resourced Union soldiers, but fought anyway. Standing in moral defeat (and with federal troops still occupying the South initially), former Confederates and sympathizers “scrambled to distance the Confederacy from the peculiar institution.” They claimed that while slavery played a part, it was loftier goals like states’ autonomy that the secessionists had fought for.Yet this revision of historical memory was not benign. It coincided with losses of recently acquired rights of citizenship for freed men and women. Reconstruction officially ended in 1877 when federal troops left the South; by the 1880s, state governments began erecting barriers to voting rights and mandating separate accommodations for Blacks and whites in public spaces. Lynchings, usually committed as punishment or warning against some breach of social order, spiked in the 1880s and 1890s. According to data compiled by the Southern Poverty Law Center,  the biggest increase in dedications of Confederate monuments and memorials was in the early years of the 1900s. Memphis’s Forrest monument was dedicated at a ceremony attended by nearly 30,000 in 1905. Throughout the years, proponents of the monument included prominent leaders in business and city government, and they celebrated the former general’s “rough-hewn, unschooled martial style,” and held him up as a “pinnacle of southern manhood,” writes Carney. At least, publicly, they mostly minimized or ignored his history of brutality, but sometimes, when Blacks were particularly vocal and assertive, like during the push for desegregation during the 1960s, Forrest enthusiasts resorted to threatening an unruly populace that the general would be somehow resurrected to avenge something lost. Even in Memphis of the 1980s and 1990s, when I grew up, remnants and relics of the Lost Cause mythos were everywhere. My first job was as an actor in a city theater performance of Tom Sawyer, a musical adaptation of Mark Twain’s first novel, The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. I played a friend of Amy Lawrence, essentially a chorus girl, and had two speaking lines. I was thrilled to have the job  — I was 12 and got to be out of school for more than half the day for rehearsals and performances. I earned a weekly stipend and adored learning from the veteran actors in the theatre’s resident company. The cast was a mix of company members and actors from outside, and we were a multicultural crew. A Black actor played Tom Sawyer, and I was the one Black girl in the chorus. Nigger Jim was played by another Black girl; we only called her character Jim. The actress had several speaking lines and performed a solo musical number to the song “Buffalo Gal,” a song I now know is from a minstrel written by early blackface performer John Hodges. Throughout his life, Mark Twain wrote about his love of minstrel performances, calling them “nigger shows.” He said in his autobiography, “If I could have the nigger-show back again, in its pristine purity and perfection, I should have but little further use for opera.”Watching the actress’s adroit performance every afternoon and night, singing along with the rest of the chorus to songs about the glorious Mississippi and the whistle of steamboats, I don’t remember feeling anything I would call embarrassment. I sometimes got a vague feeling of discomfort, but, truth be told, I thought I was different from the other Black actress. I was, after all, playing a schoolgirl, not a slave on the run. Weren’t we simply celebrating the glory of Mississippi River towns? Our shared land and culture? I was a child and I was deluding myself.It is only now, looking back, that I realize that none of the theatre’s resident company, the actors with guaranteed jobs and pay for the season, were Black. While researching this piece, I learned that is still the case.A subterranean racism is intertwined with many Southern artifacts and practices. It is an incomplete nostalgia, a false memory, a longing for an old South stripped of the truth of what living then meant for many people. At Memphis’ Sunset Symphony, a seemingly benign, popular, old-fashioned outdoor picnic was held on the Mississippi River every May. “Ol’ Man River,” from the musical Showboat, with lyrics by Oscar Hammerstein II, was performed for 21 years by local bass singer James Hyter as the crowd-stopping finale, with encore after encore. Hyter would change the lyrics many times throughout the years, removing words like “nigger” and “darkey.” Even without the hurtful words the song still describes a Black man’s life of impossible toil.It is only now, looking back, that I realize that none of the theatre’s resident company, the actors with guaranteed jobs and pay for the season, were Black. While researching this piece, I, learned that is still the case.* * *Late last month, the investigative journalist and author Nikole Hannah-Jones tweeted a long thread about the failed slave revolt allegedly planned by Denmark Vesey in Charleston in 1822. “This man was free and prosperous,” she wrote, “but never separated himself from the enslaved, recruited 9000 ENSLAVED PEOPLE — 9000! — to his plot to liberate enslaved in SC, overtake the armory, commandeer a boat and then sail to Haiti…” She said she learned “next to nothing” about Vesey, despite being  an African-American studies major in college, and that omitting or minimizing the truth of Black resistance is a form of “social control.” Indeed, the details of Vesey’s plot, its scale and depth, explained in a comprehensive biography by David Robertson, are remarkable.In high school, what I learned about North American slave rebellions and resistance was cursory. I knew they happened; I learned them as facts — a laundry list of who, what, when, and how: Stono’s in South Carolina before the American Revolution; Nat Turner in Southampton, Virginia; John Brown at Harper’s Ferry.I didn’t learn that they were more than isolated incidents — that those individual instances of resistance acted in concert with other global eruptions. They were also proof of how utterly unsustainable slavery was. Rebellions, small and large, were “frequent and were ferociously put down,” throughout the Americas, according to a website dedicated to information about Bristol, England’s role as a trading port in the transatlantic slave trade. This resistance is a missing link in the gap between the two strands of collective memory about slavery. It disrupts the Lost Cause narrative of slavery as benign, and its history has been deliberately suppressed. Robertson writes, “In order that his life and actions not be publicly commemorated, any black person, man or woman, seen wearing mourning in the streets of Charleston within a week of his [Vesey’s] execution was to be arrested and whipped.”…the act of imagination is bound up with memory. You know, they straightened out the Mississippi River in places, to make room for houses and livable acreage. Occasionally the river floods these places. “Floods” is the word they use, but in fact it is not flooding; it is remembering. Remembering where it used to be. All water has a perfect memory and is forever trying to get back to where it was.From,”The Site of Memory,” Toni Morrison; Inventing the Truth: The Art and Craft of Memoir* * *Identity is nothing if not a collection of memories, strung together over time, lunging forward to inform and create a future. Who and what we mourn, too, is bound up in what we love and value. According to Kytle and Roberts, newly freed people held countless public commemorations and a “yearlong wake,” to celebrate the end of slavery, including, in one instance, a procession with a “hearse carrying a coffin labeled ‘Slavery.'” The first Memorial Day, held May 1, 1865 was an occasion when Black volunteer associations in Charleston reburied the remains of Union soldiers in properly marked graves.Walking in the new Memphis, twenty years after the last time I lived there, I was often lost. There was little pedestrian traffic, but many police cars in the tourist spots I visited. An old Black man, ostensibly homeless, asked for my carton of takeout food. In an old place I loved years ago, sitting at a piano bar alone, having a cocktail, I was the only Black person who was not obviously an employee. In the new places, a fancy coffee shop and a fancier restaurant, it was the same. Chicago’s South Side monument to Ida B. Wells-Barnett may be erected before the end of 2019. There is a marker for her in Memphis, on Beale and Hernando Streets, near the offices of the Free Speech, the newspaper for which she wrote columns, investigated lynchings, and urged Blacks to leave the city if they were not treated more humanely. Wells-Barnett took up that work after grieving the March 1892 lynching of her friend Thomas Moss, a postman and an owner of the People’s Grocery, as well as two of his employees. That May, the Evening Scimitar printed an editorial about Wells-Barnett threatening “to tie the wretch who utters these calumnies to a stake at the intersection of Main and Madison streets.” At Main and Madison, a few blocks from the bridge, the river, and where I’d gone to rest after burying my father, there is no marker.* * *Danielle A. Jackson is a writer and associate editor at Longreads.
 
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
Science journalist Alice Robb on why we need to take our dreams seriously.Jessica Gross | Longreads | December 2018 | 14 minutes (3,551 words)In 2011, when she was in college studying abroad in Peru, Alice Robb ran out of reading material and picked up a copy of Stephen LaBerge’s Exploring the World of Lucid Dreaming. Her initial skepticism quickly dissolved, and she and a friend spent the summer practicing LaBerge’s tips: they recounted their dreams to each other; they did “reality tests” during the day to trigger similar checks while sleeping. Robb began keeping a rigorous dream journal and found that, after very little time, she began remembering her dreams in detail.In short, she began taking her dreams very seriously — a stance that she has maintained since. In her new book, Why We Dream, Robb, a science journalist, presents a comprehensive and compelling account of theories of and research on dreaming from ancient times through the present day. Throughout, she displays an intense respect for what our minds do while we’re sleeping, and the findings she presents — that dreaming is essential for sanity, that analyzing our dreams can be revelatory, that dreams can be used as diagnostic tools and even manipulated for our own mental health—corroborate her conviction that, as a culture, we would benefit from paying more careful attention.Robb and I met at a bar near where she lives in Brooklyn to talk about dreams’ predictive power, what it’s like to make your dream journal entries public (hint: uncomfortable), and what closely observing our dreams can offer.Toward the end of the book, there is a line that moved me so much: “I like seeing proof that even while I’ve been unconscious, I’ve been alive.” It seems to me that dreams as proof of life — so then, maybe, as defense against death — is a pivotal concept in this book.I used to have a lot of trouble sleeping and I was kind of afraid of sleep. A lot of people have compared sleep to death, and being unconscious is a scary thing to think about. But paying attention to my dreams and improving my dream recall and seeing that there’s actually so much going on in my mind while I’m asleep has made sleep feel more like a lively time — more integrated with the rest of my life and waking hours — rather than this weird period where I just shut down. You started working on your book proposal in 2015, but that was several years after you’d begun your own personal journey with lucid dreaming. How much of the extensive research here was stuff that you had picked up from your own interest, and how much was directed specifically toward the project of this book? And, also, how did you synthesize all of it? Your notes are, like, 40 pages long! [laughter]Most of the research that I did in a serious way was for the book proposal or the book project. I had been keeping a dream journal, though, and it ended up being really useful that I could draw on that and look for patterns that went further back. One of the challenges with this book is there’s obviously been so much written about dreams. I wanted to do my own reporting, but I didn’t want to do a ton of unnecessary reporting when there is so much fascinating archival material from so many different disciplines. I felt that where I could add the most value as a reporter would be in the more scientific sections, because that hadn’t been synthesized for a mainstream audience in many years. I wanted to try to make something cohesive out of all these different strands. And I didn’t want to leave out the historical stuff, which was some of the most fun to research.Freud plays an interesting role in this book: early on, you present a physiological, neurochemical counterargument to his theories on dreams. But by the end—and tell me if this is an accurate reading—you have come to a really nuanced relationship with his theories; you present a lot of evidence that bolsters what he theorized. That said, you write that even psychoanalysts today have devalued dreams in comparison to the way Freud treated them. So can you talk about your thoughts on Freudian dream theory and psychoanalysis more generally, having gone through this entire research journey?I think that’s definitely an accurate reading. Freud did something really important in giving dreams a scientific underpinning a hundred years ago. And I think a lot of the gist of what he said has been borne out, that dreams show us things about ourselves that we’re not consciously aware of. They sometimes show us things that we desire, but they often show us things that we’re afraid of.But those are so linked, too.Yeah. I talked to one historian who blamed Freud for the way that people became embarrassed to talk about their dreams; one idea that has obviously taken off in the public consciousness is that dreams are all about sex. Actually, there’s much less sexual content in dreams than most people would expect—at least based on how people report them, which may not be totally accurate. Regardless, when Freud’s reputation suffered, our consideration of dreams, I think, suffered a little bit along with it.You write about how talking about our secrets, anxieties, fears, and desires through the language of dreaming gives us a way to talk about them safely, with a bit of distance. In Greek, you write, it’s phrased as “I saw a dream,” rather than “I dreamed.” In other words, there’s a way in which you can disown responsibility for what you dreamt.I feel like that’s one of the most useful things about dreams, emotionally. A lot of the therapists that I’ve talked to have said that it’s easier to get someone to admit that something happened in a dream, which they can kind of laugh off. I have even used this in my life. Maybe I’ve wanted an excuse to get in touch with someone, so I’ll tell them a funny dream I had about them.I’ve also had this interesting experience over the past few years working on this book where people often tell me their dreams. I think part of that is they want some psychoanalysis and think that I’ll be able to provide that. But sometimes they don’t realize how personal they’re getting, and those dreams open up incredibly personal conversations with people that I don’t necessarily know that well.What has that been like for you?Really interesting. I’ve had people confess a lot about relationship anxieties and a lot of people talk about people they’ve mourned in their dreams. Often, people will have more intense phases of dreaming and remember their dreams more when they’re working through something that’s really emotionally fraught. So someone may have died, or a lot of people have talked to me about how they used to have an addiction — they used to smoke pot everyday or are an alcoholic. When you stop doing that thing, you have a big increase in dreaming.That must be interesting, because on the one hand you’re in a dream group—a group of people who gets together regularly to share and collectively analyze your dreams — so you must really like relating to people in this way. But on the other hand, your dream group is a structured environment with people you know well, which is entirely different from a semi-stranger coming up to you and soliciting that kind of engagement.I think that for people who do remember their dreams every night, it can be this very intense thing that they think that no one is interested in — they’ve been trained to suppress it and not talk about it. And then they meet me, and it’s this free pass: “Here’s someone I can talk to about this.”Yes. The book feels like it really is driven by a mission, which is urging people to (a) take dreams seriously, (b) track them, and (c) share them. You’re presenting the benefits of paying attention to your dreams over time in a rigorous manner.Yes. That is the argument. Have you ever tried to track your dreams?It’s funny, when I started reading this, I remembered that I had this dream journal that was in my nightstand, I just hadn’t taken it out in years. So I looked at it and the last time I had recorded a dream was in 2009, almost ten years ago.Wow.I always think I can’t remember my dreams, but the entries were very detailed. So I put it on my nightstand to urge myself to try it again. But 2009 was before I had a smart phone. Now, I’m in the habit of checking my phone immediately when I wake up—which makes the dream vanish. I put the dream journal there—but the smart phone is right here. So how can people hold onto their dreams in this era when there’s no time between waking and information, information, information?The thing is, it takes so little time to think about your dreams in the morning. If you take ten seconds before you reach for your phone, I think that can be enough because dreams do, for most people, just disappear if they don’t think about them immediately.But for a while I used to record my dreams on my smart phone. So that’s another thing you can do. You can either type them into the Notes app or speak them into a voice recorder.You go through so much research on what dreams can offer us, along so many different avenues. One that I’m particularly interested in, probably just because I’m a writer, is the link between dreams and creativity. You cite many examples of writers who have been inspired by their dreams and translated them into stories—one that came to my mind, that you didn’t cite, is George Saunders’ “The Semplica-Girl Diaries,” which was inspired by a dream. In this vein, you write about free-associating, and how the pathways that are built in dreaming are very similar to free-associating pathways in waking life. So has doing all this research enabled you to trust your own waking-life free associations more? Because I feel like there’s an instinct to dismiss stuff that seems illogical.That’s such an interesting question. I feel like as writers, we probably are a little bit more accepting of those free-associative pathways. I did keep hoping that I would find a structure for my book in a dream.Wouldn’t that have been great?That has never happened. At one point, my editor and I were both trying to think of a title in our dreams, but that also never happened.How do you try to think of something in a dream?If you focus on something before you go to bed, you can increase your likelihood of dreaming about it. We think of our dreams as these crazy aberrations, but a lot of our dreams are a pretty straightforward recital of what happened during the day, or just really mundane stuff from three hours before bed. So if you try and think about a problem before bed — Stephen King, for example, fell asleep thinking about a plot problem he needed to solve in It and, in his dream, he did.I love that. You’re a lucid dreamer, so you probably have a greater potential to do this than someone who isn’t. But you write that even in lucid dreams, you can’t just do whatever you want, which I didn’t know.No. I think that’s a really common stereotype. Lucid dreaming, like regular dreaming, is very idiosyncratic, so there may be people who can control every aspect—but part of what’s fun about lucid dreaming for those of us who can’t is that you’re very aware, but you’re not controlling everything, so things are still surprising. That’s what’s sort of mind-bending about it: people are talking to you in your dream, and you’re still surprised by what they’re saying, even though obviously it’s coming from you.It reminds me of fiction writing in that sense: all the time, writers say things like, “I didn’t know the character was going to do that,” or “I didn’t know that was going to happen.” It sounds crazy, but I think it really does work that way! Similarly, as you point out, the characters in your dreams are all versions of you, but because they’re coming from your unconscious, that doesn’t mean that you are dictating their behavior willfully, even if they’re reflecting aspects of you that are real.Yes — and that self-discovery is, I think, a big part of the value of dreams.That said, I was comforted by what you wrote about dreams being mostly mundane and boring, because I always thought I was the most uncreative dreamer on the planet.[Laughs] Yeah. Sylvia Plath has this story that I found after I had submitted the final draft about a Sylvia Plath character whose dreams are really boring; she is really jealous of the Ted Hughes character, whose dreams are really exciting. And then she kills herself. I kinda wish I’d found that two months earlier.Alice Robb (Photo: Don Razniewski)What else were you sad didn’t make it into the book?I didn’t end up including this because it’s been written about several times, but it is a crazy story: Abraham Lincoln had this dream shortly before he died about being assassinated. It was this really eerie dream that he wrote a letter about. He was wandering through the White House and he heard a funeral procession and he saw a coffin and then he looked in the coffin and it was himself.People are constantly telling me stories that I like wish I could include — like what you just said about George Saunders’ story. A friend who I sent a galley to just texted me that her mom was in a lucid dreaming study in the 1980s at UVA. And I was like, “I would’ve loved to have interviewed your mom.”When I was talking about people telling me their dreams, often people would just tell me things that I would want to include in the book. Dreaming is something that everyone has a personal relationship with, so everyone is entitled to an opinion on it. Some people have told me stories of making decisions because of their dreams. Someone I had just met told me how he had broken up with his girlfriend because he kept having dreams that she was cheating on him. He would wake up angry with her, and it led him to reflect on other issues in the relationship. It seems like the dreams were the motivating thing.But he must have been harboring some suspicions or ambivalence or whatever, otherwise he wouldn’t have dreamt that in the first place.Dreaming reifies the feeling.The Lincoln story is so interesting—you write about how dreams can be predictive, but not because of mysticism, necessarily; that you’re picking up on low-level things in the environment that you may not be consciously aware of, but that you’re synthesizing in dreams, right?Yeah, because we’re taking in so much information all the time and we’re not consciously analyzing all of it, so we probably can predict lots of things that we don’t think we can.A lot of people have talked to me about their Trump dreams. I was actually looking through my dream journal and found that during the primaries, I had a dream that Trump had taken over The New Republic, where I used to work — he had commandeered it. And I had one that I was like sitting next to him on a plane and then he sexually assaulted someone. And this was before — this was when I first thought he was going to lose. I mean, I’m not saying that’s predictive, but…But sort of.Yeah.What do you make of that now?I think that I was anxious; I don’t think it’s necessarily more than that I was anxious about the election even though we all were telling ourselves it was going to be okay, on some level, it was scary.And so maybe you were picking up on some level that this was a greater possibility than we were consciously admitting to ourselves.Yeah.Local BookstoresAmazonLet’s talk more about the research you did. What discoveries shocked or surprised or delighted you?The International Association for the Study of Dreams conference I went to in the Netherlands was a lot of fun. I saw these really symbiotic relationships between scientists and people who were more into the mystical side of dreaming, and how they could really help each other. The scientists could find research subjects, for example. It’s hard to find people who are so skilled at lucid dreaming that they can just go into a sleep lab and do it any night of the week. I met this woman who uses lucid dreaming to help with her anxiety. Almost all of her dreams are lucid, which is very unusual, so she’s become something of a celebrity in the lucid dream world. She has been a subject in a bunch of studies; scientists love her. So a lot of those relationships were fun to watch.One of the things that I had to overcome, working on this book, was a certain bias: I couldn’t just dismiss someone because they had done a study on whether dreams could predict the future, because they could do one study on that and then they could do a study on something more stereotypically reputable. If both studies used the scientific method, I couldn’t dismiss that person’s work.One thing that seems very clear from the book is that if we don’t dream enough, our mental health really suffers. You write about research in which cats were bopped on the nose to wake them up as soon as they appeared to start dreaming, which, over time, made them become sort of manic and ferocious. And then you write about two people who did these stunts staying awake for extreme amounts of time — two hundred hours for one man, eleven straight days for a teenager after that — and really suffered for it, at least in the short term.Yes. I think we all know now how important sleep is for health, but it does seem like REM sleep is particularly important for mental and physical health. I was really surprised by some of the links between dreaming and depression, and how there’s this paucity of dreams in depression.Rosalind Cartwright has done studies investigating how people’s dreams change throughout depressed episodes. She did a study on people’s dreams as they’re going through the divorce process; she could often predict who would recover based on how they were interacting with the exes in their dreams. In the study, the people who didn’t recover as well were people who tended to be more passive in their dreams about their exes; they just kind of looked at them or still felt humiliated by them or watched them with another person.Passive and victimized.Helpless, yeah. In general, taking control in your dreams can be helpful for mental health: for people who are recovering from trauma, mastering the trauma in dreams can translate into real life improvements.What was it like for you to choose from your own dreams to share with a public audience, and how do you feel knowing that this book is going to come out and your dreams are in it?I just pretend it’s not happening. [Laughs] That’s the answer.Let’s talk about how people think dreams are boring. As I started to read that section, I was like, How dare they? But you actually present some compelling reasons: dreams are illogical. It’s uncomfortable to hear a story that doesn’t follow, that doesn’t have normal cause-and-effect. You don’t know what to do with it. Right?Yeah. It was really interesting trying to get an answer to that question because as much as I am more interested in dreams than the next person, sometimes people tell me their dreams and I wish they would stop. But I tend to think that it’s more that we’re not in the habit of telling them in an interesting way. We’ve all learned how to tell stories in a way that we like: leave out the boring details, structure them in a dramatic way. It seems like people have less practice in doing that with dreams.How could we tell dreams in a more captivating way?I think that if we took them more seriously, we would. And if we did see them as having more real consequences or being more revealing, if we accepted that idea, then we would be more willing to listen to each other’s dreams.It does take some effort, sometimes, to unpack a dream. My dream group of 10 people will spend an hour or an hour-and-a-half talking about one dream. If that’s what it takes to get somewhere, to even chip away at a dream, that’s probably not what we’re going to do in a casual conversation. It may be a different type of conversation that’s necessary.* * *Jessica Gross is a writer based in New York City.
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
Marlene Adelstein finds herself transported back in time and consciousness via an inherited painting.Marlene Adelstein | Longreads | December 2018 | 13 minutes (3,190 words)When Mom sees me, a big smile lights up her face, her blue eyes shine bright, and I give her a hug and kiss. “Hi, Connie,” I say. Although she doesn’t know me any more as her daughter, she seems to recognize my face. I’ve flown down to Florida to visit her in the assisted living facility where, until last year, she lived with my dad. When he suddenly got an infection and needed to be hospitalized, Mom, who has late-stage Alzheimer’s, couldn’t be left alone. It was clear what needed to happen. We moved her one floor down to the locked memory care unit, a necessity that was long overdue. My dad had been her caregiver since her diagnosis but the last couple of years she’d simply become too much for him. He recovered from the infection and moved back to the facility but into a smaller apartment, a one bedroom, where he lived alone for about five months until he had a sudden, dramatic decline in his health and, at 89, died.Once she moved to memory care, Mom would often ask for my dad by his name, Bernard. He was the last person she remembered. But lately she has asked for Bernard less frequently and now when she sees me she says, “Have you seen the other guy?”“No,” I say cheerfully. “I came to see you! Want to go out to lunch?” Redirecting is the name of the game to avoid the extremely unpleasant outbursts which my mom is known for. A few times a week she sets off the alarm by opening the door to the stairwell while trying to leave the floor, yelling and flailing as the staff restrains her. Exit seeking, the staff calls it. Connie wants to see her mother, who she claims lives across the street. She shoves caregivers away or pounds on the window overlooking the rehab wing my dad was in for many weeks, where she often visited him. Mother, I’m guessing, represents her husband, her children…home.Back in her studio apartment after lunch, I give her a book called “Bear Hugs,” a small board book meant for very young children. It contains drawings of animals and the various cute nicknames their loved ones call them. I read it aloud with exaggerated expressions, acting it out. “You’re super cute and cuddly, as sweet as pumpkin pie.” When I get to the end where a mama bear grabs her baby in a bear hug, I demonstrate on her, which makes Mom giggle and smile. She loves that part. “That is so sweet,” she says and she flips through the book. She quickly forgets that we just read it so I go to the beginning and read it to her again. She loves being held and I have to admit, I like it too. I was never particularly close to her but in recent years that’s changed as our roles have reversed and I’ve had to care for this mom-child.“You’re good,” she says to me after the third time through the book. “Well, thank you,” I say. “So are you,” and again, I get that brilliant smile out of her.Later when I am getting ready to leave the facility, always a dicey situation, I tell her I have to say goodbye. Sadness descends over her like a curtain and I think she’s going to cry. I give her an effusive bear hug, holding my mother the way I would have held the child I never had. When she asks for her mother and “what’s his name,” I rock her back and forth as if playing a game until I am able to cajole that smile again. “I’ll be back tomorrow, I promise,” I say.The elevator is taking forever to come so I punch in the code to disarm the alarm and duck into the stairwell to hide my tears, the door clicking shut behind me. I hear Mom screaming “Let me go, I want to go home!” and when the alarm goes off I realize she’s tried to follow me out the door.
***After my emotional visit, I fly back north. I’d recently moved, and when I walk in to the house I’m greeted by Mom again. But this time it’s only an image. In my dining room, a very large portrait of my mother at age 9, framed in gold leaf, is propped up on a chair. It resided in her childhood home in St. Paul, Minnesota; the assisted living facility in Sarasota, Florida; and every one of her residences in between. It has always been in my life in some way too. In the house where I grew up, in Cleveland, it hung above the piano.In my dining room, a very large portrait of my mother at age 9, framed in gold leaf, is propped up on a chair.The painting is mine now, shipped to me from Florida after my siblings and I cleaned out my dad’s apartment. In the portrait, the young girl who would become my mother wears a forest green dress with a white lace Peter Pan collar and holds an oversized doll in her lap. Young Mom has brown, shoulder-length hair, and a pair of hair bows protruding from the back of her head that match the color of her dress. The painter’s skills are uneven. Her face is well-executed; cheekbones nicely shadowed, and highlighted with a rosy hue, but the arms and hands of both the girl and her doll are out of proportion. Mom gazes directly, assuredly at the viewer with a calm, yet commanding look in her eyes; a closed mouth, neutral expression. But the painting isn’t pretty. Its colors are drab and dark, and in fact, it’s kind of creepy. The large doll wears a pink dress with a stiff Elizabethan collar. Her intense eyebrows and worried expression add to the strange, but powerful image.“Who wants the painting when I’m gone?” Mom playfully asked my two brothers and me so many times over the years it became a family joke. My siblings would respond by exchanging a look with my dad, rolling their eyes and stifling a laugh. My dad said he hated the thing, but humored Mom by letting her hang it prominently in every home they lived in.I stayed quiet, knowing I would probably end up with it, yet not wanting to admit I actually coveted the eyesore.It’s the girl’s face and eyes that draw me in. Even though it’s a painting of my mother, I only see myself in it, my childhood doppelganger. I have photos of my mom from the day she sat for the painting and photos of myself when I was 9. I think I looked much more like the girl in the portrait than she did. Portrait-girl has my 9-year-old face, high forehead, brown hair, even the same hairstyle I wore back then. The only difference is that my eyes are brown. There is no mistaking my mother’s startling sapphire eyes.But it’s not just the girl’s resemblance to my younger self that gets to me. It’s something else — the essence of the girl. Looking at the painting is like looking in a mirror of sorts and feels both comforting and disturbing. It’s not me, yet I feel the artist somehow captured my inner self. I relate to the girl’s tranquil spirit, her poise and seriousness, yet mature veneer. But the fact that this is a young version of my mother doesn’t really compute. Let’s just say, my relationship with this portrait is complicated.Looking for clarity, I call my brothers and ask them what they remember about the painting. My younger brother, Frank, says he knew it was a portrait of Mom but, like me, he would sometimes forget. He’d just see an anonymous girl, and then he’d remember it was really mom. “Mostly,” he says, “it was just home.”My older brother, David, says he thought the “depression girl” was weird, and when he was a little boy it scared him. “It was Edgar Allan Poe-like. I didn’t think of her as Mom.” Like our dad, he didn’t like it, but mostly, “it was always there.”Now that I can’t ask Mom about it, I wish that I had earlier. What was it like to sit for the painting? How many days did it take? Did the artist ask her to look so serious and stare straight ahead? How did she really feel about the results? I’ll never know.Even though the portrait is now mine, I haven’t hung it in my new home. I’m not used to its presence in this space. It feels so big, so demanding. Yet I can’t help but look at it every time I enter the dining room. Often, like magic, it carries me time machine-like, to defining moments of my past.Kickstart your weekend reading by getting the week’s best Longreads delivered to your inbox every Friday afternoon.Sign upThere I am in the first grade, holding in my fear as I waited in line to return to our classroom after receiving a TB shot. Next thing I knew, I was lying on the floor, the principal, a buxom, no-nonsense woman, kneeling over me with smelling salts. Or wait, there I am practicing the piano unenthusiastically, disappointing, in my mind, both my musician father and the girl in the painting above me. Oh, and next I see myself at 10 in the family car overhearing my parents as they discussed their upcoming anniversary. But it didn’t make sense to me. My brother was older than the number of years my parents had been married and as I corrected them my mom turned to me and said “You remember honey, I told you I was married once before I married Dad.” Her words had a don’t ask, don’t tell quality that became my unspoken instructions to withhold my feelings and keep secrets.Encountering the portrait post-Florida-visit, I am transported back to October of 2005, Westport Island, Maine where I was doing a six-week writers’ residency at a luxurious artist colony. I stayed in a light, airy, upscale home right on the rocky coast that had high-end decor and impressive local artwork on every wall. I was assigned a pretty bedroom with killer water views, a dainty, antique desk, and a mattress so plush, I looked forward to bedtime each night.When I awoke one morning in the comfy bed three weeks into my stay, a dream taunted and circled but wouldn’t land. All I could recall of it were images of a little girl, the daughter of one of the other colony residents. The night before at dinner, Harry, a collage artist, had lovingly spoken of his 7-year-old daughter. I was at work on a novel about a mother whose precocious, bird-watching 10year-old daughter went missing from a Gap-like clothing store at a shopping mall, never to be seen or heard from again. The story dealt with the mother’s inability to move on with her life, stuck in a limbo of not knowing whether her daughter was alive or dead, if she’d ever see her again or if she could ever let go of her own guilt. How could she fill that huge gaping hole her missing daughter had created?When Harry’s daughter surfaced from the murky dream that morning, my first thought was that I should make one of my handcrafted bark boxes for her. I had been taking long walks on the island when I wasn’t writing and picking up pieces of birch bark from the ground and then sewing them into little round boxes. Making something with my hands that I could finish in an hour or so was a satisfying task, the complete opposite of this endless novel I had taken on. I was giving a box to each artist and staff member at the colony. I assumed that my early morning dream bits of Harry’s daughter simply represented the character of the missing daughter in my novel. And though I didn’t know Harry’s kid, I decided one of my boxes might be a nice gift for her. A gift for my character, from my character. And besides, I reasoned, I was running out of people to give my bark boxes to.I was still lying in bed, mulling over my next bark box, when…Wham! Something else from my elusive morning dream hit me. It was a list about my novel that had been buried deep in my subconscious but used the dream to ram into my awareness.I had an “oh my God!” moment, rushed to get pen and paper and wrote down what poured out of my head fully formed.1. It’s about my own “missing daughter” — the child I never had but was supposed to. 2. It’s about my inner self — the little girl, childlike me that is always there, sometimes hidden, sometimes not. 3. It’s about Etan Patz. Etan Patz was the 6-year-old boy who disappeared from New York City’s SoHo neighborhood on May 25, 1979 on his way to his school bus stop. It was one of the first missing child cases that got huge nationwide coverage. The little boy’s smiling face was plastered on fliers all over Manhattan shortly after I’d arrived in the City to attend NYU. It was a sad, mysterious, tragic story that lingered for years, the boy or his body never to be found. Only recently, some 38 years later, was the case resolved with a murder conviction for a former bodega clerk who had confessed to the crime. Etan’s father had been in the news over the years advocating on behalf of his son, but rarely did I see the mother. I thought about her, wondered what her life was like, and imagined the hell that she must have gone through. To me, this tragic real-life story was always the obvious inspiration for my book, the one I’d mention when asked. But my sneaky subconscious had firmly placed Etan’s story in my dream list’s third place slot. In first place was my own “missing daughter.”Hmm. Interesting.I had always assumed I’d have children, but neither the appropriate partner nor the strong desire to mother a child alone ever came along. I was 48 at the time of the dream. I didn’t yearn for children, even felt grateful for the freedom being childless allowed. When I saw my friends with their kids, it wasn’t jealousy that washed over me, it was a sense of relief. But clearly, my subconscious dream list was telling me I had unresolved feelings. Then item number two — my own inner-self.  The child inside me that was always there, hidden, but a part of who I was: a mix of a very capable, highly independent woman and a shy young girl who wanted protecting. Sometimes the inhibited girl wished she could be more confident, more aggressive. But sometimes she felt comfortable in her calm, knowing way. That was all me.Apparently I was exploring my own grief, my own sense of loss over not having the child I’d assumed I’d have.I studied the list I’d scrawled onto paper. How could I be working on a book for years and have no idea why or what it truly meant? I thought I was inspired by a well-publicized news story. I thought I was exploring a mother’s grief, which was a topic I had written about in short stories before, although I was never quite sure why. But apparently I was exploring my own grief, my own sense of loss over not having the child I’d assumed I’d have. And the loss of that possibility. And maybe most of all, simply the loss of my youth. It made me feel like I’d been hit by the proverbial brick, but it was also a wonderful gift. I knew that no reader would need to know these things to enjoy or appreciate the book. It was a private, secret message to myself. A way towards acceptance of the path my life had taken. It didn’t change the emotions that were surfacing but being aware of them itself was a comfort. The idea that I was exploring these huge life issues subconsciously made me feel that perhaps, publishing wasn’t the most important thing about finishing this novel. Maybe, I finally realized, my tortoise-like subconscious was processing all these issues, and that’s why it was taking me years, many years, to birth this baby, so to speak.***I come out of my art colony memories, back to my dining room, back to the painting. I realize it’s more than a conduit to my past, it’s also a channel to my inner life, a part of me I’d submerged that was always there, all along. As I watched my parents age, I began to worry about who will care for me the way I have cared for them when I’m old and need help. Who knows if I’d had children, if they would even have been there for me down the road. Yet from my current vantage point, selfishly, that’s what my childlessness means to me. I will never have the daughter I was to my dad and still am to my mom.When Dad recovered from his infection and hospital stay and moved to the smaller apartment in the assisted living facility, he was alone for the first time in his 62 years of marriage. I could tell he was depressed. He was both lonely and afraid of running into mom in the lobby with one of her caregivers, as well as worried about his own declining health; it all took its toll on him. He started using another elevator at the far end of the hall to avoid seeing mom sitting with her caregiver under the shade of the main entrance canopy. I pictured Dad with his lightweight walker, the one he could hoist into the car he shouldn’t have been driving, unsteadily shuffling out the side door like a thief in the night. He wanted to be with Mom. They’d been a happy unit through their marriage and barely apart since he retired, but when he saw her after they began to live separately, she’d demand to know where he’d been or where he was going and why she couldn’t go too. Her noisy, public scenes stressed him terribly. The immense guilt and grief, undoubtedly, weighed him down.I had helped him settle into his new apartment, buying groceries, arranging clothes in his dresser drawers and hanging photos and artwork on the walls to make living in this place he hated more homey. When I asked him what he wanted to hang over the couch, his response came without a moment’s hesitation. “Mom’s painting,” he said.***There’s only one wall in my new house big enough to hold the portrait, a nice empty white one in my dining room. I eyeball a good spot in the middle, climb up a stepstool, make a pencil mark, and hammer in a nail. I heave the bottom corner of the heavy painting onto my shoulder for leverage and hang it.Climbing down off the stool, I step back, straighten young Mom, young me, and take a good look. “We’re here,” I tell her. “We’re home.”* * *Marlene Adelstein is a writer and freelance book editor. Her debut novel, Sophie Last Seen, was just published. She lives in New York’s Hudson Valley.
Editor: Sari Botton* * *Also In the Fine Lines Series:
Introducing Fine Lines
Gone Gray
An Introduction to Death
Age Appropriate
A Woman, Tree or Not
Dress You Up in My Love
The Wrong Pair
‘Emerging’ as a Writer — After 40
Losing the Plot
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
How can the life of a famous surrealist painter be so drabbly predictable?Sophie Beck | The Point | November 2018 | 31 minutes (6,109 words) The difficulty began with the title of a painting at an exhibition of work by the Spanish artist Joan Miró. The title was Woman Entranced by the Escape of Shooting Stars (1969). I particularly like this title. The painting itself pleases and eludes me at the same time—the woman’s upturned face has a serenity and happiness that comes of no clear aspect; she has stopped doing something to contemplate the heavens. I can’t make out what objects are in her hands and, if I were to read an interpretation, I’d probably find it questionable. There are two stars: one twinkles and the other spirals. Next to the painting was a sculpture I didn’t like, and then another sculpture constructed of found objects I considered meaningless to the point of being irritating. There was a whole room beyond that full of pieces I didn’t look at very closely. It was crowded in the museum that day. People around me shuffled, stopped, and shuffled, deep in their audio tours.I stood before Woman Entranced by the Escape of Shooting Stars absorbing the elements—woman, star, spiral star not shaped like a star, inscrutable other stuff—then it followed me into daydreams and lodged in a fold of my mind. I am not an artist or critic and lay no claim to any special understanding of Miró’s work or methods. I am not his admirer, countryman or contemporary. I just started liking the guy despite not liking the guy. I couldn’t stop thinking about him so I wanted to write about him, but the more I wrote, the more I came to believe that the key to his fantastic work, to the sheer volume of work—he kept working without pause from age nineteen to ninety—was that he was phenomenally boring. It seemed that only Miró could take the fact of being Miró and make something lustrously reality-bending, inspired, haunting and gorgeous out of it. To be removed by one degree, to write about him or his work, is to risk crafting something tedious to read. My initial essay flamed out so thoroughly that I threw it in the digital garbage on multiple occasions. Each time, I fished it back out again, attached to the gleaming scraps of something resiliently and stubbornly salvageable.In the first attempt, I had this idea that I was going to work myself in and sort of sidle up to old Miró—drawing winning parallels between his artistic experience and my own. This was rather rich, given that I am some woman in Denver who is tinkering with this essay during elementary-school hours, and he is, well, internationally renowned Spanish surrealist artist Joan Miró. This “me and Joan” concept was not quite what was called for, but I kept thinking it was absurd enough that it might just come off. It had to be sufficiently ridiculous, but tinted with that kind of outrageous audacity that would allow it to transcend itself. It was not.One light yet sticky observation emerged out of the “me and Joan” draft concept—that Miró was just like an excellent typist (though I suspect he rarely typed anything ever). My daughters are learning touch typing, or keyboarding. The practice drills involve repetitions of sequenced keys, beginning with the home-row keys of ASDFG HJKL;. Hardly impressive in clerical terms, my current 64 words per minute awed my kids. When we began household competition in their exercises, however, my prowess fell apart—I was brought low by the combinations jj kk ll dd; and jkjksdsddds. When I type nonsense, as opposed to words, I have to think about fingers and keys. Typing presents a ready and common example of the effect of overlearning. When we practice a skill well beyond basic mastery we reap the ability to focus on the overarching performance or goal instead of concentrating on the steps required to achieve it. This is overlearning and it is the first element of flow—transcending the mechanics of the maneuver at hand.Dangerously, I found myself discussing flow, which is intellectually en vogue, but unevenly so; one reader might be engaged but another would sigh. Flow is the experience of absolute immersion in a skilled activity. In this fullness of concentration, future, past and time itself all drop away, as does the awareness of the self. There is only the action, which becomes crisply confident—doubt disappears as error disappears. It is the “doing without doing” of Taoism, or the spiritual goal of overcoming the duality of self and object through discipline. Psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi developed a body of research on this experience; he calls integration of awareness and action the “optimal experience,” when the self drops from consciousness as the beautiful performance consumes the performer. In describing flow, Csikszentmihalyi quotes a composer he interviewed: “You are in an ecstatic state to such a point that you feel as though you almost don’t exist.” This release from self-awareness is experienced as a profound joy or even rapture, yet while in flow the awareness of emotion has dropped away. Either the joy itself arrives ex-post, or “joy” is the only word we have to describe the form of pleasure that comes with the complete release from experiencing anything at all. Meanwhile, out of this vacation from the self the practitioner paradoxically emerges with a stronger sense of conviction or perspective. The concept of flow echoes, or perhaps is the Western recasting and branding of, one fundamental assumption of Zen: that we more fully become ourselves by surrendering ourselves.It is this steady work and repetitious effort of the conscious mind that also seems to give access to layers of the unconscious or effortless mind.The key elements of achieving flow are heavy practice and the cultivation of the capacity to focus. You learn it first through overlearning. Miró gleaned this early. He describes spending hours upon hours teaching himself to sketch objects he had placed behind him, allowing himself only to touch them. He remained a relentless, lifelong practicer who sketched on a schedule, showing up at his local church at the same time every morning, materials in hand.It is this steady work and repetitious effort of the conscious mind that also seems to give access to layers of the unconscious or effortless mind. Miró and other surrealists experimented with automatism: improvisational and somewhat random drawing and painting intended to tap the subconscious. Key to automatism is the release of the artist from conscious self-censorship, thereby freeing otherwise repressed artistic possibilities. But although the artist supposedly allows his hand to move at random, Miró combined this with direction, the conscious mind eventually called upon to marshal the production of the unconscious. Miró’s take on freedom involved just as much control as release. Meanwhile, even to employ the method required discipline. His takeaway from the knockabout looseness of automatism appears to have been an understanding that getting there wasn’t knockabout at all. Clearing distractions from the mind is hard work and dropping lightly into the subconscious is methodical.Miró was extremely uncool. He didn’t booze or womanize; he didn’t experiment with mind-altering substances for fear of damaging his mind; what inspiration he gleaned from hallucinations early in his career was hunger induced. He rarely engaged directly with politics, even though his career spanned both World Wars, the Spanish Civil War and the ensuing Franco regime, and even though his identity and inspiration were intensely enmeshed with his embattled native Catalonia. The other artists of his circles—among them Pablo Picasso, Salvador Dalí, Max Ernst and the writer André Breton—considered him a grind and mockably bourgeois. American artist Carl Holty described him as “orderly and punctilious about the working day,” which illustrates fairly well what other artists thought of his form of discipline (“punctilious” is never in the vocabulary of warm admiration). Punctilious Miró never stopped working until his death at ninety years old, the author of an enormous proliferation of provocative and influential works in an ever-evolving yet identifiably personal style, and in a range of media. The quiet routine-monger in a pressed suit was the unequivocal master of his flow.What is there to say about it? Miró didn’t do the sorts of things I can sensationalize—he just dug in and worked after a sensible breakfast like an accountant sitting down to his ledger. I stopped, aware that everything I had to say of Miró had boiled down to the subject of ordinary toil, and I had crafted a lengthy discussion, only excerpted here, of the artist and his work ethic. I wasn’t certain where to go from there. When I faltered on Miró, the other sorts of work spooled out in every direction; there were meals to prepare, oil changes, stains to remove and damp towels left on carpets, assorted lists, plus forms, waivers, intakes, evaluations and permission slips. Favored work pushes back on other work, preventing its expansion.* * *I turned my attention to Miró’s extreme output. He created more than five thousand drawings and collages, at least two thousand paintings, five hundred sculptures, about four hundred ceramic objects, over two hundred fifty illustrated books, plus murals, tapestries and a load of other undertakings. In 1928, he took inspiration from some postcards of Dutch Golden Age interiors and created a series of canvases that are at once spare and brimming over with household occupants and items. He wedges in a riot of bedfellows, but the representations are stripped down—each form reduced to the elemental so there is just enough to understand a vase or identify a table. Perspective is entirely his own purview; some elements are shrunken and others inflated. His Constellations series (1939-41) remains crammed with ideas but largely dispenses with backgrounds. Miró had begun to develop simple symbols to stand in for feelings, concepts, motion, impressions—moving away from objects. “The thing I consciously seek is tension of spirit,” he said. Paring away all the rest, Miró is after existence—being a lover; contemplating the heavens and crushing limitlessness of the constellations; feeling wonder. His art didn’t lack ambition.Among the symbols, the sentient beings remain: especially women and birds, sometimes peasant men. The sky also has an abiding place; the stars are central and numerous. In Woman and Birds at Sunrise (1946), the sun is his recurring cheerful red disk. In Woman and Bird in the Moonlight (1949), a large blue crescent and stars. He keeps hewing at his own work, removing and removing. By the time of Bleu I, II and III (1961), even the beings and the stars have become optional to Miró’s inner editor. What remains is experience. The enormous Bleu triptych presents a layered and absolute experience of the color at hand; blue slashed with red and punched with black that makes it feel all the more saturated, all the more blue. It is one of the most sure-handed, confident editing jobs of them all.Kickstart your weekend reading by getting the week’s best Longreads delivered to your inbox every Friday afternoon.Sign upMiró wasn’t trying to get past verbal language so much as to utilize every possible form of expression. He layered poetry in with painting, and the title is often essential to the art of his art. A Dew Drop Falling from a Bird’s Wing Wakes Rosalie, Who Has Been Asleep in the Shadow of a Spider’s Web (1939) offers a juxtaposition—the title feels benign, suggests luscious Rosalie refreshed, but the visual is jarring as she is painted on rough burlap, fat and jiggly spider close at hand, and nearby birds looking alarmed. By its title, The Nightingale’s Song at Midnight and the Morning Rain (1940) would imaginably be spare and serene, but the visual field is packed, heaving with signs and symbols, full of thoughts and intensity. The Beautiful Bird Revealing the Unknown to a Pair of Lovers (1941) also joins a calm yet mystical title with pulsing visual crowding—the unknown is energetic, complex and dense. Later on, the visual plane is crisply emptied but the words may continue to pile onto one another, as with The Lark’s Wing Encircled with Golden Blue, Rejoins the Heart of the Poppy Sleeping on a Diamond-Studded Meadow (1967). Sometimes the title is the art and the painting that carries it feels like a vessel. Other times the words are shut out and the titles are a shrug—Painting, Woman, Figure, Landscape. Sometimes Miró is working furiously through his symbols. Sometimes colors. Sometimes words. Always returning to the subjects he had taken into his heart—birds, women, stars.I felt that I’d reached another deadlock with Miró. Eternal themes are so relentlessly eternal, after all, and he was eternally getting after them. Miró’s interest in the experiential means that going there with him has to be experiential. I can’t trundle along, trying to explicate his birds or the color blue. I can’t say which of his squiggles seemed to be about passion or anxiety or how images he created could seem both foreboding and joyful. I can’t describe the Constellations so much as just be present with them, much as I have no narrative to make sense of the celestial sky. How incomprehensible. How beautiful.* * *Spartan Miró didn’t feel he owed the viewer a birdlike bird or womanish woman. Only the naked essence remains, maybe just the suggestion—the eye of the bird, the curve of the woman. Woman here is abstract and visceral. If woman as a concept must stand in for desire—the desire for wholeness or union, the exercise of our essence through love and creation of new life—she need not take the form of any specific woman so much as the barely suggested form. Miró’s women are not especially sexy even when they seem to be speaking to desire. Perhaps this conveys ambivalence or even acknowledges darkness, yet what a breath of air they are since women in art are so frequently toting the burden of sexiness about. When Miró painted women, he made their parts unruly, with their breasts heaving out in all directions or their hairy vaginas dangling between their legs like cumbersome, disruptive appendages. It isn’t a particularly appealing vision, but nor does it seem an angry, terrified or subjugating one. Even when I felt little affinity for his women, I still found myself appreciating the space Miró opened up for the unmanageable and elemental in them. He was painting me and not painting me at all, over and over. I am the woman he sketched and painted and sculpted—tangled up with creation and nurture, tumultuous, serene today and furious tomorrow. But he and I will both stop to consider the escape of shooting stars.I looked at that last paragraph with its glimmer of the “me and Joan” essay, and continued to feel that it was true, that it was a good bit. But it was enough all by itself, unexpectedly complete in spite of the complexity of all it touches on. I didn’t feel a pull to continue on about women as we are imagined by Miró. Perhaps there was an entirely different essay to be gleaned from it—the experience of living in the body so often stripped down and then loaded up with so many meanings by so many artists. But that was an essay for another day or perhaps not even my essay but someone else’s instead. So that one section—Spartan Miró—was set aside, floating alone in its own document, unmoored from the main discussion yet somehow germane. It bounced out of the natural progression of the essay repeatedly.The essay was not a string; it was a stack. I was accustomed to progressions—ideas that folded into subsequent ideas, hopefully ascending. Working with Miró, I found myself with an assemblage and I was uncomfortable. There were multiple discrete elements and I couldn’t figure out how to delicately thread them together. They all just appeared to terminate abruptly. Was it a pleasing collage or a pointless jumble? I sifted through the stack, rearranged the stack, removed, added, removed, began again.I became generally irritable about Miró. I ended my daily assignations with him in frustration, then renewed my efforts the following morning after each daughter had been sent off fed, kissed, sunscreened and with hair braided. The beginning of each school day was the beginning of my wars with the artist.* * *“I think of my studio as a kitchen garden. Here, there are artichokes. There, potatoes. Leaves must be cut so the fruit can grow. At the right moment, I must prune.” This was Miró discussing his work in 1958, at age 65. He’s so patient and trusting. The fruit will indeed always appear. Miró does not feel anxious that the creativity will flow—he found his mundane formula for mining his own artistic promise. Be punctilious. “I work like a gardener,” he says. “Things follow their natural course. They grow, they ripen. I must graft. I must water.” He is a facilitator, welcoming and quietly coaxing forces that he takes no credit for, that don’t specifically belong to him. Miró attends to his numerous charges, each maturing at its own pace and each seeding the next. “So I’m always working at a great many things at the same time.”The garden grows on, little affected by humans and history, and in many ways Miró, the gardener, is likewise living outside human time in his garden—entrenched with his existential questions. Miró was criticized by his peers for his lack of response to the Spanish Civil War and World War II. The Reaper was exhibited to comparatively little fanfare next to Picasso’s widely discussed Guernica at the World’s Fair in 1937. The Reaper was large in scale like Guernica, and even carried the intent of a provocative political statement like Picasso’s piece, but unlike Guernica, which focuses on events, The Reaper focuses on the peasant—the ordinary man impacted by those events. Miró’s concern for humanity was ultimately not about our conflicts but rather our connections—to land, to our fertility, to our cosmos. He belonged to the farmers and farms, to the inhabitants of his garden. All he sees are the people themselves; he describes attempting to “bring myself closer, through painting, to the human masses I have never stopped thinking about.” Yet in 1937, war too present for everyone else, the topical was what the rest of the world needed to process.Miró waits on the seed. His feat was to be sure he was in the garden each day, showing up. The idea of the artist as a patient servant as opposed to mad genius is not especially glamorous. In fact, the garden was at once the most compellingly true-feeling yet dull metaphor he could possibly have come up with. No wonder the other guys found him irritating—there goes Miró with another one of his eternally eternal truths.Miró does not feel anxious that the creativity will flow—he found his mundane formula for mining his own artistic promise. Be punctilious.I wanted to get away from that smug, patient gardener, so I turned to Bach, who had crept into my notes like an assassin. Born two and a half centuries before Miró, Johann Sebastian Bach was part of a composing family. For two centuries of generations before him and another generation after him, the Bachs made their livelihood writing, arranging and performing music for religious and educational uses, and private patrons. Johann Sebastian may have been the standout—particularly creative, particularly adept, outrageously prolific—but perhaps he was also the most organized and dedicated to what he and his family viewed as a skilled trade. The Bachs wouldn’t have considered themselves part of an artistic dynasty, and no one was labeled a prodigy. Or, as soberly laid out in The Bach Reader, “We are not unaccustomed to the passing on of trades and crafts from father to son. But we look upon artistic talent as too individual a gift to be handed down and shared like a landed estate, by a whole family. The line we draw between art and craft is, however largely artificial, and to earlier centuries would have seemed entirely so.” The Bachs were capable composers and arrangers down the line. They weren’t even exceptional in this, as there were other families of successive generations of musical or artistic craftsmen throughout Europe, passing along knowledge and principles of creation. A large portion of Bach’s output is gone now, never disseminated after the performance for which it was crafted. Bach did tend to save his compositions, sometimes for broader use and distribution but just as often simply in order to borrow from them in the future. He also set aside his clever bits and many methodically thought out rules because he aimed to instruct—developing materials for the musical education of his sons and other students. Not one to toss any mystical haze over the artistic process or credit the muse, Bach laid out a ready-for-use, nuts-and-bolts operation in such writings as The Little Organ Book and The Well-Tempered Clavier. His son, Carl Philipp Emanuel, passes forward some of his father’s composition tricks in his instructional “Essay on the True Art of Playing the Clavier.” The path to mind-bending compositional novelty was prosaic for Bach. He lived in Miró’s garden—weed, water, prune, repeat.Like Miró, Bach was a voracious consumer of forms. He tinkered with and assimilated into his music any style, form or pattern he encountered. He didn’t, however, tend to mash them up. When he introduced elements of a regional style, he confined himself to that style and then dug down vertically—drawing his mind deep into the singularity of what he was using and finding a unique quality that he could blow up and exploit until it became so thoroughly differentiated as to be unexpected, electric. Related to this was his instinct for scale—what he blew up, he blew up bigger, and for longer, than the norm. Bach liked more.And then there was his signature: the fugue. Bach explored contrapuntal melodic themes that he could pit against one another to create richly woven harmonies. Whereas Miró became intent on creating negative space, Bach excelled at generating density. He loaded his harmonies, pushing those contrasting elements onto one another until they were forced into a détente. Miró sought the vast; Bach sought the rich. Both approaches require volume input—that is, you need ample opening material to select from both when you are winnowing and when you are layering. And both of them were members of the Volume Output Club. There are currently 1,128 preserved pieces of Bach’s music. The rest—and it is reasonable to believe there were substantially many more—weren’t saved, but rather used to wrap fish.So, was I going to link up Miró and Bach? Could I bring that off? I’d started to feel that Miró would have liked Bach, but that was a connection of my own making, and I was veering awfully close to just making stuff up. Still, Miró respected Bach’s tradition—artists who don’t sit around calling themselves artists. He was interested in the medieval notion of the artist as a skilled craftsman and the anonymity inherent to the concept; the medieval artisan was a contributor more than a diva. But both temporally and philosophically, Bach was far more aligned with this mindset in the early eighteenth century than Miró could be in the twentieth. The modern artist trades on his individuality and celebrity, his uniqueness of vision. Miró could not be successful in his own era unless he was willing to distinguish himself and ultimately trade on his signature approach. Still, Miró often put the work forward and let himself recede. Meanwhile, I now had Bach in my Miró essay and the whole thing continued to feel unsettled. I arranged and rearranged my stack.* * *The ecotone is the biological transition zone between neighboring ecological communities. It is the place where the forest meets the prairie, the river meets the bank. It can be fat or skinny, gradual or abrupt, and it is characterized by more life, action, strife and striving than the more stable environments that flank it. The microbes crowd; the plants tangle; the wet, damp and dry creatures meet.Miró emerged from a kind of epochal and regional ecotone. He had a medieval artisan’s heart, and felt strong connections to conservative rural Spain. Yet he was born in Barcelona, into the dregs of the fin-de-siècle artistic and intellectual climate of Europe in the late nineteenth century, marked by cynicism and ennui. Often working in Paris, he wove himself in and out of the life and perspective offered by the experimental European movements, participating here and opting out there whether his fellow artists liked him or not. Likewise Bach, who we now think of as an exemplar of the Baroque style, was living the creative shift of his own era. We may now associate the idea of the Baroque with the ornate, but the signature concept that drove its definition at the time was nonconformity. The word “baroque” derives from the concept of the natural pearl—misshaped, contoured, unexpected. The Baroque movement was an artistic embrace of nature’s hot mess—the tumult of biodiversity at its loudest and most layered, arguably, the tumult of an intellectual-artistic ecotone. And then there’s the personal ecotone of ideas Miró and Bach created for themselves as each introduced more and more inchoate possibilities to their respective studios. Scraps and sketches of ideas, failed efforts and near misses all jostled against one another, multiplying with each passing year of work. Miró’s carefully cultivated garden was also a very lively bog.We may now associate the idea of the Baroque with the ornate, but the signature concept that drove its definition at the time was nonconformity.So many of his paintings reflect this busy interaction. Each Miró is whispering with previous Mirós. His pieces seem to depict unanswered questions and, despite forceful simplicity in the elements, they evade classification and invite varying levels of uncertainty and misunderstanding. When I look at Woman Encircled by the Flight of a Bird (1941), I have to get comfortable with not getting everything. Are those floating hourglasses or is that just me, just today? Yet the composition of the elements is satisfying, the shape of the shapes is complete—like a perfectly smooth, flat and heavy skipping stone in my hand.* * *Miró was a working artist for a good seventy of his ninety years. He was the dead opposite of the flame-out young talent, the such-a-shame/what-a-waste sort of artist. I imagine him washing out his brushes each night and then soaking his dentures, except that he probably had excellent oral hygiene and therefore no need for dentures.As Miró grew older, he kept himself surrounded by his earlier work. He continued to avail himself of his previous inspirations but as a progressively more austere editor. He distills himself. And yet, he feels urgency. This is Miró in 1978, at age 85: “I painted these paintings in a frenzy, with real violence, so that people will know that I’m alive, that I’m breathing, that I still have a few more places to go. I’m heading in a new direction.” Well, sort of. This new direction emerges from previous directions—the same concepts revisited with new insights. Some of his later sculptures feel as if they have just stepped out of the Constellations, ideas of the 1940s taking on three dimensions in the 1970s. He was never finished with what he made, not because he needed to go back and endlessly adjust each canvas but because he lifted from his previous works in his new works. It was so Bach.Perhaps this is part of what maturity is—our thinking becomes finer as we gradually shut out parts of the larger world we drank in as younger people and we become more comfortable returning to spar with our broken-in themes. Never sated with her, Miró is exploring his eternal woman over his entire lifetime, moving under her armpit and along her back, between her legs and over her shoulder. His endless birds perch on his decades. His heavens appear at dawn, at twilight, and studded with stars. He explores the night and its edges again and again. “The spectacle of the sky overwhelms me. I’m overwhelmed when I see, in an immense sky, the crescent of the moon, or the sun. There are, in my pictures, tiny forms in huge empty spaces. Empty spaces, empty horizons, empty plains—everything which is bare has always greatly impressed me.” To coax onto the canvas the vastness that grips him so fully, Miró is compelled to first fill and then progressively remove so that absence remains.All the action is within, a battle heaving on inside that orderly mind. “I work in a state of passion and compulsion,” he says. Years of steady output provided a framework for that compulsion, and the tension between what he could imagine and what he could actually create. “Of course, a painting can’t satisfy me right away. At the beginning, I feel the distress … It’s a battle between me and what I’m doing, between me and the canvas, between me and my distress. This struggle is passionately exciting to me. I work until the distress leaves me.” Having moved through this intense productive process again and again over the years, the cycle of distress and respite is an old companion.Miró watched many of his contemporaries cease to produce. He wrote that young artists know how to struggle while they are poor, then are undone by success, losing their drive to work when it is no longer the difference between a meal and hunger, between artistic respect and being just another striver full of talk. He called this dropping away a “shameful decline” and it is clear to what standard he would hold himself as he lauded those who “continue to struggle until their last breath.” It is something he must have considered carefully, as he found his only relief through work. “Each year of their old age marks a new birth. The great ones develop and grow as they get older.” He wrote this in 1936. In the 1970s, when he was in his eighties, he was living it.* * *Ernest Hemingway purchased one of Miró’s early celebrated paintings, The Farm (1921-22). He praised it lavishly, and also appropriated it for his own art form, the tale. With The Farm as his axis, Hemingway spun out a bright story of Paris that included engaging in regular evening rounds of boxing with Miró at a local gym, and a gilded form of being inconveniently broke that required roaming the city’s bars with John Dos Passos in search of other friends in order to secure the final funds with which to purchase the painting. He even throws in the added embellishment that he won the right to purchase the painting in the first place with a lucky roll of dice. In contrast to Miró himself, Hemingway had a gift for making engaging narratives out of the act of being Hemingway.Exuberant and generous, Hemingway asserted, “After Miró had painted The Farm and after James Joyce had written Ulysses, they had a right to expect people to trust the further things they did, even when the people did not understand them.” Miró exercised the right, but who trusts the work first? The artist or the people? Though Hemingway’s account makes it seem both imperative and providential that he acquire The Farm, Miró initially had difficulty selling it. There is no certainty that the work will be as we hope, or received in the spirit of our intent. Inability and failure shadow all successes. So Miró trudged back to the garden, back to the process.He was the dead opposite of the flame-out young talent, the such-a-shame/what-a-waste sort of artist.The process is demanding. As with overlearning, I was taught what this means by children. I had three daughters in four years, none of whom slept well until she walked. In the haze of missing rest I tended to nothing except the new lives of these new people for an interval of several years. The love of literature and an assortment of writing work had been core elements of my life to this point and suddenly they were absent; I was just Mom, having no capacity for anything more than this. I barely read, rarely wrote. If I had known this would happen, I would have been afraid to have the first child, and yet this time of single-dimension stillness was and remains precious and rich to me. In the absence of much other experience, I was entirely attuned to the present right down to the way one or another little girl drew breath. The slow living we did was defined by much walking, repetition of picture books, examination of ant activity, naps and the feel of water. Then the girls sped up. The fallow period ended and I had to work to speed back up as well. Incomprehensibly, it felt as if I found more things to say after those years of silence, though by all external appearance my own life had become so quiet and seemingly lusterless, built on children’s routines and challenges. It is my earned privilege to spar with Miró in my restored working hours, when all that I have taken responsibility for is carpooled away for the day. I need the work. My kids do not yet intuit why, but they like me best on those days when I have been working well, fuming at Miró or some other subject, when a tiny bit of flow’s “optimal experience” seemed to stream down to me like a glint of sunlight while they were away rehearsing their letters.I look forward to greeting them in the afternoons. Sometimes I wonder if I am too interior, if they might find that they struggle to know their mother because so much of what was surging in my mind never emerged in conversation. My brightest thoughts and observations so often happen in solitary stillness. Even in far smaller form, the process is greedy.* * *There is, of course, no “me and Joan.” I am not punctilious-yet-fanciful Miró, but rather his messy, mercurial subject. I rage and sigh. My life is on burlap like Rosalie. Miró, who largely ignored wars, remained in one relationship, had one daughter, and kept his banker’s hours, cleared the decks purposefully and ruthlessly, pouring his energy and essence into his work of representing life to make sense of it. The resonance and intensity within that body of work is perhaps all the more intriguing because Miró wasn’t living the tumult he was channeling; he had stepped out to step in. Vincent van Gogh asserted that “painting and fucking a lot are not compatible.” Miró seems also to have subscribed to the idea that one could either work absolutely or live absolutely—but not both.We mostly pooh-pooh the binary and definitive choice these days. We have to pull success out of failure, knowledge out of confusion, and so on. We want both the painting and the fucking, and we definitely want painting to seem as exciting and charged as fucking. We rage against the punctilious. Audacity is the narrative we love. Audacity suggests a pleasingly upended binary—the fact of getting a desirable and ultimately admired outcome through outrageous defiance of desirable and admired behavior. That’s a contemporary tale of success—the big play that works out. There’s such glorious audacity in Miró, but it’s the warty, humdrum sort.Here are Miró and Bach hunting through the daily work of so many previous days, looking for what they could assemble into the new and arresting whole—the variation that validates all of the scratched drafts. The unseen labor, everything that was swept away and stashed away, the partially realized possibilities form the backbone. The lesser works seed the next attempt, so long as we maintain a path among them, so long as there is a bit of space to pass through the studio again and again. Contemporary portrait and photographic artist Chuck Close said, “I always thought that inspiration is for amateurs. The rest of us just show up and get to work.” The work emerges from the work, which emerges from the work.Here is the work initiated by scratching at Woman Entranced by the Escape of Shooting Stars. I fussed over my stack of Miró segments endlessly, waiting for them to fall in line and allow me a clear progression. The segments seemed reasonably hale, and perhaps appropriate to Miró, formed a constellation. Here was flow, there were women and stars, here was Bach, there was the ecotone. Whether they belonged together, they clung together in that assemblage. Other bits had bounced out. I’d culled entire sections on archery, Mark Twain’s Roughing It, and mathematician Roger Penrose’s tiling structures, each held for some other enterprise, some other day. “Under duress we do not rise to our expectations—we fall to the level of our training.” That quote opened the dropped paragraph belonging to Bruce Lee. It expressed a kind of inverse effect of overlearning to that of the flow principle—when one is fractured, off center, unable to drop into anything fine or transcendent, still the baseline is defined by the preparations. We are defined by our preparations.The entranced woman has stopped her task. Her tools are slack in her hands; she turns a calm eye upward. The stars continue in both constancy and streaming destruction. Soon she will again grip her objects and continue the work.***This essay first appeared in the 2018 Fall issue of The Point. Our thanks to Sophie Beck and The Point staff for allowing us to republish it here.
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
The psychology behind America’s obsession with Hallmark Christmas movies.Jane Borden | Longreads | December 2018 | 12 minutes (3,211 words)In a big city, a woman lives a fast-paced life until something forces her to visit a small town, just before Christmas. Shortly after arriving, she connects with a charming small-town man. Commence ice-skating, hot chocolate, a tree lot, tree decorating, caroling, gift giving, charity work, big family meals, snow, snowmen, snowballs, snowball fights, red scarves, cookie decorating, a grand old house or country inn, sleigh bells, giddy children, and the soft plucking of stringed instruments whenever a character delivers a joke. Every made-for-TV Christmas movie tracks the above plot. And yet, the uniformity does not prevent proliferation: This year alone, Hallmark made 38 holiday films across its two channels. Lifetime made 14. “The word is insatiable,” says Meghan Hooper, senior vice president at Lifetime and Lifetime Movie Network. “We don’t seem to be able to do enough to make the audience happy.”“Suddenly, Hallmark is no longer a guilty pleasure, it’s just a pleasure,“ says writer-director Ron Oliver, who has made 13 Christmas movies for TV since 2004, mostly for Hallmark, which has become synonymous with heartfelt, holiday romantic comedies (it’s the Xerox of them, or, if you will, the Kleenex). “I have not seen this happen until this year. Everybody jumped on board.“ In 2017, 83 million people watched at least one Hallmark Christmas movie during their Countdown to Christmas and Miracle of Christmas events. The Hallmark Channel was last year’s number one cable network among women 25 to 54 in quarter four, and is shaping up to remain in that spot for 2018. Both Hallmark and Lifetime boast double-digit ratings increases during December. And the field is getting crowded: UPtv produced seven original holiday movies this year, Netflix made four, and Freeform made three.How did America become obsessed with sappy, predictable, low-budget Christmas movies? Before we delve into history and psychology, let’s finish the plot: Our protagonist falls in love, of course. She also rights an ethical wrong, always something from the past awaiting resolution and absolution. “It all goes back to Dickens,” Oliver says, referencing Scrooge’s transformation in A Christmas Carol. Like Scrooge, our modern-day heroine receives help, her three ghosts being her new love interest, the small-town community, and a stranger who slightly resembles Santa (what Hooper calls “a Santa-like”). At the film’s end, she and the love interest kiss, usually for the first time (these are family films), and she either moves to the small town or is forever changed by it. No one asks why the moms and aunts look only 10 years older than the protagonist. Roll credits, start the next one, begin to confuse which characters are in what. It’s easy to assume that viewers enjoy these movies in spite of the repetitive plotlines, as if the networks greedily scam us. But Hallmark and Lifetime both do extensive focus grouping and ratings analysis. They know what works — we watch these movies because the plots are the same. In fact, Oliver calls the plots peripheral: “The real elements of these movies that make people love them is this sense of returning to your own past, your own childhood and sense of innocence from that era.” The slightly varying setups and environs must be similar to deliver us. These films are not art or even entertainment — they serve a function. They are ritual, a ritual as pagan as Christmas’s origins. And their key piece of iconography is the kind of American small town that’s quickly disappearing.***“Small towns have always been the iconic image for human relationships,” says Krystine Batcho, a professor of psychology at Le Moyne College, whose work specializes in nostalgia. “The older woman lives here and the nice young family lives here. When you present the imagery of the small town, it’s portraying how we can get along in peaceful ways and help one another.”Oliver grew up in one of these towns. He recalls, “It was this absolute Norman Rockwell Christmas town.” However, he adds, “I went back, maybe 20 years ago, and it is now strip malls. There is nothing to hold onto from there, so you hold the memories and recreate them in stories.”He uses his hometown as a template when designing scenes and sets, but admits a challenge: “A few places exist, but they are getting harder and harder to find. We have to make them. We use every trick in the book.” Christmas Everlasting, one of this year’s Hallmark films, is partially shot in Covington, Georgia, because Oliver was drawn to its charming town square. “But when you go two blocks from there, it’s Walmart and CVS,” he says. Ultimately, the setting of the film is an amalgamation of three different small towns, plus a healthy dose of CGI.Suddenly, Hallmark is no longer a guilty pleasure, it’s just a pleasure.So these movies deliver a fantasy of a memory — except, for most of us, it’s a false memory we internalized through Norman Rockwell art, and Rockwell was also delivering the fantasy of a memory. You can trace the line of American Christmas imagery all the way to Queen Victoria: In 1848, The Illustrated London News published an etching of Victoria and Prince Albert standing around a Christmas tree with their family. It was published two years later in the States, and had a lasting impact of popularizing the tradition. “Christmas was not always a family-centered celebration,” explains Bruce Forbes, professor emeritus of Religious Studies at Morningside College, and author of Christmas: A Candid History. It became a family holiday in the second half of the 19th century, thanks to the wild popularity of Queen Victoria, and to Charles Dickens, who published A Christmas Carol in 1843. “Dickens was not telling you what was happening in England, he was trying to create a Christmas that didn’t exist yet,” says Forbes. “When we talk about the ‘spirit of Christmas’ now, we talk about generosity. That’s a Dickens creation.“ What did exist prior? In England, not much. As a result of the lasting effects of the Puritan revolution in the 1600s, the English hardly celebrated Christmas at all. The Puritans’ beef was twofold: Christmas was not celebrated by early Christians (the holiday didn’t appear until the 300s) and those who did celebrate Christmas, Forbes says, “went to midnight mass and then to the tavern and got drunk.” So Puritans wiped it from the English consciousness.The Illustrated London News (1848)Taking the baton from the Victorian image was Currier and Ives. The phenomenal success of this New York City lithography firm in the mid- and late-19th century put affordable prints of snowy landscapes into the hands of a nation. Then in the 20th century, Norman Rockwell paired nostalgia for 19th-century Christmas with images of our mid-century obsessions: the nuclear family and suburban life. It was a powder keg. Today, pulp-like TV Christmas movies recreate these images again — in their own way as prolifically as Currier and Ives — but this time they’re more reflective of our modern world. Additions include both the mundane (texting) and the imperative (finally, after years of criticism, we see characters of color). Nostalgia is meta by nature.***A few years ago, Hallmark Cards, Inc., the parent company of the two Hallmark networks (aka Crown Media), tapped one of its senior illustrators, Geoff Greenleaf, to create a series of images about a fictional town called Evergreen. The series of snowy scenes in a small town, featuring quaint shops and an iconic vintage red truck, became a bestseller. In response, Crown Media turned the cards into a 2017 film titled Christmas in Evergreen. The movie, and its 2018 sequel, Christmas in Evergreen: Letters to Santa, were shot at Burnaby Village Museum in British Columbia, itself a fictional setting designed to preserve and romanticize small towns of yore.Dickens was not telling you what was happening in England, he was trying to create a Christmas that didn’t exist yet.Oliver believes the mid-century American imagery that these films capitalize on is so effective because it speaks to a time “when America was truly powerful and firing with all six cylinders: making great cars and great music, going to the moon, for crying out loud.” But, of course, Rockwell and his ilk rarely painted the whole picture. “It’s sanitized,” says Forbes. “It ignores all kinds of things: race, teenage pregnancy, poverty. But it was the image that white Americans had of themselves.” 

TV Christmas movies have certainly perpetuated this brand of whitewashed nostalgia. As the films’ popularity rose, networks received ample criticism. Still, just five of Hallmark’s 38 holiday films this year feature leads of color. This includes Christmas Everlasting, starring Tatyana Ali, who also stars in this year’s Jingle Belle on Lifetime. “It speaks to a shift in our culture, that suddenly there is a move afoot to have more and more of our real world look like our television world,” says Oliver. Still missing in the genre are LGBTQ love stories; no lead to date has been gay. As American as a proclivity towards heteronormative whitewashing, so too is the tendency towards consumerism — some of the imagery within the films is for sale. Christmas in Evergreen has an adjacent product line: a keepsake ornament of the red truck, a magic snow globe, a mystery key, Santa’s mailbox. “We worked in partnership to look at a couple of the products they had that we could weave into the overall storyline,” says Michelle Vicary, executive vice president of programming and network publicity for Crown Media Family Networks, which owns the Hallmark Channel and Hallmark Movies & Mysteries. And of course they did: Hallmark was a retailer long before it got into content creation. “Not all brands evoke emotional connections,” Vicary says, “but that is at the top of what this brand promises and it has been since the beginning.” ***These films are not merely delivering the past; the stories achieve a delicate balance between familiarity and novelty. In them, we see a “constant struggle between wanting to hold onto certain things from the past but wanting a new beginning,” says Batcho. That new beginning is provided primarily by the love interest — TV Christmas movies are never not romantic comedies. Hooper says her team at Lifetime learned the importance of adding a romance element, after trying other versions of holiday films without it. This makes sense to Batcho. “Like nostalgia, romantic stories focus on relationships and the sense of the ideal,” she says, adding that early brain imaging studies suggest that romance and nostalgia produce similar hormonal releases in the brain, “the loving, feel-good, pro-social feelings.” Plus, of course, as important as it is for us to protect the village, we need new relationships to strengthen the gene pool. But Batcho also says novelty is intrinsically linked to nostalgia. She likens cyclical markings of time, such as holiday celebrations, to a carousel: Each time it goes around, the horses look the same, but different people may be sitting in different places. “By being different and new, [novelty] allows you to escape so you’re not trapped in the past,” Batcho says. “Nostalgic people tend to be more optimistic, forward-looking people.”Kickstart your weekend reading by getting the week’s best Longreads delivered to your inbox every Friday afternoon.Sign upAlthough nostalgia was originally defined as homesickness and categorized as a disease, scientists now understand its healthy and profound psychological function. Studies suggest that exercising nostalgia enhances mood, reduces stress, and increases both social connectedness and self-regard. “Nostalgia helps us rediscover aspects of our authentic self, by going into our past,” says Batcho. Studies even suggest it helps us ascertain a meaning or purpose to our lives. Batcho also describes nostalgia as a social experience, since we identify ourselves in terms of relationships. “Nostalgia actually helps diminish loneliness by reminding people that, even if you are not physically with those who have loved you, you were once loved,” she says. Further, the process isn’t random. We specifically seek past memories that will help our current state. “Every time you turn the television on,” Oliver says, “you’re seeing news about another betrayal of an ideal that America held close for a long time. I think the country is trying to find its moral center again. There’s a consistency to these stories that people hold onto like a life raft in the middle of a cultural storm.” Perhaps, as viewers, we also try to right a wrong.The makers of TV Christmas movies wisely trigger nostalgia in several ways. “We certainly have gone after a certain type of talent, in terms of recognizable faces we grew up with from ’80s and ’90s shows,” says Lifetime exec Hooper. Nostalgia serves us. A 2018 survey by Cigna reports that most adults are lonely — as in, the average score, on a scale from one to lonely, was at least lonely. Other studies have shown loneliness to be a major predictor of poor physical health, leading some researchers to declare loneliness both a health crisis and an epidemic. Further, cohorts aged 18 to 22 and 23 to 37 reported more loneliness than older generations. “That’s new,“ Batcho says. A press representative for Hallmark identifies the network’s demographic as women 25 to 54, but says that during the fourth quarter – our holiday season – “our women and adults 18 to 34 are through the roof,” suggesting a potential link between loneliness and viewership. ***Nostalgia TV has been booming for a few years now, and the seemingly endless reboots and remakes premiere all year long. So why this huge surge in viewers around Christmas? Even otherwise prestige-TV-obsessed viewers, who turn up their noses at predictable schmaltz, now indulge in made-for-TV Christmas movies. “I don’t know if the season causes it as much as the season gives you permission,” opines Oliver. “From Thanksgiving night onward, you are allowed to be sentimental.” “It’s something about the holidays that is just built in: indulgence. Drink the hot chocolate, eat the food, lay on the couch, enjoy your family,” says Hooper. And when Batcho is asked why people insatiably consume this kind of content during the holidays, she says, “Winter represents nature dying and taking a pause. It makes you feel very sad and hoping to look forward to a rebirth in the spring, which tells us that it is very fundamental and natural for people to like cycles. Bears hibernate. Even human beings need to take a pause.”In one way or another, they are all saying the same thing, which is that we watch Hallmark around Christmas for the same reason Christmas happens at Christmas: the solstice. In the 300s, when the church designated the holiday, it likely chose December 25th for a litany of savvy reasons: some political and some for convenience, some building off already established pagan rituals. “You could guess them even if you didn’t study the cultures,“ says Forbes. “If it’s a midwinter festival, it would be a festival of lights to push back the darkness. It would feature evergreens because they look alive when everything else has died. To get past the isolation of winter, you would have feasts. And you would have dancing, singing, and drinking.“From Thanksgiving night onward, you are allowed to be sentimental.Part of why we’ve celebrated midwinter festivals since before recorded time is because, as Batcho said, we like cycles. They help us predict regular change: It’s cold and dark now, but abundant spring will come again, and we know it. They also help us deal with the constancy of change, with whatever on the carousel is new. “We can’t stop change. What do we do instead? Build cycles,” Batcho says. These cycles come in the form of temporal landmarks, which trigger nostalgia: birthdays, anniversaries, holidays … holiday movies. “We anchor ourselves. It is important for psychological well-being to have a sense that we are not out of control.” The consistency of plot and its predictable ending therefore serve an important purpose: we need the films to be predictable because they are another icon of the midwinter festival. We see one and our brains not only know what to expect, but also what to do. If we seek this iconography now more than ever, then we must feel especially out of control.***It would be easy to attribute the popularity of these films to a kind of escapism resulting from the current division in our country, from the fear and hatred that many feel on both sides. But the rise of both Lifetime and Hallmark TV holiday movies started ramping up around 2012 (see graph). Perhaps the division in our country and the popularity of holiday films (and nostalgia programming in general) are effects of the same cause: an almost unfathomable acceleration of rates of cultural change. In the 1980s, architect and inventor Buckminster Fuller (he of Dymaxion House and Geodesic Dome fame) posited a theory known as the knowledge-doubling curve. This sort of stuff isn’t 100 percent measurable, but the basic idea is: The amount of information we know, as a species, doubled about every 1500 years back when we were cavemen, and every 100 years in the modern era, up until World War I, at which point, it started doubling at an ever increasing rate. In the ‘90s, Artificial Intelligence researchers estimated the amount of information in the world doubles every 20 months. Today, varying estimates suggest that the amount of information in the world doubles every 10 to 13 months, and that, in our lifetimes, it could begin to double every 11 hours. Change is coming at a furiously accelerating rate, providing us with greater and greater dominion. However, Yuval Noah Harari argues in his bestselling book Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind, evolution did not equip us to handle this kind of rapidly increasing power. For millions of years, Genus Homo was positioned in the middle of the food chain. Only in the past 100,000 years did we jump to the top. “Humankind ascended … so quickly that the ecosystem was not given time to adjust. Moreover, humans themselves failed to adjust. Most top predators of the planet are majestic creatures. Millions of years of dominion have filled them with self-confidence.” Our genus, by contrast, stumbles along with far less than a majestic prowess: “many historical calamities, from deadly wars to ecological catastrophes, have resulted from this overhasty jump.”We need help adapting to cataclysmic change. Nostalgia provides aid, and so does story. Researchers discovered that character-driven narratives cause the brain to release oxytocin, which can enhance empathy, thereby motivating cooperation and leading us to trust strangers. The study, led by Paul J. Zak at Claremont Graduate University, also found that we continue to mimic the actions and feelings of characters after the story ends. If a protagonist accepts shifts in her life and finds optimism for the future, then so may we.We know that loneliness is on the rise. We know that both nostalgia and story help us create and sustain relationships. And we know that more than 83 million of us are turning to nostalgic stories during the annual month when humans anchor themselves against change, all during a time in history when the pace of change threatens to destroy us. Maybe we’re obsessed with schmaltzy TV Christmas movies because humans understand, deep down, that the real savior, this season and every season, is each other. Come on, you knew this article would have a Hallmark ending.***Jane Borden is a freelance culture writer based in Los Angeles.***Editor: Katie KosmaFact checker: Sam SchulyerCopy editor: Jacob Gross
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
A New Yorker reads “Seasonal Associate” in the age of HQ2. Rebecca McCarthy | Longreads | Month 2018 | 10 minutes (2,519 words)In May of 2017, Mayor de Blasio unveiled Jimmy Breslin Way, a street sign dedicating the stretch of 42nd Street between 2nd and 3rd Avenue to the late reporter. It was a strange press conference — half eulogy, half lecture — a chance for the mayor to laud Breslin and scold members of today’s media by whom he often feels unfairly maligned. “Think about what Jimmy Breslin did. Think about how he saw the world,” said de Blasio. He left without taking questions. What was he talking about? Did he imagine he and Jimmy Breslin would get along? In 1969 Breslin wrote a cover story about Mayor Lindsay for New York Magazine, “Is Lindsay Too Tall to Be Mayor?” was the title. Lindsay was an inch shorter than de Blasio.In 2010, Heike Geissler took a temporary position at an Amazon warehouse in Leipzig. Geissler was a freelance writer and a translator but, more pressingly, she was the mother of two children and money was not coming in. Seasonal Associate, which was translated by Katy Derbyshire and released by Semiotext(e) this month, is the product of that job. (Read an excerpt on Longreads.) It’s an oppressive, unsettling book, mainly because the work is too familiar. The book is written almost entirely in the second person, a style that might’ve come off as an irritating affectation with a lesser writer or a different subject. Here, it’s terrifying — you feel yourself slipping along with Geissler, thoughts of your own unpaid bills and the cold at the back of your throat weaving their way through the narrative. It’s not just that this unnamed protagonist could be you, it’s the certainty that someday she will be you. “You’ll soon know something about life that you didn’t know before, and it won’t just have to do with work,” Geissler writes. “But also with the fact that you’re getting older, that two children cry after you every morning, that you don’t want to go to work, and that something about this job and many other kinds of jobs is essentially rotten.”*The question of who killed New York used to be up for debate. Was it John Lindsay, who couldn’t face reality, who covered the city’s debts with short-term, high interest loans he knew were impossible to repay? His successor, Abe Beame, who bent to the demands of the bankers and gutted the social safety net during the fiscal crisis of the 70’s? Ed Koch, who embraced Beame’s cuts wholeheartedly and mocked past mayors as men who wanted New York “to be the No. 1 welfare city in America”? Giuliani, who launched the deregulation of rent controlled apartments and the quality of life campaign that gave us Broken Windows and COMPSTAT? (I’m not mentioning David Dinkins, because I really don’t think David Dinkins brought us here.) Was it Hipsters and their attendant paraphernalia? Was it the McKibbin Lofts? Union Pool? Was it Shred Stuy?Inventory work provides Geissler with a granular view of consumerism. Stripped of the marketing and storefronts that make it palatable it quickly begins to look like a form of mental illness. Who is buying these mugs, stamped with George Clooney’s face?All New York City mayors are venal, but some are more venal than others. A few months ago, I would have told you Bloomberg was to blame, our bloodless, billionaire mayor, who rezoned the city’s most vulnerable neighborhoods and openly courted real estate investment from foreign billionaires. Rents rose at neat clip alongside the homeless population. To his credit, Bloomberg — a very short man — was always transparent about where his priorities lay. The city, he said, was a “luxury product” and it should behave that way.De Blasio was supposed to be the antidote to the Bloomberg years, a progressive underdog who ran on universal pre-k and affordable housing. But that affordable housing has largely failed to materialize — where it’s been built, it’s often still pretty unaffordable — and his administration has been marked by disappointing half-measures and an ill-conceived plan for a ridiculous four billion dollar streetcar no one wants.On Black Friday, Amazon workers staged mass walkouts across Europe. On Cyber Monday, led by community groups Make the Road New York and New York Communities for Change (NYCC), protestors stormed Amazon’s Midtown bookstore to protest the planned headquarters in Long Island City and later gathered in front of the LIC Civil Courthouse chanting “I stand in the rain, I stand in the snow, Amazon has got to go!” City Council members Jimmy Van Bremer, Jumanne Williams, and Melissa Mark-Vitero were all in attendance — Williams and Mark-Vitero, it should be noted, are both running for Public Advocate. All of them decried the incentives offered to Amazon, which total about 3 billion. Williams claimed they were steamrolled by the Mayor and Governor Cuomo and that while Cuomo’s betrayal was no surprise, the de Blasio administration was “the biggest waste of progressive capital [Williams had] ever seen.”Kickstart your weekend reading by getting the week’s best Longreads delivered to your inbox every Friday afternoon.Sign upIt might’ve been a good show of force, had not all of the aforementioned politicians signed the letter urging Amazon to build its headquarters in New York. What did they think was going to happen? A New York Times investigation released earlier this year showed that the city had lost 152,000 rent-regulated apartments since 1993. The subway system is crumbling, the state leads the nation in income inequality, and the homeless population is at an all time high. No reasonable human being could look around and conclude that the answer to all these problems is to give the most avaricious company in the world the keys to the city. Amazon swallows everything it touches, it isn’t interested in civic health. Only half of the jobs being brought in are in tech and many of the low level positions will likely be replaced by robots fairly soon, but for now, these are the jobs for which the Mayor sold the city. “At any rate,” Geissler writes, early on in Seasonal Associate, “it’s almost impossible not to be forced to your knees and into defiance by this job you’re about to have.”*Geissler was hired in the warehouse to handle the Christmas rush, hence the title, and the cold is so omnipresent it seems to be a feature of the company rather than simply the reality of winter. A gate that will not latch properly becomes a major antagonist and everyone is either ill or on the verge of falling ill, although they have been warned specifically against this. “Sick days hurt Amazon,” Geissler is told at her orientation. Precarity manifests as a constant, low-grade fever. You’re the protagonist but her voice leads you through the job, a tired Virgil navigating a new circle of hell. The work is inventory — entering items into the system so they can be purchased online and performing at least a cursory check to make sure they’re undamaged. “Everything exists, in case you were going to ask,” says Geissler. “Absolutely everything exists, and people can buy it all.” Despite the scale of the warehouse, inventory work provides Geissler with a granular view of consumerism. Stripped of the marketing and storefronts that make it palatable it quickly begins to look like a form of mental illness. Who is buying these mugs, stamped with George Clooney’s face? Who needs these pre-distressed Iron Maiden hats, already rags at point of purchase? Amazon customers, which is to say, all of us.Geissler tried to sell the book as straightforward journalism initially and was turned down by five publishers, likely because the book is largely boring. It’s a propulsive, weaponized banality though — something unnatural is going on here and it’s hard to see a way out.Geissler isn’t the typical warehouse employee and as a temporary contractor she’s something of a tourist at Amazon. She’s well-educated, she’s white, she lives with the father of her children, and she’s normally able to make a living — however precarious — as a writer. There’s significant privilege there. Many people spend their entire lives working shitty, unforgiving jobs with arbitrary, infantilizing rules and part of the reason Geissler is so attuned to the myriad indignities of Amazon is because she’s unused to them. She’s aware of this position though. “It has to be said right away,” she writes, “that no one is suited for unhappiness, yet this fact doesn’t get enough recognition.” Seasonal Associate is a book about slippage and a sudden fall into the working class, but it’s a document of anxiety and futility rather than stunt journalism. The central rallying point in the warehouse is a desk made out of a door — a replica of Jeff Bezos’ desk when he founded Amazon; an absurd symbol of frugality and the company’s dedication to customer satisfaction over employees’ personal comfort. As if every warehouse worker has the potential to become the richest man in the world, if only they would stop buying such expensive desks. The idea that if you work hard enough you will inevitably rise out of poverty has always been a sham and Amazon has taken it to it’s logical endpoint. You work hard and nothing happens. You will never be good enough at your job, because you’re a human being, not a machine. As long as you’re alive you’re a potential problem for the company.Local BookstoresAmazonIn order to maintain some sense of agency Geissler stages tiny acts of rebellion — refusing to hold a handrail despite the signs instructing her to hold the handrail, keeping her safety vest in her pocket until she absolutely has to put it on. The gestures are adolescent and effectively meaningless, but every time she’s snide it’s a relief — a sign of life. Much later, after her contract is finished, she recognizes a man in a parking lot who she described as Amazon’s “only hipster.” The last time she’d seen him he was docking people’s pay for what’s commonly known as time theft. They had lined up a few minutes early to leave work, rather than waiting, unpaid, to go through security. “Unable to think of anything better,” says Geissler. “Or because it seemed like the most appropriate idea, I called out the name of a book I’d just read, by Mark Greif and others. I yelled at him: What Was the Hipster! I called it twice and I thought then he might know he was over.”Geissler tried to sell the book as straightforward journalism initially and was turned down by five publishers, likely because the book is largely boring. It’s a propulsive, weaponized banality though — something unnatural is going on here and it’s hard to see a way out. “You’ve completely forgotten that you have a profession and are only here to alleviate momentary poverty,” Geissler writes, just after her interview at Amazon. “Something inside you is essentially unsettled and will never calm down again, even though you do get the job. From this point on, you are beside yourself with worry.”My own mother raised two kids by herself as a high school English teacher and she took a number of side jobs to supplement her income. Tutoring, working at a bakery, working at a strange, luxury gardening store that sold copper birdhouses and rocks that said things like “LOVE” and “CREATE” for people who couldn’t. None of them were bad jobs, none as oppressive as warehouse work, but they did not pay very well. Her desk (worse than Jeff Bezos’) was just a slab of wood, perched atop two filing cabinets. She never made a big deal out of that though, because she is not an asshole. She’d wake up at four or five in the morning to grade the lousy papers of teenage Republicans and shovel the walkway, but she still tried to read to me and my brother before putting us to bed. Oftentimes she’d fall asleep mid-sentence and start mumbling about the electricity bill or replacing the boiler. Eventually, a doctor told her she had to relax — her blood pressure was dangerously high, her muscles so tense that when she breathed, her ribs barely moved.If you think you’re immune to this — if you went to college, if you believe you’re upwardly mobile, if you imagine you will comfortably survive the inevitable spike in rent once Amazon’s headquarters settles into Queens — unless you have vast familial wealth to draw on, I’m sorry but you’re wrong.My mom was thrown into financial uncertainty (and my dad wasn’t even a deadbeat) by an early divorce and the responsibility for two small children, but at this point that choking feeling is basically just the lived experience of the average American. In a conversation with Hans Ulrich Obrist in 2003 J.G. Ballard said that “the totalitarian systems of the future will be subservient and ingratiating, the false smile of the bored waiter rather than the jackboot.” This is it, the future is here now. It’s because Geissler doesn’t fit the typical profile of an Amazon warehouse worker that her book is such a well-timed warning shot. If you think you’re immune to this — if you went to college, if you believe you’re upwardly mobile, if you imagine you will comfortably survive the inevitable spike in rent once Amazon’s headquarters settles into Queens — unless you have vast familial wealth to draw on, I’m sorry but you’re wrong. Without immediate collective action, this is coming for all of us.*“Too tall,” Breslin clarified, about Mayor Lindsay, “means too Manhattanish, too removed from the problems of the street corners.” He wrote “Is Lindsay Too Tall to Be Mayor?” shortly after his own failed mayoral bid with Norman Mailer, a campaign that left him “nervous and depressed.”“I saw a sprawling, disjointed place which did not understand itself and was decaying physically and spiritually, decaying with these terrible little fires of rage flickering in the decay…On top of the city was an almost unworkable form of government and a set of casually unknowing, unfeeling, uncaring men and institutions. The absence of communications in a city which is the communications center of the world is so bad that you are almost forced to believe the condition of the city is terminal.”If that doesn’t sound familiar, it will soon. On December 12, the New York City Council held the first of a series of hearings on the new Amazon headquarters. Protestors covered the balcony and unfurled a No HQ2 Banner. “It’s all smoke and mirrors!” a man yelled. “Don’t let them monopolize the city! Don’t let them near the subways, don’t let them near the schools — these guys are lying creeps!” He was escorted out.Amazon has become so large that it can have the same pacifying effect as the threat of climate change, but despair isn’t helpful right now. As Hamilton Nolan and Dave Colon have already pointed out over at Splinter, Amazon’s New York headquarters represents the best chance at effectively unionizing the company and the resistance to HQ2 is broad and growing. Still, it was difficult to watch the City Council hearing without a paralyzing sense of dread. Amazon is a contractor with ICE, they have a horrific labor record, and they’re accountable to no one. That guy was right, these people are lying creeps, as are many of the people we’ve elected. There’s such a long and rich tradition of grift in this city that it’s rare to be able to definitively level blame, but here we are. De Blasio was too tall to be mayor and we didn’t see it. “Is this all a matter of life and death?” Geissler writes, at the very beginning of Seasonal Associate. “I’ll say no for the moment and come back to the question later. At that point, I’ll say: Not directly, but in a way yes. It’s a matter of how far death is allowed into our lives.”* * *Rebecca McCarthy is a freelance writer and a bookseller.Editor: Dana Snitzky
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
This week, we’re sharing stories from Casey Parks, Cathy Newman, Zach Baron, Molly Priddy, and Christopher Solomon.This week, we’re sharing stories from Casey Parks, Cathy Newman, Zach Baron, Molly Priddy, and Christopher Solomon.Sign up to receive this list free every Friday in your inbox.* * *Casey Parks | The Trace | December 12, 2018 | 33 minutes (8,260 words)Roger Stringer, a father and gun owner in Mississippi, testifies against his older son, Zac, in the shooting that kills his younger son, Justin. Zac goes to prison, but eventually Roger learns that the rifle in the incident — a Remington Model 700 — is at fault.Cathy Newman | National Geographic | December 20, 2018 | 16 minutes (4,076 words)When Susan Potter died of pneumonia at the age of 87, she donated her body to the Visible Human Project so it could be sliced and photographed. The images would be digitized and used to create a virtual cadaver that medical students could use to dissect and reassemble with the stroke of a few keys.Zach Baron | GQ | December 19, 2018 | 26 minutes (6,611 words)At a time when local newsrooms are shrinking or closing entirely — and Trump is calling the news media “the enemy of the people” — Zach Baron visits the reporters and editors of The Fresno Bee in California’s Central Valley, where Republican Rep. Devin Nunes declared war on the paper.Molly Priddy | Autostraddle | December 7, 2018 | 6 minutes (1,527 words)In a piece that’s part personal essay and part service journalism, Molly Priddy shares how challenging it initially was going home for the holidays just after she got sober — and how it’s gotten better over the years. She also offers tips suggesting how others avoiding alcohol might get through the end-of-year forced family fun with their sanity — and sobriety — intact.Christopher Solomon | Outside | December 17, 2018 | 8 minutes (2,167 words)In this poignant piece, longtime runner Christopher Solomon considers loss and the body’s inevitable decline as he recounts how his father helped him fall in love with running, what running has meant to him over the decades, and the injury that stands between him, daily roadwork, and the peace and joy that it can bring.
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
