
			Welcome,		
				Fin Costello/Redferns/Getty Images			Neil Peart made it only 10 months into his hard-won retirement before he started to feel like something was wrong. Words were, for once, the problem. Peart, one-third of the Toronto band Rush, was one of the world’s most worshipped drummers, unleashing his unearthly skills upon rotating drum kits that grew to encompass what seemed like every percussive possibility within human invention. Before band rehearsals for Rush tours, he’d practice on his own for weeks to ensure he could replicate his parts. His forearms bulged with muscle; his huge hands were calloused. But he was also the self-educated intellect behind Rush’s singularly cerebral and philosophical lyrics, and the author of numerous books, specializing in memoir intertwined with motorcycle travelogues, all of it rendered in luminous detail. Peart took constant notes, kept journals, sent emails that were more like Victorian-era correspondence, wrote pieces for drum magazines, and posted essays and book reviews on his website. Despite ending his formal education at age 17, he never stopped working toward a lifelong goal of reading “every great book ever written.” He tended to use friends’ birthdays as an excuse to send “a whole fucking story about his own life,” as Rush singer-bassist Geddy Lee puts it, with a laugh.  








“I do a lot of my thinking that way,” Peart told me in 2015. “There is a quote from E.M. Forster. He used to say, ‘How do I know what I think until I see what I say?’ For me, that’s when I write.”Peart laid down his drumsticks after Rush’s final show in August 2015, shortly before his 63rd birthday, but he intended to continue his writing career, which exacted less of a physical toll than pummeling a snare drum. He envisioned a quiet life. He’d work nine-to-five in what he liked to call his “man cave,” a plush garage for his vintage-car collection that doubled as his office, just a block away from his home in Santa Monica, California. The rest of his time he’d spend with Carrie Nuttall, his wife of 20 years, and his elementary-school-age daughter, Olivia, who adored him. He planned to spend summers with them at his spectacular lakeside country property in Quebec, not far from the former site of Le Studio, the picturesque spot where Rush recorded Moving Pictures and other albums.Photograph by Fin Costello/Rush ArchivesBefore Rush’s final tour began, Peart got a taste of the day-to-day existence he wanted. He ached to return to it, a rock star pining after mundanity like a cubicle drone daydreaming of living in the limelight. “It was awfully hard for me to turn away from a contented domestic life, a contented creative life,” he told me in 2015, sipping Macallan on ice in his garage just before the tour. “I’d wait till Olivia went to school in the morning and then come over here. I’m an early riser, as she is. I’d go pick up lunch and come back here. And again, I never take it for granted. I’ll be walking down Olympic to Starbucks or to Subway or whatever, thinking, ‘Isn’t this great?’ ”After the tour, when Peart wasn’t working in his man cave, he volunteered for library time at Olivia’s school. “Olivia was thrilled,” says Nuttall. “She got to see Daddy at school all the time.” At night, he’d come home and cook family dinners. “He was living his life exactly the way he wanted for the first time in decades, probably,” she says. “It was a very sweet, content time … and then the gods, or whatever you want to call it, snatched it all away.” 








“I just feel so bad,” says Lee, “that he had so little time to live out what he fought so hard to get.”Peart started doing newspaper crossword puzzles back in the early Seventies, when he traveled to England from his native Canada to make it as a drummer, only to end up as the manager of a souvenir shop, with time to kill on a tube commute. For the past couple of decades, he made a ritual of whipping through the New York Times Sunday puzzle. In June 2016, he was baffled to find himself struggling with that task. “He couldn’t figure it out,” says Rush’s longtime manager, Ray Danniels. “ ‘What was the matter?’ ”Peart kept his concern to himself, but by summer, he was showing signs of what Nuttall assumed to be depression. She broached the subject with Danniels during a visit to the manager’s house in Muskoka, Ontario. “I was like, ‘Carrie, he got everything he wants,’ ” Danniels recalls. “ ‘He won. He got his freedom. He got a huge paycheck off the last tour. This is not depression.’ ”In late August, Nuttall and Peart’s mother both noticed that he was unusually quiet. When he did speak, he started “making mistakes with his words,” as he later told his bandmates. He rushed to a doctor, and after an MRI, ended up in surgery. The diagnosis was grim: glioblastoma, an aggressive brain cancer with an average survival time of roughly 12 to 18 months. Genetic testing of Peart’s cancer suggested it was unusually treatable, and Peart lived until January 7th, 2020, more than three years after his diagnosis, which, in the case of this illness, qualified him as a “long-term survivor.” “Three and a half years later,” says Lee, “he was still having a smoke on the porch. So he said a big ‘Fuck you’ to the Big C as long as he could.”Shortly before the surgery, Peart placed an uncharacteristic FaceTime call to Alex Lifeson, on the Rush guitarist’s birthday. “It was so unusual to get a call from him, because he was never comfortable on the phone,” says Lifeson. “You’d get these beautiful emails from him. But he wasn’t that crazy about talking to anybody. I was in shock. But I could tell there was something weird. I thought maybe it was a difficulty with a connection or something. But he just didn’t seem like he normally was. And I kept thinking about it afterwards.” 








A couple of weeks later, Peart sent an email to his bandmates with the news. He didn’t pull any punches. “He basically blurted it out,” Lee recalls. “ ‘I have a brain tumor. I’m not joking.’ ”Lifeson was at a golf course when he got the message. “I think I started crying right there,” he says.“You go into fight-or-flight mode,” Lee says. For Lifeson and Lee, the priority became finding chances to see their friend, who lived far from their mutual home base of Toronto. Peart handled his illness with heroic strength and stoicism, friends say, even as he fought to survive. “He was a tough man,” says Lee. “He was nothing if not stoic, that man. … He was pissed off, obviously. But he had to accept so much horrible shit. He got very good at accepting shitty news. And he was OK with it. He was going to do his best to stick around as long as he could, for the sake of his family. And he did unbelievably well. … He accepted his fate, certainly more gracefully than I would.”There was a certain fatalism to Peart, who wrote song after song about the randomness of the universe, and then saw the events of his own life prove it to him. In 1997, his daughter Selena died in a car accident on the way to college; his common-law wife, Jackie, died of cancer soon after. Peart’s loss was so all-encompassing that despite his rationalist bent, he couldn’t help wondering whether he’d somehow been cursed.“My daughter died at 19, and my wife died at 42, and I’m 62 and I’m still going,” he told me in 2015, discussing his refusal to consider quitting smoking (which is not believed to be a likely cause of glioblastoma). “How many people have died younger than me? How many drummers have died younger than me? I’m already in bonus time. … Something is gonna kill me. Look, I ride motorcycles. I drive fast cars. I fly around a lot in airplanes. It’s a dangerous life out there. I like what one old-timer said about motorcycling: ‘If you love motorcycling enough, it’s gonna kill you. The trick is to survive long enough that something else kills you first.’ ” For all of that bravado, he couldn’t abide the idea of leaving his daughter behind. “That bothered him terribly,” Danniels says. “It bothered him that he had come full circle. At first, he felt the pain of having lost a child. And now he was leaving a child.” 








Peart had his own mourning process to get through, says Nuttall, “for the future he was not going to have and for everything he would miss out on with Olivia, and with me, and with life itself. If anyone lived life to the fullest, it was Neil. And there was still much he wanted to do. When everyone says, ‘Oh, he was so stoic and accepted his fate,’ and all that? Yes, he did. But it also broke his heart.”Peart was determined to make the most of his remaining time, just as he had always sought to maximize his days. “What’s the most excellent thing I can do today?” he used to ask himself. The answer often meant roaring through a national park on a BMW motorcycle before playing drums in an arena. (“You can do a lot in a lifetime,” he wrote in the lyrics to “Marathon,” one of Rush’s most powerful songs, “if you don’t burn out too fast.”) That was one of his signatures as a drummer, too, cramming an improbable amount of rhythmic information into each bar of music; he made his living by pushing the limits of time.FLY BY NIGHT: Lee, Peart, and Lifeson (from left) in 1977. Peart tried to end Rush’s touring days as early as 1989.Fin Costello/Redferns/Getty Images“He lived incredibly deeply and richly,” says one of his close friends, former Jethro Tull drummer Doane Perry. “Which might mean being on his own, reading a book at his place up in Canada on the lake — that was just as fully engaging as being onstage in front of tens of thousands of people.” Peart’s lifelong need for privacy grew stronger. His illness was a secret kept among a small circle of friends, who managed to guard their knowledge to the very end. For Lee and Lifeson, who were doing interviews and fielding calls from friends and peers about rumors, the burden of concealment was heavy. “Neil asked us not to discuss it with anyone,” says Lifeson. “He just wanted to be in control of it. The last thing in the world he would want is people sitting on his sidewalk or driveway singing ‘Closer to the Heart’ or something. That was a great fear of his. He didn’t want that attention at all. And it was definitely difficult to lie to people or to sidestep or deflect somehow. It was really difficult.”Peart always dismissed unnecessary discussion of unpleasant subjects with a hand wave and a hearty “never mind,” and that’s what friends heard if they tried bringing up his illness or treatment. “He didn’t want to waste his remaining time talking about shit like that,” says Lee. “He wanted to have fun with us. And he wanted to talk about real things right up to the very end.” 








Peart never complained, Lee jokes, unless he “ran out of smokes.” “One time I arrived without any alcohol,” adds Lee, a serious wine collector. “And I’m famous for arriving at his house with what he used to call ‘your bucket of wine.’ And I didn’t bring it this one time. And he was just so appalled. So of course, the next day, Alex and I went to a wine store and made sure we arrived with a bucket of wine. And all was good again.”Peart also overcame a lifelong aversion to retrospection and nostalgia, spending a significant amount of time listening to his catalog with Rush. “When we talk about his intense desire to be learning,” says another close friend, Vertical Horizon frontman Matt Scannell, “very hand in hand with that spirit is, ‘What’s new? What next?’ Back when I’d send him mix CDs, if it was old, he wasn’t interested. But I thought it was beautiful that he found something to enjoy about looking back, whereas before, it was kind of anathema.”“I don’t think any of us listen to a lot of our old music,” says Lifeson. “It’s all been done and played. But my guess is that he was just reviewing some of the things that he accomplished, in terms of music, anyways. And I think he was a little surprised at how well it turned out. I think that happens, you kind of forget. It was interesting to see him smile and feel really good about that. And when he still could write to us, he wrote about how he was reviewing some of our older music and how it stood up for him.”Lee wasn’t surprised. “Knowing Neil the way I do,” he says, “and knowing that he knew how much time he had left, I think it was a natural thing for him to review the work of his life. And he was finding himself very proud of how he had spent a big chunk of his life. And he wanted to share that with Alex and I. Whenever we saw him, he wanted to talk about that. He wanted us to know that he was proud.”Fly By Night, Peart’s debut album with Rush, begins with the intro to “Anthem”: guitar, bass, and drums interlocked in a brutally syncopated riff, in ⅞ time, with some of the most crisp high-hat work the rock world had ever heard. From there, the song became a ferocious salute to Ayn Rand-inspired individualism. The Rand influence was powerful at that point for a young Peart, adhering to his public image for decades, but he’d soon regard it as philosophic and intellectual training wheels, at best. He’d eventually call himself a “left-wing libertarian” or “bleeding-heart libertarian,” and tell Rolling Stone in 2015 that he planned to vote Democratic after gaining his U.S. citizenship. 








On Rush’s previous album, recorded with a far more limited drummer, John Rutsey, Lee had been singing come-ons (“Hey, baby, it’s a quarter to eight/I feel I’m in the mood!”) over bar-band Zeppelinisms; now he was screeching objectivist philosophy over thrilling, twisty prog-metal, a genre his band was inventing moment by moment. “We wanted to be the most complex hard-rock band out there, that was our goal,” Lee told me in 2015. “So I knew from the very first audition that this was the drummer of our dreams.”GHOST RIDER: Peart took to traveling from show to show on Rush’s tours via motorcycle, even at age 62.Juan LopezPeart spent his infancy on a family farm, before his father — who would eventually run his own auto-parts business — moved the family to Port Dalhousie, a suburb of the small city of St. Catharines, Ontario. Until his teenage years, Peart’s childhood was relatively idyllic. He spent much of his time outdoors, cultivating what became a lifelong connection with nature. “Where he was really most comfortable was in nature and in quiet and a degree of solitude,” says his friend Doane Perry. There was one deeply traumatic incident. Swimming in Lake Ontario when he was around 10, Peart grew tired and tried to grab onto a buoyed raft, before some older boys decided it would be funny to keep him off of it. Peart flailed in the water, feeling himself start to drown. At the last minute, two classmates saved his life. Peart was left with a certain distrust of strangers, and would flash back to the terror of that moment years later, when he was unlucky enough to be caught in a crush of fans. He developed a phobia of feeling “trapped” that would shape his profound discomfort with fame and his constant need to escape the cloistered world of rock touring. Peart was brilliant enough to skip two grades, starting high school at 12. He began drum lessons, practicing for a full year without an actual kit. Peart’s first spark of interest in drums came with a viewing of The Gene Krupa Story, a biopic about the big-band drummer; big-band jazz was Peart’s dad’s favorite music, and Peart would take a serious stab at playing it later in life. Keith Moon, the Who’s wild-man drummer, became his hero, but as Peart’s skills developed, he realized he didn’t actually want to play like Moon. The chaos didn’t suit him. Peart would find a way to embody Moon’s energy while staying true to his own spirit, playing parts that were even flashier and more dramatic, but also more precise and composed, following a sort of three-dimensional geometric logic.  (Ever restless, Peart, in his later years, reversed course and worked on his improvisational side.) 








Teenage Peart grew his hair long and started wearing a cape and purple shoes. Local jocks were unimpressed. “I was totally happy up until the teenage years,” he told me, “when suddenly — I didn’t know I was a freak, but the world made me aware of it.” He was playing in his first bands and becoming completely obsessed with his instrument. He’d only stop practicing when his parents made him. “From the time I started playing drums, there was only drums and music,” Peart said. “I did great in school up until that point, and then it just didn’t matter.”He dropped out at 17, and by the next year made his way to London. He spent 18 frustrating months there, returning to Canada with very different ideas about his musical career. He decided he couldn’t stand playing music he didn’t believe in for money, and would rather work a day job and play for fun. “I set out to never betray the values that 16-year-old had, to never sell out, to never bow to the man,” he told me.He was offended by what he saw as pandering and corrupt commercialism in the rock world; there’s genuine contempt in the line about the “sound of salesmen” he’d later write in “The Spirit of Radio.” After a stint at the local record store, where he worked with the brothers of his future wife, Jackie Taylor, he settled into a job as parts manager at his father’s business, helping to computerize the inventory system.ALL THE WORLD’S A STAGE: Rush sounded bigger than any ordinary three-piece.Fin Costello/Rush ArchivesPeart’s first attempt at ordinary life lasted barely a year before he was recruited to audition for a Toronto band already signed to a major label. Peart joined Rush, and began 40 years of recording and touring. “You look at him in photographs in the early days,” says Lee, “and he had a great smile. He was very happy for a very long time. Only after years of grueling road work did that smile start to wear away a little bit.”From the beginning, though, Peart found the downtime on the road stultifying. He started putting it to use, plowing through ever-growing stacks of paperback books, filling in the gaps of his education. At the same time, he laced Rush’s early albums with some of rock’s oddest and most colorful lyrics. (“I have dined on honeydew!” Lee famously yelps on the 1977 classic “Xanadu.”) In his songwriting, Peart drew at first on his love of science fiction, fantasy, and Rand, before shifting to more earthbound concerns by the Eighties. 








Rolling with some of those early lyrics was a “leap of faith” for the band, Lee acknowledges: “Sometimes you weren’t into it! And you didn’t want to do it. You had to talk about it.” As the years went by, the process became ever more collaborative. “For many years,” Lee adds, “Neil sat beside me in the control room when we listened back to vocals, and we’d talk about something that could be improved and he would rewrite it on the spot.” Later, Lee might pick just a few lines he liked, and Peart would rewrite songs around them.The band’s breakthrough, 1976’s monumental, riff-happy rock operetta “2112,” was dead serious in its furious salute to personal freedom; the priests of Syrinx, who controlled everything in their dystopian society, were a thin stand-in for record execs who wanted Rush to sound more like Bad Company (and for teenage fans, parents who just didn’t understand).There was more humor in the band and in Peart’s Seventies writing than some of his critics understood — 1975’s “By-Tor and the Snow Dog” was inspired, for instance, by the nicknames of two dogs Danniels owned. “I remember one morning saying to Geddy, wouldn’t it be funny if we did a fantasy piece on By-Tor and the Snow Dog?” Peart told me. Even in their peak-prog moment, 1978’s Hemispheres, the band was self-aware enough to give the wry subtitle “An Exercise in Self-Indulgence” to “La Villa Strangiato,” a twisty masterpiece of an instrumental. “The Spirit of Radio,” from 1979’s Permanent Waves, lived up to its title, winning Rush extensive FM airplay, followed by their biggest-ever album, Moving Pictures, with Peart’s awe-inspiring performance on “Tom Sawyer,” highlighted by some of the most indelible drum fills in rock history. Rush were now huge, and Peart wasn’t enjoying it. When he heard Roger Waters’ depiction of rock alienation on Pink Floyd’s The Wall, he wrote Waters a letter of appreciation for capturing his own feelings so well. His friend Matt Stone, South Park’s co-creator, was stunned to find how ill-at-ease Peart could be about being recognized in public, even late in his career. “He was a really weird guy about his fame,” Stone says. (For that reason, Peart particularly loved Stone’s Halloween parties, where he could meet people while in disguise — which, one year, meant full drag.) 








Peart developed strategies to break free. “I carried a bicycle on the tour bus and sometimes on days off I’d go riding in the country,” he told me, “and then, if the cities were a hundred miles apart, I could do it on my own, and that was the biggest thrill. The whole entourage left, and I’d be in the little town in a motel room and on my own, and in those days no cellphones or anything. Just me and my bicycle.” He took extracurricular trips, too, riding through Africa (toting, on one trip, a copy of Aristotle’s Ethics and a collection of Vincent Van Gogh’s letters) and China. The deprivation he witnessed in Africa was transformative, pushing the “bleeding heart” part of his libertarianism to the surface. Peart tried to end Rush’s touring days as early as 1989, when his daughter Selena was 11 years old. “After much wrestling in my own mind I came to the realization, if I’m going to call myself a musician, then I’m going to have to perform live,” he told me. “I like rehearsing much better than performing. It’s got all the challenge and gratification, but without the pressure. And you don’t have to leave home. Even in ’89, I was thinking, ‘Imagine if they had a hologram, so every day I just went to one place and played my heart out, and then went home.’ ”Peart felt intense pressure, night after night, to live up to his own reputation. “He never rated himself as highly as everyone else did,” says Police drummer Stewart Copeland, another friend. “But he did very much feel the responsibility that he carried to be the god of drums. Kind of a burden, actually.”ANALOG KID: Beginning with Rush’s earliest tours, Peart used downtime to read endlessly.Carrie NuttallIn May 1994, at the Power Station recording studio in New York, Peart gathered together great rock and jazz drummers, from Steve Gadd to Matt Sorum to Max Roach, for a tribute album he was producing for the great swing drummer Buddy Rich. Peart noticed one of the players, Steve Smith, had improved strikingly since the last time he had seen him, and learned that he studied with the jazz guru Freddie Gruber. In the year of his 42nd birthday, while he was already widely considered to be the greatest rock drummer alive, Peart sought out Gruber and started taking drum lessons. “What is a master but a master student?” Peart told Rolling Stone in 2012. 








He was convinced that years of playing along with sequencers for the more synth-y songs in Rush’s Eighties catalog had stiffened his drumming, and he wanted to loosen back up. (For all of his efforts and mastery, there were some areas even Neil Peart couldn’t conquer: “To be honest, I am not sure that Neil ever fully ‘got’ the jazz high-hat thing,” Peter Erskine, who took over as Peart’s teacher in the 2000s, wrote affectionately.)Rush as a whole were feeling some creative exhaustion on their next album, 1996’s Test for Echo, but Peart felt he’d done his best playing to date, thanks to a revamped sense of time. He also found a new way to make touring bearable, even pleasurable, traveling from date to date on his BMW motorcycle. “I’m out in the real world every day,” he told me, “seeing people at work and going about their daily life, and having little conversations in rest areas and gas stations and motels, and all the American life every day.” Five years would pass before the band toured again.On August 10th, 1997, Peart and his wife Jackie helped 19-year-old Selena pack up her car as she prepared to drive to the University of Toronto to begin her sophomore year. Her expected arrival time came and went without a phone call. A few hours later, a police officer came to Peart’s door. At Selena’s funeral, Peart told his bandmates to consider him retired, and Lifeson and Lee assumed the band was over. Jackie was shattered, and within months received a diagnosis of metastatic cancer. She responded “almost gratefully” to the news, Peart wrote. Jackie died in June 1998. She is buried next to their daughter. Peart left everything behind, got on his motorcycle and rode. He felt alienated from himself; at one point, he watched one of his old instructional drum videos and felt like he was looking at a different person. There was part of him left, though, “a little baby soul,” and he did his best to nurture it. There were times when he sought the “numb refuge of drugs and alcohol,” as he put it in his memoir of the period, Ghost Rider. Midway through his journey, before embarking on a run through Mexico, Peart broke out of his isolation for a week, spending some time in Los Angeles with Rush photographer Andrew MacNaughtan. 








TIME STAND STILL: Rush in 1977. “Neil had a great smile,” says Lee.Fin Costello/Redferns/Getty ImagesOne of the few things that made him laugh during that period was South Park, so Peart was pleased when MacNaughtan introduced him to Stone. “Andrew was like, ‘Neil’s coming to town,’ ” Stone recalls. “ ‘Let’s get wasted and hang out.’ I got some party materials and went up to the Hollywood Hills. Because of what happened, it was, ‘Don’t talk about girls. Don’t talk about children.’ So we talked about art and philosophy and rock & roll and travel. … But it was a guy who was just fucking sad.” Over the course of more than a year and 55,000 miles’ worth of motorcycle trips, Peart began to heal. He ended up in Southern California for good, ready to start over. “When I first moved here it was remarkable, because my life was one suitcase, a bicycle, and a boom box,” he told me. “All the possessions I had. I rented a little apartment by the Santa Monica Pier. And I joined the Y here. I would do yoga or the Y every day, ride around on my bicycle, come home and listen to my boom box, and it was great.” Through MacNaughtan, he met Carrie Nuttall, a gifted photographer, and fell in love. They married in 2000. Peart called the band and told them he was ready to get back to work.Rush were as popular as they had ever been by their 40th anniversary in 2015, having been belatedly absorbed into the classic-rock and pop-culture canons. After many stylistic reinventions, they had re-embraced their core approach with what would turn out to be their last studio release, the triumphant concept album Clockwork Angels, in 2012.But Peart had again grown reluctant to tour. He and Olivia, now five, were very close, and during the band’s 2012-13 tour, she found his absences painful and disturbing. Peart relented only because Lifeson developed arthritis, and the guitarist worried that it might be his last chance to play. “Realizing I was trapped,” Peart wrote, “I got back to my hotel that night and stomped around the room in a mighty rage and an attack of extreme Tourette’s.” After the tantrum subsided, he decided to follow an adage of Freddie Gruber’s: “It is what it is. Deal with it.” As the tour went on, Lifeson started feeling better. It was Peart who suffered. He kept up his motorcycle routine, a 62-year-old man riding hundreds of miles a day, sometimes in the rain, before playing three-hour concerts. He developed a painful infection in one of his feet, among other issues. “He could barely walk to the stage,” says Lifeson. “They got him a golf cart to drive him to the stage. And he played a three-hour show, at the intensity he played every single show. I mean, that was amazing.” 








At the beginning of the tour, Peart was feeling good, and signaled to Danniels that he might be open to adding more shows. His feelings changed along with his physical condition. “Partway through the second run,” says Danniels, “he made it clear to me, ‘I can’t do any more. I don’t want to do any more.’ And, you know, I was frustrated.” So were Lee and Lifeson, who were in the middle of one of Rush’s greatest tours, with a fan’s-dream set list that ran through the band’s catalog in reverse chronological order. MEAN, MEAN PRIDE: Peart poses with Lifeson and Lee in London circa 1978.Fin Costello/Redferns/Getty Images“My relationship with him had been one of coaxing,” Danniels adds. “But even getting angry couldn’t move him. He wasn’t a racehorse anymore. He was a mule. The mule wasn’t going to move. … I eventually let go. I realized I was going to negatively affect my friendship with him.”The band never really spoke about the significance of what was happening at Rush’s final show, at a sold-out Forum in L.A. At least not aloud. “The conversation took place onstage,” says Lee, “all through the show, in our eyes.” Peart made it clear that something unique, and most likely final, was happening when he came up to the front of the stage with his bandmates at the show’s conclusion. It was the first time he had done so in 40 years. “That was a beautiful moment,” Lee says.For all the finality, there was always some hope that the band would find some way to continue. “Do I think Neil would have done something again?” says Danniels. “Yes. He would have one day. [Something] different, whether it was a residency in Vegas or whatever. I think, yes, before the illness. That’s what stopped this thing from ever coming back.”The years of Peart’s illness were filled with uncertainty. Early on, he was in remission for a year before the cancer returned. “In a way, every time you said goodbye to him, you said goodbye,” says Lee. “Because you honestly didn’t know. Even when he was doing pretty well. It was three and a half years of really not knowing. The timeline kept moving. So when you said goodbye, it was always a giant hug.”During one visit, Lifeson stayed in L.A. by himself for a few days. “And when I left, I gave him a big hug and a kiss,” the guitarist says. “And he looked at me and said, ‘That says everything.’ And, oh, my God. And that, for me, was when [I said goodbye]. I saw him a couple times afterwards, but I can see him and feel that moment.” 








The final time Lee and Lifeson saw their bandmate, they were able to have one last, glorious boozy dinner with him and Nuttall. “We were laughing our heads off,” says Lifeson. “We were telling jokes and reminiscing about different gigs and tours and crew members and the kind of stuff we always did sitting around a dressing room or on a bus. And it just felt so natural and right and complete.”Peart had some degree of impairment as the disease progressed, but “really, right up to the end, he was in there,” says Perry. “He was absolutely in there, taking things in.” (A report after his death that Peart was confined to a wheelchair and unable to speak was entirely false, friends said.) He kept up his routine, heading to his man cave each weekday, seeing friends there, even throwing himself a final birthday party in the fall of 2019.When Peart could no longer drive, his friends Michael Mosbach and Juan Lopez shuttled him there. “I’m just really grateful and proud,” says Nuttall, “that I was able to provide Neil with the ability to still do all those things he wanted to do, really up until the very end. But I couldn’t have done it without Juan and Michael.”Peart never played drums again after Rush’s final show. But there was a drum kit in his house. It belonged to Olivia, who was taking lessons and seriously pursuing the instrument. Peart’s parents had allowed him to set up his drums in their living room, and he did the same for Olivia. It said everything about Peart that his daughter wasn’t shy about tackling the instrument in the shadow of his own achievements. “Neil immediately said, ‘She has it,’ ” says Nuttall. “She did inherit what he had. And of course, that thrilled him. … He made a huge effort not to make her feel intimidated by him — he didn’t sit there and stare at her having her lesson. He would be out of sight, but he’d be listening.”With Peart’s passing closely followed by a global catastrophe, it’s been a dark and surreal year for his friends and family. In a world frozen in place, it’s been hard to process grief. “It feels like it wasn’t very long ago,” says Lee. There was more drama in the Rush camp, too. Lifeson became terribly ill in March, and was hospitalized for a few days and placed on oxygen. He tested negative for Covid-19 but positive for the flu, though he did lose his sense of taste and smell while he was sick. Lifeson has since fully recovered. 








A planned private Toronto memorial for Peart had to be called off, but there was a small dinner with the band and friends in Los Angeles, and a formal memorial there hosted by his widow weeks later. “Carrie picked a beautiful place overlooking the Pacific,” says Perry. “It was a beautiful afternoon. It was a healing time for everyone. Carrie put together a wonderful slide show of pictures, going right back to when he was a boy.”Some of Peart’s friends — Scannell, Perry, Copeland, prose collaborator Kevin Anderson — spoke in front of an audience that included his bandmates and other famous drummers: Taylor Hawkins of Foo Fighters, the Red Hot Chili Peppers’ Chad Smith, Tool’s Danny Carey. In Copeland’s speech, he noted that thanks to Peart, all of the drummers in attendance shared the indignity of meeting fans who’d tell them, “You’re my second-favorite drummer!”A FAREWELL TO KINGS: For the first time, Peart took a bow with his bandmates, at their final show, in 2015.John Arrowsmith/Rush ArchivesAt the end, Olivia Peart, age 11, got up and talked about her dad. “She was wonderful,” Perry says. “She’s really Neil’s daughter, a really smart little girl.” Olivia and her mother are, of course, still struggling with the loss, compounded by pandemic-era isolation. The Canadian border has been largely closed for months, separating them from Peart’s extended family. “Our lives were turned upside down when Neil died,” says Nuttall, who spent Christmas alone with her daughter. “And then eight weeks later we were alone at home together, and it’s been tough. … We both think about him every single day, and talk about him every single day, and miss him every day.” Through it all, Olivia is continuing her drum lessons.Since Peart’s passing, Lee and Lifeson have found little interest in picking up their instruments. “I love playing, and I never, ever wanted to stop,” says Lifeson, during an emotional joint video call with Lee. Lifeson was in his studio, where nearly a dozen gleaming guitars hung behind him. “And I thought, you know, ‘One day, when I’m just sitting around shitting my pants, I’ll still want to play guitar.’ And that’s kind of gone now. After he died, it just didn’t seem important. But I think it’ll come back.” 








“For the longest time,” says Lee, “I didn’t have any heart to play. … I still feel there’s music in me and there’s music in Big Al, but there’s no hurry to do any of that.” Even as they mourn their friend, Lee and Lifeson are adjusting to the idea that Rush, too, is gone. “That’s finished, right? That’s over,” Lee says. “I still am very proud of what we did. I don’t know what I will do again in music. And I’m sure Al doesn’t, whether it’s together, apart, or whatever. But the music of Rush is always part of us. And I would never hesitate to play one of those songs in the right context. But at the same time, you have to give respect to what the three of us with Neil did together.”After the final Rush show, Peart stuck around the venue, instead of bolting off on his motorcycle. He was, for once, having a great time backstage. “He was ebullient,” Lee says. Neil Peart had finished his work, held on to his standards, never betrayed his 16-year-old self. He was still playing at his peak.“He felt like it was a job well done,” says Scannell, who hung out with him that night. “And who could deny that?”
		In This Article:
				Alex Lifeson,				Geddy Lee,				long reads,				Neil Peart,				Rush 
			Want more Rolling Stone? Sign up for our newsletter.

								From Bond to Black Widow, Broadway musicals to a Beatles docs — the films we're looking forward to seeing (fingers crossed) this year							Newsletter SignupHave a Tip?
			Welcome,		Follow UsAlerts & Newsletters
					© 2021 Penske Media Corporation				Central Florida doesn’t do glamour. I know because I was born and raised in Lakeland, Florida, the birthplace of Publix supermarkets and where Ernest Hemingway’s first wife, Hadley Richardson, died in a nursing home. Growing up, my sister Abby and I had a never-named game where we’d see a figure skater, Vanna White, anyone, wearing a pretty dress on television, and then we’d passionately bicker over who got to have the rhinestoned, beaded, or sequined costume. We knew what glamour looked like, and we wanted it. By the time I’d graduated high school, I knew glamour in real life. I’d seen it in person three times.My high school band competed in an annual competition up in Gatlinburg, Tennessee. Each year, when the music part of the trip was over, we’d go to Dolly Parton’s dinner theater show one night, and spend a day at her theme park, Dollywood. And inside Dollywood, inside Chasing Rainbows, a museum dedicated to telling Dolly’s life story, was my pilgrimage: a collection of Dolly’s rhinestoned, beaded, and sequined costumes, more beautiful and breathtaking than anything I’d ever bickered over in the never-named game of my childhood.Two years after high school, I moved to New York City and dug my heels into culture shock. Five years in, I got into a Dolly Parton-themed holiday party put on by a fancy New York PR firm. I glided through the night among the well-dressed and well-heeled. I sipped moonshine and peach iced tea with a party-themed name like it was mother’s milk. I danced to Kylie Minogue performing Dolly covers. And I held my head up high all night because I’d long already seen the installation in the front room, a sparkling display of Dolly’s costumes on loan from Dollywood.I won’t say Dolly Parton changed my life. I’ve only just read her 1994 memoir “Dolly: My Life and Other Unfinished Business,” loaned it to three people, gave it as a wedding present, and have the first and only edition in paperback and hardcover. I recently got the first Christmas album Dolly recorded with Kenny Rogers, “Once Upon A Christmas.” I’m pretty proud of that. I don’t own any Dolly T-shirts or anything like that (maybe I should), I just think she’s a gift to humanity — a living, breathing embodiment of dreams. Maybe you agree, maybe you don’t. Dolly would say, “It’s hard to be a diamond in a rhinestone world.” Maybe she’s not for you, even though she’s for everyone. But, hey, don’t take my word for it.In this excerpt from her 2020 book, “She Come By It Natural: Dolly Parton and the Women Who Lived Her Songs,” journalist Sarah Smarsh describes Parton’s brand of implicit feminism. By harnessing the value of economic agency and sexual power to overcome the poverty that defined her childhood — born the fourth of 12 children, “wearing dresses made of feed sacks” and “dyeing her lips with iodine from the family medicine cabinet for lack of lipstick” — Parton has shaped the person she is today.She reminds her audiences that, no matter where they came from, everyone can identify with being shamed one way or another, and no one deserves it. Never be ashamed of your home, your family, yourself, your religion, she says, and adoring crowds applaud. One need look no further than her immense LGBTQ following to know that Parton’s transformation from a slut-shamed, talented teenage bumpkin to entertainment superstar contains a universal struggle that has less to do with being Appalachian than with being human. If her presence and the appreciation it instills in people could be whittled to a phrase, it’s “be what you are.”The person and brand that is Dolly Parton did not just happen overnight. Emily Lordi provides an overview of Parton’s decades-long career, illustrating how it’s been furthered not by reinvention, but through the reintroduction of Parton and her music, all while Parton herself engages with the times. Lordi first interviewed Parton over the phone, then in person after providing a negative COVID-19 test.People want her gifts, her glow, her time; and Parton, who, as she says, “loves everybody and wants everybody to love me,” is often happy to oblige. She can’t sit still anyway — and early on in the pandemic, she decided to keep working, as long as her team could do so safely. Last May, she released “When Life Is Good Again,” a song of reassurance that justifies the journalist Melinda Newman’s claim, in Billboard, that, during the coronavirus crisis, Parton seems to have appointed herself America’s “comforter in chief”: “When everything is on the mend, / I’ll even drink with my old friends, / Sing and play my mandolin … And it’s gonna be good again.”The daughter of an industrious sharecropper father and a musically inclined mother, Parton is a savvy businesswoman whose earliest and latest decisions in the music industry are only the core of her empire. As Melinda Newman writes, “Her legendary body of music is just the start of what makes her Dolly. …”She sounds surprisingly giddy as she talks about the next chapter of her career as if it’s her first. “I’m touched and honored that I’m still around and that I’m able to still be important in the business,” she says. “I honestly feel like I’m just getting started. I know that sounds crazy but I really feel like I might have a big music career, record career. Who knows?”In an interview with Parton, Anna Moeslein and Parton review “Heartstrings,” a Netflix series in which each episode is based on a different Parton song. They also discuss emotions and Parton’s position on what people can do to bring “a little Dolly in their own lives,” as well as fashion and beauty.Well, I think it’s always important for us to be allowed to be who we are, all that we are, and appreciate that. And I know being a woman in this world…I’ve always been proud that I was born a woman, and I’ve joked that if I wasn’t, I would have been a drag queen. That’s my favorite line, but it’s probably true. I love being able to express myself, and I want to be seen and appreciated for who I am. So I’ve always appreciated and loved people for who they are. Because we don’t need to all be the same.Citing Jad Abumrad’s Radiolab podcast (“Dolly Parton’s America”), Parton’s Netflix series, shoutouts from Nicki Minaj and Drake, and even a history course at the University of Tennessee, Rachel Riederer discusses the latest Dolly Parton renaissance. And, given the political landscape of the U.S., Riederer wonders if there’s a place for Parton’s enduring position to sidestep politics — which Abumrad refers to as “Dollitics.”You cannot talk about sharecropping without talking about politics, and to say more would not be her style. She was not shy about her desire to sell books or to present her life as a fairy tale, and you sell a fairy tale by focusing on the romance and adventures of the rising princess, not the conditions that made her a scullery maid.When I mentioned Dolly’s “dinner theater show” above, I was intentionally vague. Despite my setup, I know Dolly is human. And humans are complicated. Dolly’s dinner show seems complicated, too, but really, it’s not. The show, known until 2018 as “Dolly Parton’s Dixie Stampede,” is performed before an arena split into the “North” versus the “South,” where the audience, feasting on a four-course dinner eaten without cutlery, cheers on white-washed narratives of colonization, then the Antebellum South, then a performance competition between the North and the South. As a high schooler attending the show, I sat and watched from the North side, not fully grasping how problematic the programming was. I suppose I could do what Parton did in the Billboard article above: plead “innocent ignorance.” As an adult, I know better.The last time I saw the show was in 2006. Aisha Harris reviewed the show in 2017, after watching it the same week as Unite the Right, a white supremacist rally, descended on Charlottesville, Virginia. At the rally, a neo-Nazi intentionally drove into a crowd of counter-protesters, killing an innocent woman, Heather Heyer, and injuring others. (The president notably remarked in the aftermath that there “were very fine people, on both sides.”) Harris recorded the experience of the dinner show from start to finish, without holding back.While the show makes zero mention of slavery, that’s not to say there were no references to the Civil War. The war was alluded to both in the overarching North-versus-South conceit and through details both subtle (the gray and blue color schemes on each side) and blatant: The racing piglets were named after Abraham Lincoln, Ulysses S. Grant, Robert E. Lee, and Scarlett O’Hara. Dolly says that the show is about bringing back “those good old times,” referring to her childhood, but of course she wasn’t around during the days of Grant and Lee.Harris wrote a follow-up to this piece after the show responded to her initial review, and again in April 2018, when the show dropped “Dixie” from its name.Jessica Wilkerson, who grew up in East Tennessee, where Dollywood is located, confronts the worldviews of her upbringing with those acquired as an adult after moving away from home for graduate school in New York. Weighing the socioeconomic implications of Dollywood’s hiring practices and confronting “Dolly Parton’s blinding, dazzling whiteness,” Wilkerson strikes a reluctant balance, compartmentalizing more than one version of Dolly Parton.But the aftermath of Dollywood left me low-spirited. I was nestled into a cozy room in the log house my dad built on top of a ridge, where we lived. From the peak of that ridge, I could stand and see the Smoky Mountains, where Dolly Parton grew up and where she built a simulacrum of her mountain childhood. Hers felt more real than mine. I was sad, but jealous, too. I lived in the real world of Appalachia. A world of layaway stores and packaged foods, bleary-eyed workers and stressed-out mothers. I longed for the simulation.Alison Fishburn is an American writer living in Paris, Ontario.
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
Filed under:Twenty-five years ago, Terry Gilliam and the other outsider creators of ‘12 Monkeys’ gave humanity a warning about our pandemic-filled future, whether they meant to or notThere is a scene toward the end of 12 Monkeys in which James Cole sits in a 24-hour movie theater watching Alfred Hitchcock’s Vertigo. Cole, played by Bruce Willis, is not entirely certain whether he is a prisoner who “volunteered” to time travel from a future when 99 percent of the world’s population has been killed in a pandemic and the survivors live underground because the surface air is deadly, or whether he is just a man with a serious dissociative disorder. Next to him, applying a fake mustache to his face, is Dr. Kathryn Railly (played by Madeleine Stowe), his once doubtful psychiatrist who has become his coconspirator in investigating a group run by Jeffrey Goines (played by Brad Pitt) called the Army of the 12 Monkeys and their role in unleashing the virus on the planet.Examining Kim Novak and James Stewart on screen, Cole is confused and agitated, his mind either scrambled by the effects of time travel or just in its natural state. He thinks he’s seen the movie before, maybe on TV when he was a kid, but something about it feels both familiar and unfamiliar. “It’s just like what’s happening with us,” he tells Railly. “Like the past, the movie never changes. It can’t change, but every time you see it, it seems different, because you’re different. You see different things.” Arriving in select theaters at the end of 1995 before getting a wide release 25 years ago this week, 12 Monkeys was an immediate commercial success. Directed by Terry Gilliam, it was the middle installment of the three movies the iconoclastic filmmaker made for major American studios during the ’90s. But audiences quickly began to see 12 Monkeys differently. In the midst of a wave of global natural disasters, film critic Elvis Mitchell wrote in a 2002 New York Times essay, “It’s as if the world has finally caught up to the lyric paranoid streaks in the imagination of the filmmaker Terry Gilliam.” In the ensuing decades, authoritarian-minded governments proliferated, environmental catastrophes continued, overpopulation went unabated, and the climate crisis neared the point of no return. More people started to feel like Cole, knowing witnesses to a civilization that seems destined to end during their lifetime. Writing for Vulture in 2018, Abraham Riesman called 12 Monkeys, “[O]ne of the most currently relevant pieces of science fiction ever committed to celluloid.”And then came the coronavirus pandemic. At the time of this article’s publication, it’s estimated that COVID-19 is directly responsible for more than 1.8 million deaths, and that number is expected to continue to rise across the globe in the coming months, even as vaccines become more widely available. When lockdowns and restrictions were put in place during the first quarter of 2020, viewers started returning to 12 Monkeys or checking it out for the first time. “It had a whole new life,” says Charles Roven, one of the film’s producers. “It holds up really well.”A TV adaptation of 12 Monkeys debuted at the start of 2015 and ran for four seasons on the Syfy network. Though the show is far different from the movie, it too has become a streaming favorite, even finding an audience for the first time in countries like India. “I certainly don’t love how topical our show has become,” says cocreator Terry Matalas, who estimates he saw Gilliam’s film in the theater three or four times when he was a student at Emerson College. The movie Outbreak came out several months before 12 Monkeys, and journalist Richard Preston’s 1994 book The Hot Zone about lethal filoviruses was a national bestseller. Still, for most of the world’s population, a massive pandemic had not been a pressing concern since the Spanish Flu killed 50 million people between 1918 and 1920. Now there is a rising feeling that the next one won’t come a century from now. It could arrive much sooner and could be far worse. “I think the very first spoken words that aren’t voice-over in our show are, ‘It’s never been about if. It’s always been when,’” Matalas says. “When you start to really dissect that data, it’s terrifying. Right now we’re on the precipice of a vaccine, but are we truly ready for the next [pandemic]? I don’t think so.”In 12 Monkeys, Railly has written a book called The Doomsday Syndrome and gives a lecture at a museum about madness and apocalyptic visions. She discusses the Cassandra complex, the idea taken from Greek legend about figures who know the future but whose warnings aren’t heeded, leading to what Railly describes as, “[T]he agony of foreknowledge combined with the impotence to do anything about it.” In the 25 years since its release, 12 Monkeys is increasingly seen as a Cassandra of its own kind.“We told you so,” Gilliam says.David and Janet Peoples live in the hills of Berkeley, California. Even though the married couple have been writing screenplays for the past four decades, they’ve spent their careers more than 360 miles from Los Angeles. Since shutdown orders arrived last March, they’ve left the house only to buy groceries, pick up takeout, or get their teeth cleaned. Still, things are going better for them than what they envisioned for the pandemic survivors in 12 Monkeys. “We’re lucky we’re not underground,” says David on a November morning.“Yeah, but we’re almost ready to go there,” Janet adds.The Peoples each got their first screenwriting credit on The Day After Trinity, a Peabody Award–winning and Oscar-nominated documentary about J. Robert Oppenheimer, the man often called “the father of the atomic bomb.” The only other project they wrote together that reached the screen was 12 Monkeys. They swear they aren’t obsessed with how our society will end. “We don’t think about the apocalypse much,” David says reassuringly.While it was their inventive script for 12 Monkeys that attracted both the on-screen and behind-the-camera talent to the film, the spark didn’t start with them. In the early 1990s, Roven produced mid-budget films like Cadillac Man and Final Analysis, which might be familiar to you if your parents sprang for subscription cable channels back then. Atlas Entertainment, the company he cocreated in 1995, didn’t start making DC Comics movies relevant again until 2005, when it released Christopher Nolan’s Batman Begins. That film was the first in a relationship between Roven, DC Comics, and Warner Bros. that has persisted for 10 projects, including Justice League, the recently released Wonder Woman 1984, and James Gunn’s forthcoming The Suicide Squad.In the early ’90s, Roven had a first-look deal with another producer named Robert Kosberg, who brought him the idea of doing a feature-length remake of the French New Wave short La Jetée. Roven had never seen La Jetée (this will be an ongoing theme) and at that point, relatively few people in America had, besides deep cineastes and film school students. La Jetée didn’t scream mass-market appeal. Directed by prolific, convention-breaking filmmaker Chris Marker and released in 1962, the 28-minute piece is told through French narration over high-contrast black-and-white still photography, except during one crucial, beautiful moment when the image actually moves. La Jetée follows the story of humans who have been driven below the surface of the planet by the nuclear fallout from World War III. The surviving scientists in Paris send a man who is haunted by a memory from his prewar childhood across the boundaries of time in hopes that it will help them figure out how to rebuild a postwar existence.After watching it, Roven thought La Jetée was great and brought it to the Peoples. (Kosberg is credited as an executive producer on 12 Monkeys. He did not respond to requests to comment for this article.) In the early 1980s, David Peoples made his name in Hollywood after Ridley Scott brought him on to revise the script for Blade Runner. After various writing and rewriting projects over the years, he received a Best Original Screenplay Oscar nomination for Unforgiven, Clint Eastwood’s 1992 Western self-examination, which was a largely unchanged spec script he wrote in 1976.Roven and the Peoples had prior history together. For years the producer had tried to develop David’s script for Soldier, eventually released as a Kurt Russell vehicle in 1998 with an entirely different set of filmmakers. Roven had also produced The Blood of Heroes, the only feature-length movie David directed.When Roven brought La Jetée to the Peoples, they too had never watched the film. “It was one of those very famous pictures that you think you should have seen, just like you should have read Proust, but we hadn’t,” David says.The Peoples also thought it was fantastic, but James Cameron’s Terminator 2: Judgment Day, another film about someone being sent back in time to save humanity after nuclear annihilation, had recently been in theaters and became a culture-defining work. “Terminator one and Terminator 2 are in our minds masterpieces,” David says. “There isn’t a way we want to look like we were copying those pictures.” But the couple spent a weekend thinking about it and became intrigued by centering the film on a story in which the protagonist, the people around him, and the audience are all increasingly unsure whether his claims are true or not. “We’re in Berkeley, so it would not be particularly unusual if somebody came up to you and told you that he was a prisoner who escaped from the future,” David says.They took the job and drew on more of their own experiences and what else from the culture was fermenting in their minds as they constructed the script, which was more “inspired by” La Jetée than a direct reworking of it. When David and Janet were younger, they both held jobs at the same state psychiatric hospital (though at different times), him as an orderly and her as a nurse. They found that the patients and the people who treated them could often have equally tenuous holds on reality. At the bio labs of nearby UC Berkeley, there were frequent demonstrations by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, which led them to make the Army of the 12 Monkeys a group of extremist animal rights advocates with a penchant for dramatic protests. One of the Peoples’s daughters had a summer job in Southern California working at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which was preparing to send out a probe to study Jupiter. They also heard about scientists who planned to venture up to the permafrost to find samples of the Spanish Flu, in order to sequence its genome and learn from it to combat new pandemics. These stories not only pushed the Peoples to shift the source of the world’s destruction from nuclear to viral, they solidified their vision of the scientists from the future as people intent on finding information and material to ensure humanity’s continued existence, not ones bent on changing the past.Time travel is the third rail of science fiction, opening up questions about which actions will alter the course of history, the possibility for multiple realities, and all kinds of paradoxes. The Peoples decided from the outset that in 12 Monkeys, the death of 5 billion humans was inevitable. As Cole tells a panel of psychiatrists in 1990, “This already happened. I can’t save you. Nobody can.” Instead, journeying into the past serves as a crucial form of research. The scientists from 2035 ultimately want a pure sample of the virus from 1996, before it started mutating, so they can synthesize a cure. “It was a completely different take on the time travel,” Roven says. “Most time travel movies talk about the fact that if you change the past, you can change the future because you’re fucking up the space-time continuum. Or they say that the past, present, and the future is all one time, and that there is no such thing as time. But the premise of this movie was, you can’t change the past, you can’t undo it, it is what it is.”The producers brought the Peoples down to Los Angeles to discuss the project with Marker. When they got there, they learned that the rights for La Jetée hadn’t been secured from the French filmmaker yet and hopefully they would be the ones to convince him. This was beyond their comfort zone. “We’re not salespeople,” says David. Though they did have a pleasant meeting with him at the Chateau Marmont, Marker made it clear he wasn’t interested in a Hollywood adaptation. Afterward the Peoples ran into their friend Tom Luddy, the cofounder of the Telluride Film Festival and a fellow Northern California resident who had ties to Francis Ford Coppola’s American Zoetrope production company. They told Luddy what happened and he let them know that Coppola was also in town, and that Marker loved the gregarious filmmaker, so he might be able to persuade him. Luddy arranged a big dinner with the principal players and some other friends (“Just writers, no producers, no suits,” says Janet) at a Chinese restaurant. At the start of the night, Coppola sat at one end of the table and spent 15 to 20 minutes conferring with the chef about what to order. “We started eating and there was a lot of wine and everyone was very happy,” Janet says. “Chris was very quiet, but seemed to be content. And then in the middle of it, Francis says, ‘Chris,’ and Chris says, ‘Yes, Francis.’ And Francis says, ‘David and Janet want to write this movie based on La Jetée. They’re good people. I think you should let them do it.’ And Chris said, ‘OK.’ So that’s how we got the rights to La Jetée.”Roven worked with the business affairs department at Universal, the studio where the film had been set up, to put together paperwork that was more thorough. Well, slightly more thorough. “He was a very secretive guy,” Roven says of Marker, who was rarely photographed and wouldn’t even reveal to journalists where he really grew up. “He required the contract for the option of the property to be on no more than two pages.” That way Marker could understand it all without the aid of lawyers.Months later, the Peoples were back in Los Angeles and ran into Terry Gilliam. They told him about their idea for 12 Monkeys and when they finished it, they sent him a copy of the script. He liked it, but he was already lined up to make an adaptation of A Tale of Two Cities starring Mel Gibson. Then Gibson dropped out to direct and star in Braveheart, and Gilliam was unable to get the level of financing he needed for his movie, even with Liam Neeson in the lead role.In the intervening time, the producers of 12 Monkeys hadn’t been able to find a suitable director and the script had undergone a minor rewrite from the Peoples to keep the project alive. With Gilliam now available, they sent him the new version and he asked why they had wrecked the original. “By the time they got to me, they had tried proper directors and nobody wanted to do it,” Gilliam says. “Nobody seemed to understand what it was, what it was about, what the focus was, and how you dealt with that. I loved the fact that it went so many different places, and it wrapped you into this kind of DNA double helix of the future.”The Peoples were confident their screenplay had found the right director. “We were very comfortable with Terry because he loves absurdity as much as we do,” David says. “He is also interested in ambiguity, and ambiguity is what we live on, in a way.”Gilliam had long burnished a distrust of the American film industry. Raised in Minneapolis, the filmmaker has spent almost his entire adulthood in England. As a founding member and writer for the Monty Python comedy troupe, he created their TV show’s animation sequences and codirected the film Monty Python and the Holy Grail. His 1981 movie Time Bandits, a charmingly bizarre adventure about a thieving group of little people and the child they befriend, was a surprise hit in the United States, bringing in more than $42 million at the U.S. box office on a $5 million budget. In its aftermath, 20th Century Fox offered Gilliam the directing job for the interspecies bromance Enemy Mine, but he instead made Brazil, a dark satire about a man’s reluctant fight against a bureaucratic, authoritarian government.Though it’s considered Gilliam’s masterpiece today (over the years Criterion has released the director’s cut on laserdisc, DVD, and Blu-Ray), the director had an infamously difficult time getting distributor Universal to release Brazil in the United States. It had done fairly well in Europe, but Sid Sheinberg, the president of Universal’s parent company, MCA Inc., hated the movie and demanded a drastic recut that eliminated its signature fantasy sequences and slapped on a happy ending that ran counter to the entire point of the film. A stalemate ensued. As the movie languished, Gilliam even resorted to taking out a full-page ad in Variety that called out Sheinberg by name, asking when he was going to put out the movie. Gilliam held clandestine screenings of it around Los Angeles, which led to the Los Angeles Film Critics Association awarding Brazil best film, best director, and best screenplay of 1985. Those wins forced Universal to acquiesce and finally release a slightly shorter version than the one that played in Europe.  But Gilliam’s follow-up, The Adventures of Baron Munchausen, went catastrophically over-budget, reportedly ballooning from $23.5 million to $46.63 million. Subsequently he couldn’t get an insurance company to give him a completion bond, a critical form of independent film financing. With his career adrift, Gilliam signed on to TriStar Pictures’s The Fisher King. As Gilliam writes in Gilliamesque, his 2015 memoir, “The painful truth was that the main reason Richard LaGravenese’s script had been sent to me in the first place was because they wanted Robin Williams to be in the film. Robin had been in Munchausen and was my buddy, and therefore I was the bait—that’s all, just a little worm stuck on the end of a hook.”The Fisher King was the first film Gilliam directed that he didn’t have a hand in writing. It turned out to be a much-needed critical and commercial success. “I guess it was my seduction into Hollywood,” he says now.For a major studio, Gilliam was now a viable choice as a director, but in this particular situation there was still leftover baggage. Universal, the same studio Gilliam went to war with nearly a decade earlier, was set to make 12 Monkeys. Reflecting on whether he had any hesitation in hiring the director, Casey Silver, the chairman and CEO of Universal at the time (and who wasn’t with the company during the Brazil debacle), diplomatically writes in an email, “I respected his talent and passion for the project. Of course I knew about Brazil, but after sitting down with Terry and having a straightforward conversation about having to execute the movie at the agreed upon budget, ultimately believed in his sincerity, his talent and his passion for the script, which I shared.” Then there were some more personal matters. Charles Roven’s wife was Dawn Steel, who became president of Columbia Pictures while Gilliam was finishing Munchausen for the studio. (Steel passed away from brain cancer in 1997.) Gilliam felt that Steel dumped the film, releasing it into few theaters, and hadn’t honored the agreements that the previous administration made with the director. “They became very estranged from each other as a result of the dynamics that occurred on that movie,” Roven says. “So it was with some uncomfortableness that I had to explain to Dawn that I was going to Terry. And then there was some uncomfortableness when I explained to Terry that I was coming to him, but I didn’t want him to be surprised by the fact that she was my wife. And instead of him being outraged, he just started to laugh with that Terry giggle. He just laughed and he said, ‘You know, it just goes to show, you can never burn a bridge in Hollywood.’”As 12 Monkeys entered pre-production, Gilliam hired Louis Pepe and Keith Fulton, a pair of graduate students at Temple University film’s program, to chronicle its making. “He always joked that he liked having witnesses,” Pepe says. “That was definitely a not thinly veiled reference to the fact that the last time he had made a film with Universal it hadn’t exactly gone well.” Pepe and Fulton eventually turned their behind-the-scenes experience into the full-length documentary The Hamster Factor. They would go on to make two more documentaries about Gilliam projects: 2002’s Lost in La Mancha, which followed the disastrous production of The Man Who Killed Don Quixote that got shut down after a week of filming, and 2019’s He Dreams of Giants, about Gilliam’s second attempt to complete a Quixote movie. Pepe believes that Gilliam’s creative process relies on courting a certain level of chaos. “Terry actually thrives a little bit on stirring up the pot of potential curses or problems, and the energy that he gets out of tackling those things and trying to best them,” he says.Though the 12 Monkeys script had plenty of unconventional elements, it was Gilliam’s most mainstream project yet. As the trailer would later show, it could be marketed, albeit inaccurately, as a fairly straightforward sci-fi thriller. “The potential conflict was that Terry was very aware that he was going Hollywood,” Pepe says. “Artistically he was trying to figure out: How do I make something that is still true to my vision and more on the arty side, but do that in the Hollywood system? And he was doing it with three major Hollywood stars.”Though he thought the script was brilliant, Silver at Universal saw 12 Monkeys as a financial risk since it was “hardly conventional studio fodder” and since he knew what had happened with Brazil, so he required that the producers find cofinancing from outside sources. To secure that money, the producers knew they had to cast big-name actors in the main roles, and they eventually landed Bruce Willis, Madeleine Stowe, and Brad Pitt (the three performers either declined to comment for this article or did not respond to requests to do so). Gilliam initially wanted to reunite with Jeff Bridges, who had starred in The Fisher King, as Cole, but he came around to casting Willis for the part. Though just years earlier the actor had been flying around the world for Planet Hollywood openings, when filming on 12 Monkeys began in 1994, Willis was in the middle of a career rehabilitation. While the third Die Hard movie was coming to theaters in the summer of ’95, he’d already taken smaller roles in more prestigious films like Pulp Fiction and Nobody’s Fool. Willis was looking for parts that went against how he’d been typecast. “One reason why he wanted to do [12 Monkeys] was to show that he was a real actor—a guy who was vulnerable, a man who’s lost, not the man in charge of the whole thing,” Gilliam says.The director said he decided to go with Willis because of the scene in the first Die Hard in which a physically and emotionally exhausted John McClane picks glass out of his feet in a fluorescent-lit bathroom. But before finalizing Willis’s casting, Gilliam made the actor agree to three conditions that went against what he’d become known for in movies: (1) No smirking; (2) no steely-eyed staring at the camera; (3) no entourage on set. Gilliam believes that it ended up being a career-best performance for Willis.For Railly, they cast Stowe, one of the most underrated actors of the ’90s. She had proved herself to be an adaptable presence, equally capable of standing out in a period action piece like Michael Mann’s The Last of the Mohicans as she was in the everyday intimacy of Robert Altman’s Short Cuts. “I have to really credit her for getting me through the movie because she was the one that was so constant and solid,” Gilliam says. “She’s the one I could always go in and talk to when I was getting confused about things or unhappy. She had a calming influence.”Pitt originally met with the makers of 12 Monkeys about playing Cole, but they were already leaning toward Willis, and besides, they thought he was too young for the part. Instead they asked him whether he’d be interested in being Jeffrey Goines, the son of a wealthy virologist, who Cole meets in a psychiatric hospital and who he starts to believe is responsible for humanity’s demise. Pitt revealed to Gilliam and the producers that Goines was the role he actually wanted to play, but his representatives told him to go for the lead. They cast him at a fortuitous moment. An obvious star on the rise, he already had filmed Interview With the Vampire and Legends of the Fall, but they weren’t in theaters yet. As Gilliam notes, the release of those films would transform Pitt “from a guy that I could walk down the streets of Philadelphia with to a guy that couldn’t move and had to be protected all the time.”Pitt went all in on the part, working with a coach to help him deliver his motormouth lines, visiting a psychiatric hospital for research, and choosing to wear a special contact lens to make it look like he had a wandering eye. (That last detail is particularly funny if you believe the theory that the pompous actor in Tom DiCillo’s Living in Oblivion is based on Pitt, since at one point he decides that his character should wear an eyepatch.) The first scene Pitt shot in 12 Monkeys was the one that introduces his character—a monologue tour of the psychiatric hospital for Cole with discourses on drug dosages and how the patients can’t spread “a plague of madness” if they’re not allowed to communicate with the outside world. “He just fired on about a dozen different cylinders to the point that at the end of the day, he could barely stand he was so exhausted,” Gilliam says. “It was such a wonderful, surprising, outrageous, comic, and manic performance.” Pitt would receive his first Oscar nomination as Best Supporting Actor for 12 Monkeys and won a Golden Globe because of his work in the movie. The Peoples’ original script went largely unchanged as it reached the screen, aside from some minor alterations, including cutting a scene in which Cole and Railly consummate their relationship in the 24-hour movie theater’s storage room. Though the screenplay was evocative, it gave Gilliam plenty of space for both his ludicrous visual humor and incredible sets. “It wasn’t very descriptive of the world, so that gave me a chance to invent my own version of what that world would look like,” Gilliam says. “That for me is always the fun part. It’s playing God is what it is. … They had made a world that made sense to me, they had thought out how the people within that world function. It was up to me to create the rest.”Gilliam too had never watched La Jetée and vowed not to until he was done with his own movie. (He eventually did when it was shown before 12 Monkeys at the film’s Paris premiere.) Still, he believed he had seen enough images from La Jetée in magazines over the years to get the gist. He worked with production designer Jeffrey Beecroft—a veteran of David Fincher commercials and music videos, and currently a frequent Michael Bay collaborator—to develop the film’s look. Beecroft introduced Gilliam to the nostalgic images of Czech photographer Josef Sudek and Brazilian photojournalist Sebastião Salgado, who documented industrial workers in developing countries.They also grabbed on to the idea that the underground society Cole comes from in 2035 had to rely on pre-virus materials to make their futuristic technology. That’s why in this world where “science is not an exact science,” the time traveling device sometimes sends volunteers back to the wrong year. Most of the scenes set in the future were shot inside decommissioned power plants and factories on the East Coast. For the psychiatric hospital in 1990, they used Eastern State Penitentiary, a Philadelphia prison built during the 19th century in the shape of a wagon wheel. “As much as Terry was a gun for hire on the project, he really understood it,” Beecroft says. “What he brought to it was this edge of madness and this kind of dystopian decay that was like, things were degrading in front of you. That’s what I was trying to find, a world that would equal what was going on in Cole’s mind.”Though 12 Monkeys was considered a mid-budget film, the scope of what Gilliam pulled off with the resources he had was impressive. The movie marked one of the first appearances of Jon Seda, who plays fellow time-traveling prisoner Jose and has since gone on to a long acting career that’s included roles in Homicide: Life on the Street, Treme, and Dick Wolf’s Chicago TV universe. One particular memory that still stands out for him is the short sequence in the film when both Jose and Cole are accidentally sent to France during a World War I chemical weapons attack. “That was the first time for me to be involved with a scene that was so massive,” Seda says. “The set, it really felt like we were in the trenches, and the special effects were amazing. The enormity of it and the bombs bursting around us. I remember I could hardly keep my eyes open because they had to keep stopping the takes to pluck rocks and sticks out of my eyes.”In the final film, Gilliam’s influence on the material is inescapable. As Roger Ebert wrote in his review, “There are relatively few shots in this movie that would look normal in any other film; everything is skewed to express the vision.”Gilliam has cultivated an image of himself as an outsider and provocateur, but during 12 Monkeys he was far from reckless. He just may be more honest than other directors about the base level of mayhem and precariousness that comes with making any film. “The mythology of Terry was very much that of the visionary filmmaker who goes up against the system, which is a pipe dream that any young filmmaker imagines for themselves,” Pepe says. “Part of the experience of watching Terry at work was realizing how practical he is as a filmmaker and how much he understood the mechanics of filmmaking and was really open to ideas that would save money and coming up with creative solutions to problems that other people would have only found difficult and expensive solutions to.”While the filming of 12 Monkeys went relatively problem free, when it entered post-production more issues emerged. Pepe and Fulton had been hired to capture just what happened on set, but they decided to keep shooting all the way until the film’s release. As the studio saw how 12 Monkeys was coming together, executives began to express their concerns. “There was starting to be some pressure about, ‘Is this too much of an art film? Do audiences not understand it?’” Fulton says.Part of the defining character of 12 Monkeys is its uncertainty, not just in solving the mystery of who started the pandemic and what the Army of the 12 Monkeys really is, but what is real and what is imagined. “It’s a bit like a mosaic, the question of how much of the image have we given away and how much does it imply the rest,” says Mick Audsley, who edited 12 Monkeys and would go on to edit two more of Gilliam’s features. “So if we’re building a portrait of a face, we’ve got the eyebrows, then we’ve got the nose in. What’s it going to take for [viewers] to fill in the whole face and recognize the complete image?”The studio held two National Research Group screenings in Washington, D.C., near the Georgetown campus, hoping that young, smart college students would get it. The filmmakers felt pleased with the showings, until the next day when the response card results came back. “The audience seemed to respond brilliantly to the film [in the theater],” Gilliam says. “It was only when they fill out the cards afterwards they become different people. They become professionals.” They said that they found the film confusing, that it took too long to engage them, and that the ending wasn’t clear. There are plenty of infamous tales of movies that got hacked apart and hastily reconstructed by the studio in a quest for higher audience test scores, but the makers of 12 Monkeys managed to evade that disaster. “We all felt passionately positive about this film,” Audsley says. “We weren’t going to change it. It couldn’t be changed hugely. It was what it was, and we embraced it.”Gilliam also had the stars of the film backing his version of the movie. That support proved essential. “I always plan for the big battle at the end,” Gilliam says. “As long as Brad, Madeleine, and Bruce were all together with me, they couldn’t touch us. That’s the way I approach almost every film: Who’s going to be in the foxhole with me at the end? And they all stuck together with me, and the studio just couldn’t do anything about it.”The filmmakers eventually agreed to some minor concessions. Roven says they added a pre-title epigram to help set the tone for the film, while Gilliam mentions changing the score during a scene between Cole and Railly in the middle of the film that sounded too romantic before audiences believed that element of their relationship existed.When 12 Monkeys initially came out, critical reception was mixed, but leaned positive. In The New York Times, Janet Maslin called it “the best of Mr. Gilliam’s evocative nightmares about modern life,” while Emanuel Levy of Variety wrote that “its look and tone are incoherent.” When it was released widely in U.S. theaters at the start of 1996, it reached no. 1 at the box office, where it stayed for two weeks. It made more than $57 million domestically and more than $168 million worldwide, which remain the highest figures of any of Gilliam’s films. During his first scene at the psychiatric hospital in 12 Monkeys, Pitt’s character Goines gets distracted by the television and starts talking about commercials. “We’re not productive anymore,” he spews to Cole. “No one needs to make things anymore. It’s all automated. What are we for then? We’re consumers, Jim. OK, OK, buy a lot of stuff, you’re a good citizen. But if you don’t buy a lot of stuff, what are you then, I ask you? What? You’re mentally ill.”Four years later, Pitt would deliver similar ideas, armored with six-pack abs and ostentatious sunglasses, as Tyler Durden in Fight Club. Though that film’s director, David Fincher, and the writer of the book it was based on, Chuck Palahniuk, saw Fight Club as a satire of modern masculinity, Durden’s views have become increasingly mainstream on both the left and right side of the political spectrum. He has been adopted as a prophet by some.Talking to Gilliam, it’s clear that the character in 12 Monkeys that he most relates to isn’t Cole, a man who knows what terror the future will bring but still has moments when he excitedly gulps in the air of a dying world. Instead, he finds a kinship in Goines. “What David and Jan had written, and what Brad was doing, was the way I saw things as well,” he says. “I’ve always liked the idea that possibly the person who sees the world most clearly is a madman. They’re free from the constraints the rest of us live within.”The last time viewers see Goines, he’s just kidnapped his father and is about to free all the animals from a Philadelphia zoological society. Blindfolded and lying in a bodybag, the elder Goines (played by Christopher Plummer) tells his son, “I never let myself believe it. Now I know it’s true. Jeffrey, you’re completely insane.” The camera lingers on a closeup of Pitt’s face, lost in a swarm of thoughts, for a full five seconds before he responds, “No, I’m not.”Gilliam does believe that the end of society may soon be upon us. The question for him is: What shape will the new one take? He’s troubled by how much hope and money is being put on colonizing planets like Mars rather than protecting the hospitable one we already inhabit. “My biggest concern is who is going to be managing the cull of humanity,” he says. “Because there’s too many of us. We consume everything, and I don’t see how we can keep taking everything we seem to think we need from the world, from nature, and the whole thing not fall apart.”It’s late November when Gilliam offers these opinions, a few days after he turned 80 years old. The Pfizer and Moderna vaccines haven’t been authorized for public use yet, but the news is imminent. Gilliam speaks wistfully of the early days when lockdown came to London, of how you could hear the birds and walk through uncrowded streets, calling it “like heaven on Earth.” Now the sound of traffic and airplanes have returned. The stores are open 24 hours a day for customers doing holiday shopping.  In his film, one of the twists is that in the end, Goines and the Army of the 12 Monkeys has nothing to do with the virus and its spread. They weren’t humanity’s killers, just a group of self-congratulatory pranksters with cans of red spray paint. Gilliam says he sees a connection between the flaws in Cole’s mission and the warp speed race to stop the coronavirus. “The search for the 12 Monkeys was fraudulent, they were going searching for the wrong thing,” he says. “We may be doing that again, the way we’re dealing with this pandemic. We’re going the wrong way, maybe. I don’t know.”In the months ahead there will be queues of people in London waiting for the vaccine. Gilliam jokes mischievously that he will be there, to make sure there is some discernment in who receives it, “I’ll be blocking the lines saying, ‘No, no, I’ve chosen you to not get the antidote.’”And then he giggles.Eric Ducker is a writer and editor in Los Angeles.An SB Nation affiliate siteYou don't have permission to access this resource.What makes good or bad design happen anywhere depends on who has the most power.Scott Berkun | How Design Makes the World | September 2020 | 1,696 words (6 minutes) Local BookstoresAmazonWe rarely think of it this way, but the leaders of organizations are designers too. Organizational designers. By choosing the strategy, the budget, the culture and who they hire, they have more impact on whether good work is possible than anyone. CEO Alfred Sloan, who made good design central to his strategy for cars at General Motors in the 1930s, would never have called himself a designer. But his choices redefined how we think of a good car, as well as what the words design and designer mean for the world. We’re often told it’s people with great ideas or passion that make good work happen, but there’s a hidden and formidable truth. What makes good or bad design happen anywhere depends on who has the most power.An organization could hire Maya Lin, Zaha Hadid or Bjarke Ingels, three legendary architects, but if their client ignored all of their suggestions, their skills would be rendered useless. When we see great works we often give the most acclaim to the designer, but as Michael Wilford wrote, “Behind every distinctive building is an equally distinctive client.” Designers and architects are often the center of attention when a work is finished, but along the way the client has the power to reject their ideas. Sometimes designers are hired as design theater, so the powerful can say “we have talented designers,” using their fame and reputation to help sell the project, even if that designer is mostly ignored.Often there’s more than one person in power, and it’s their capacity to collaborate that defines what’s possible. Take, for example, the town of Missoula, Montana. It’s a small city with one very unusual characteristic: it has a city grid plan, but the central grid is oriented 45 degrees from the rest of the town. This makes it much easier to get lost, defeating a primary advantage of grids. What was the urban planner thinking? The answer is that there wasn’t just one plan, there were two, each led by factions that couldn’t agree.Hand-drawn map of Missoula, Montana, by Tim Kordik.In the 1880s, two landowners, W.M. Bickford and W.J. Stephens, owned property near an old wagon road that ran diagonally through the area. They formulated their own plan to align with it, with all streets running in a grid parallel to the wagon road (which still exists today, shown with the dashed line below). They imagined an entire town called South Missoula, with this as the core.Hand-drawn map of Missoula, Montana, by Tim Kordik.The problem was that another landowner, Judge Knowles, owned land to the north. He didn’t like the plan that Bickford and Stephens proposed. He thought the angled roads were a mistake, since they ignored the original master section plan that much of the surrounding area was using. But he also didn’t like the idea of there being a new town called South Missoula. He was able to get the Missoula government to agree to annex his property, and installed a true rectilinear grid plan.Hand-drawn map of Missoula, Montana, by Tim Kordik.At the time most of the area was undeveloped, so the official plan didn’t mean that much until more roads were built and more people settled the area. There was still a chance for Bickford and Stephens to have their design become the dominant one. The pivotal factor was that an old bridge on the Clark Fork River, the Higgins Bridge, needed to be replaced. Depending on how it was positioned, it would support one grid plan over the other. Whichever road the bridge fed out to would become the primary thoroughfare.The Higgins Bridge was named after one of Missoula’s founders, C.P. Higgins, who just happened to be friends with Judge Knowles. They agreed to back the north-south alignment that Knowles had planned for, and worked together to influence citizens to take their side. Combined, they had far more influence than Bickford and Stephens, and when it came to a vote, the north-south alignment that Knowles wanted won. The citizens of Missoula would forever pay the price.Hand-drawn map of Missoula, Montana, by Tim Kordik.At each intersection where the two grids meet, the single street from the north-south grid has to divide into two streets, with different names. These five-legged junctions at odd angles make it unnecessarily complicated and dangerous to find your way. The worst intersection, nicknamed Malfunction Junction, had six legs, and until its recent redesign (which took eleven years to complete) it was one of the most dangerous and frustrating intersections in America.This kind of design-by-politics is common, in cities, nations and sometimes even in products themselves. People in power often prioritize their own interests, which means good design to them is that which helps them protect their power. The concerns of the people who will deal with the consequences, perhaps citizens, are secondary at best.Hand-drawn map of Malfunction Junction in Missoula, Montana, by Tim Kordik.Melvin Conway, a computer programmer, expresses this idea in a law that is named after him: “Organizations . . . are constrained to produce designs which are copies of the communication structures of these organizations.”¹ In other words, the limitations of an organization’s politics are expressed in the design of the things they produce. When one landowner, or executive, doesn’t get along with another, the battle lines between them show up in the product itself, to the detriment of everyone.This often surfaces in websites for large organizations, like government agencies or universities. Websites should focus on the most frequent things that people who visit need to do. Yet, leaders often assume that the view inside an organization is the best one to share with the world. But that’s like forcing someone who wants to watch a movie to think mostly about how it was made, the movie sets, the cameras, the lights and the producers, instead of experiencing the movie itself. Good movies work because of suspension of disbelief: they are crafted to make you forget about what went on behind the scenes, or that there were scenes, or sets, or lights, at all. Unlike the trap in chapter four, where the Segway project started with the technology first, this is a case of starting with the organization’s politics first. In both cases, it’s the people for whom, in theory, all of the work is being done who lose.Public Domain.On a global scale, there are similar stories. At the end of World War I, the Allies worked together to decide what to do with the remains of the Ottoman Empire, which covered much of what we call the Middle East today.The British and the French worked out a secret plan, called the Sykes–Picot Agreement, which divided up Turkish-held Syria, Iraq, Lebanon and Palestine into areas run by the British or French government. There were three problems. First, François Georges-Picot and Mark Sykes were two mid-level diplomats acting on behalf of their European nations, who had their own agendas for the best use of these lands. Second, neither had a great a great understanding of the history of the people who lived on the lands they were redesigning. Third, the Arabs had been promised independence in return for their cooperation during the war and this pact broke that promise.Nevertheless, they invented new nations and borders on top of hundreds of years of history and expected their new map, or nation design, to work.² Scott Anderson, author of Lawrence in Arabia: War, Deceit, Imperial Folly and the Making of the Modern Middle East, explains:If you look at the Middle East today, there’s essentially five artificial nations that were created by Sykes–Picot, the most prominent ones being Iraq and Syria—and Jordan being another one. But anyone looking at Iraq and Syria today sees that the artificial borders that were created have now completely disintegrated . . . The lines crossed tribal lines. They divided up clans and sub-clans.³After the act was ratified, riots and civil wars began. This shouldn’t have been a surprise, but it set in motion the Middle East we know today. In response to the unrest they had created, the British and French worked to take away the power that existing groups had. They gave it instead to weak leaders they could manipulate and who posed little threat of revolting. Britain and France did nothing to help soothe the ethnic, religious or linguistic divides they had intensified.After World War II, the US and the Soviet Union inherited the responsibility from the British and French, maintaining many of the same nation borders using many of the same methods. And according to Anderson, it wasn’t until the American invasion of Iraq in 2003, and the Arab Spring, that the lid on the mess that Sykes–Picot had created by design finally came off.Many wonder why the Middle East seems to always be in trouble. Or the borders between India and Pakistan, Israel and Palestine, or Nigeria and Cameroon. While there are many factors, one compelling lens is that people in power, often foreigners, chose the borders to be where they are. And powerful nations exert their influence on other countries for their own reasons, without understanding the history of why those efforts often fail.4Americans don’t have to travel far to see the power of mapmakers. Gerrymandering, where politicians in office change voting district maps to keep themselves in power, is common practice. More disturbing is the way the US government, after WWII, chose home ownership as the way to rebuild the economy and shore up the middle class for the sixteen million Americans returning from the war (including one million African Americans).5,6 The Federal Housing Administration defined who could get loans, and their manual stated that “incompatible racial groups should not be permitted to live in the same communities.”7 They made maps of which neighborhoods could get loans: green for yes, and red for no (thus the term redlining).Through these policies, poor and black neighborhoods were denied loans, as well as the right to move to neighborhoods where loans would be made available. Most Americans assume the free market decides the fate of neighborhoods, and is why some struggle and others thrive, but that’s often not true. Rey Ramsey, former chair of Habitat for Humanity, explains that despite the history, “people are lulled to sleep thinking that certain things happened by default, rather than by design.”8  This is an excerpt from How Design Makes the World, published in May 2020, lightly edited for Longreads.
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
Subscribe to our newsletters to stay up-to-date on the latest outdoor news.Help fund our award-winning journalism with a contribution today.Andrea Pitzer is the author of Icebound: Shipwrecked at the Edge of the World, which will be published by Scribner in early 2021.For a book project about 16th-century polar explorer William Barents, Andrea Pitzer needed to reach the remote Arctic island where he and his men came to grief. She booked passage on an expeditionary boat out of Murmansk, then headed north on a trip marked by unforgettable scenery, unexpected loss, and wild magic that changed her life.I’m heading to the Arctic thinking about death.Lying facedown in the top bunk of an overnight train inching from Saint Petersburg toward the Russian port city of Murmansk, I have a berth waiting for me on an August expedition sailing north.I’m working on a book about Arctic explorers, and that means swimming in a sea of sorrow. In my train compartment, dead adventurers haunt me: Faithful sled dogs eaten by humans or swallowed by chasms in the ice. Sailors devoured by polar bears or their own shipmates. Even when no animals or people are stalking them, polar explorers have a tendency to starve or freeze or succumb to disease.I’ve come to Russia at age 51 to re-create parts of William Barents’s third voyage to the Arctic from 400 years ago. Crossing and recrossing the sea northeast of Scandinavia, Barents, a Dutch navigator, went looking for a passage to China, but he and 16 men were trapped by sea ice during the summer of 1596. For nearly a year, they were stranded hundreds of miles above the mainland on Novaya Zemlya, a pair of large islands extending all the way to 77 degrees north. Five sailors died, including Barents himself, who perished at sea after they abandoned their ship and he and the remaining crew tried to get home on small boats. His quest to find the lucrative route to China was a brave but dismal failure.Once we leave Murmansk, our boat will sail the same formidable waters. Setting out with a Russian crew aboard a yacht called Alter Ego, I’ll follow in Barents’s wake over the sea that now bears his name. But Barents isn’t the only thing on my mind. Other grim news is preoccupying me as much or more. Arctic sea ice is collapsing, with few signs of reversal. I’ve been to the far north twice to report on climate change, and in the meantime it’s only gotten worse.My family seems equally vulnerable. The night before I left home, my cousin Joe messaged me about the trip. As kind a man as I’ve met, and a traumatized veteran of both Iraq and Afghanistan, he had checked himself in for alcohol rehab earlier that summer at the age of 47. By the time I was packing my bags, he’d been sober for more than a month. On the last day of July, I sent my love and told him to hold down the fort while I was gone. But I’m wondering if the fort will be standing when I return. Weeks before, my father and stepfather were diagnosed with cancer; my mother is now deep in the throes of paranoid dementia. My two teenage children are fine, but I feel bad about leaving my husband parenting solo for so long while he’s working full-time. Meanwhile, the contract I signed before all this happened says my book is due by Christmas. I feel both grateful and ashamed to have a chance to go off the grid to focus on research. I’m running from looming family mortality into the arms of historic—and historical—tragedy. Part of me thinks I shouldn’t go. But I know it might be the journey of a lifetime.Andrea Pitzer is the author of Icebound: Shipwrecked at the Edge of the World, which will be published by Scribner in early 2021.My traveling companion on the train, Tatiana Ponomareva, spent nearly two decades as director of the Nabokov Museum in Saint Petersburg, until political machinations pushed her out. She helped me in 2011 with my first book, a biography of Vladimir Nabokov, and I invited her along this time as my interpreter. The year before, Tatiana connected me with Vicaar, the Russian polar-expedition agency that matched me with this boat and crew. I’m using my book advance to cover passage for Tatiana and me. We’ll set sail with ten people aboard. Rolling into Murmansk, we’re met by a tall Russian whose dark mustache and beard are kissed with gray. He’s our expedition leader, Evgeny Fershter. Smoking cigarettes with the furious commitment of a French Resistance leader, he walks us out of the train station. We cross a footbridge over the tracks and make our way to the harbor. A single long dock stretches before us. On its left squats a black behemoth of an icebreaker, with blocky white Russian letters on the side spelling “Lenin.”Directly opposite the nuclear-powered ship, which is now a stationary museum, a lone vessel is moored to the dock: the Alter Ego. Painted white and autumn red, it seems small from a distance, but I looked up its specs before the trip. At just under 60 feet, it’s almost exactly the same length as the ship that carried Barents and his men to Novaya Zemlya. To the right, past a flock of cranes hoisting cargo, the city stretches up into hills. On the summit of the closest slope stands an enormous statue of a soldier. This is Alyosha, a symbol of Russia’s Arctic forces, which suffered brutal losses holding this corner of the world against German onslaughts during World War II.We cross a wooden plank and board. Mikhail Tekuchev, the ship’s captain, is clean-shaven and almost as tall as Evgeny. Greeting us with a smile, he warns us to fill up on food tonight, because we probably won’t feel like eating for a while once we head out. We unpack our bags, finding the odd cabinets and crevices that are essential to life at sea. Our cabin mate, Olga Chumachenko, is the designated ship’s cook, but her real trade is photojournalism. She has already traveled to the North Pole and Antarctica. Next we meet Andrey Ianushkevich, who makes a vivid impression with a full beard and a right-arm tattoo of Saint George killing the dragon. Formerly a boxer and a businessman, he’s also a licensed captain and will serve as first mate.The last crew member, Alexander Bogdanov, nicknamed Sasha, has a salt-and-pepper crew cut and knows some English. In his striped shirt, he looks like the archetype of a Russian sailor. In fact, he’s the newest member of the crew, and spent decades as a professional paraglider before setting foot on the Alter Ego. Feeling tense and overfed from lack of ­exercise, I go on deck to do push-ups and sit-ups. This might mark me as strange to my new companions, but it’s probably too late to kick me off the boat. Before long, I learn that others already have their own shipboard workout routines.That evening, we leave the harbor without fanfare, abandoning Kola Bay and heading east along the coast. I meet two other passengers, marine biologists Marthe Larsen Haarr and Michael Pantalos, who work for the marine consulting group SALT and are joining the expedition with support from a Norwegian-Russian partnership. They’ll be mapping the amount of trash in the Barents and Kara Seas north of mainland Russia.The last passenger, Alexey Neumoin, is a tourist. A Russian mystic as intense as any character in Dostoevsky, Alexey comes with some 21st-century updates: he’s also a web designer and martial artist. He intends to meditate along the entire route of our expedition and sees himself, quite seriously, as having a personal mission in the far north.Before we can land anywhere up there, though, we have to cross the Barents Sea, traveling hundreds of miles to reach Cape Desire, a spot on the northeastern corner of Novaya Zemlya in the protected Russian Arctic National Park. There we’ll pick up the last member of our party—a ranger, whose presence is required on any expedition visiting the preserve.I volunteer to help with the sailing whenever possible, and since I can’t speak Russian, I ask Tatiana to tell the crew that I hauled lines on sails during a prior Arctic expedition. I don’t have much experience, I say, but I’m strong. “If you’re so strong, why don’t you pull up the anchor?” Sasha replies. He’s a smartass, but he’s already impossible to dislike.That night, as we sail along the shoreline, I step out from our skylit cabin into the dark coffin of the hallway just as the ship rolls in the trough of a wave. I brace myself against the wall. Nausea drives my lurching stomach up into my skull.I will my internal organs into obedience and go up to the deck. First mate Andrey is at the wheel, and he tosses me a piece of an ­orange. He speaks little English, but there’s no need to talk. I notice that the compartments on deck are filled with bananas, apples, oranges, leafy greens, and carrots. Whatever else might go wrong, we won’t die of scurvy.Mist and clouds linger above the long plateau of an offshore island that we pass, its rocky surface glowing mossy green in the predawn light. As waves break along the sides of the boat, I feel a rush of delight. That afternoon, Captain Misha hands me coveralls to wear. We go on deck, where he leans in close to the long boom that nestles perpendicular to the mast. Inside one end is a set of levers. “Look,” he says, pointing to his eyes and then to the levers. After he adjusts something, he holds up three fingers and has me find the third metal ring in the sail, which sits accordioned atop the boom. After leveraging the ring, called a cringle, onto a nearby hook, I haul the sail into position. I’m not prepared to captain the boat just yet, obviously, but if the entire crew becomes incapacitated, I think I have a fighting chance to reef and hoist the mainsail, on which I could scrawl an SOS.As we prepare for the open sea, all passengers get basic safety training. If we smell smoke at any time, we should alert the crew immediately. We must always wear a life jacket on deck. We practice putting on our flotation suits and learn what to do if we encounter a polar bear. At the end, Evgeny tells a joke about a new expedition member who’s advised that, if he comes face-to-face with a hungry bear, he should smear shit on the animal’s nose. “Where does the shit come from?” the trainee asks. “Don’t worry,” the instructor replies, “there will be plenty.”Sailing in the season of the midnight sun, we see daylight around the clock for most of the trip. The temperature usually hovers just above or below freezing.Our last hour close to shore, the waves are a vivid teal, the color of some alien gemstone. Sasha appears on deck, cradling a Russian button accordion, and starts playing Eugen Doga’s haunting waltz “My Sweet and Tender Beast.” We sail between two long spits of rock toward the horizon, a thin, blurry line that becomes more indistinct in the days that follow. Below us, the water darkens to slate blue. Above, the clouds sit like some pale country, as if the sea is a shadow of the sky.We leave land behind on the morning of August 8, two days into the trip. When we hit the open sea the going gets rough, and nobody shows up for breakfast the first morning, not even Olga the cook. I spend the next three days thoroughly nauseous, with my body rejecting food and sleep. I’m able to keep tiny meals down only by constantly reminding myself not to throw up. Taking the edge off my misery, Captain Misha invites me on deck to learn how to steer. The wheel is almost as tall as me; it looks like an oversize steering wheel on a toy dashboard. Pointing and demonstrating, Misha tries to show me how to use a gauge to maintain our current bearing. It quickly becomes apparent that steering a boat is just like driving a car—that is, if wind regularly blows you off the road, and the road moves up and down like a roller coaster. I have a tendency to oversteer, waiting too long to correct the course, which leads to sweeping turns that necessitate corrections of their own, slowing our progress.With more gestures and a handful of English words, Misha explains that the gauge and digital map of our course are lagging indicators. He shows me how to watch the “little magicians”—short plastic strips fastened to the sail and a cable securing the mast. Like tiny windsocks, they provide instant feedback on whether the boat is really catching the breeze.While we’re at it, I learn that we have other vessels on board. One is a bright red boat called Mikhalych, attached to the back of the Alter Ego and lowered into the water by a motorized winch. (It will ferry us to shore on Novaya Zemlya, if we live long enough to get there.) The second is an inflatable raft, Pchyolka—“bee” in Russian—which is folded neatly and strapped to the deck before the mast. The captain’s drone, nicknamed Zhuzha—“buzzbuzz”—makes regular circuits to survey the sea and sky when Misha isn’t at the wheel.During this sloshy ride I keep trying to take notes, but my aggrieved stomach makes writing an ordeal. Others have it worse. Apart from Michael, no one even sees Marthe for several days—and it’s not easy to vanish completely on a boat this size. I watch with wonder as Andrey, when he’s not on duty, manages to sit quietly with his e-reader, devouring a historical novel set in the time of Peter the Great. Among the passengers, ­Tatiana alone floats unperturbed through the unsettling waves.I take to using bungee cords on the bedframe to strap my legs in at night, so I won’t roll onto her if I ever manage to fall asleep again. But sleep doesn’t come, and in my darkest hour on the longest night, I hear the rustle of cellophane. I look over the side of my bunk to see Tatiana calmly eating crackers and scrolling through pictures on her phone. Hours later I sit at the dining table, feeling despondent. Expedition leader Evgeny sprawls in the seat across from me. It’s day four, and I realize I can’t remember ever seeing him eat. Like some 1970s supermodel, he appears to subsist entirely on cigarettes. I ask him if he feels sick. He doesn’t answer but says that if I’m feeling bad, the best medicine is to take the wheel. I go on deck, where we’re still surrounded by endless water. The sun has come through the clouds, turning stretches of the sea’s surface a milky white.We sail all day and night for almost a week. Crew members take the helm in four-hour split shifts: two hours steering and two as backup. Tuesday morning we spot land. As we approach shore, the collective nausea begins to subside. Sasha makes blini for breakfast and lets me practice doing a stovetop flip.Working our way around the same coastline that Barents mapped, we come to Cape Desire. Lowering Mikhalych off the back, the crew gets ready to take us ashore. Once we hit the beach, Tatiana and I, along with a ranger from the station, walk up the bluff and climb exposed lighthouse stairs to look at the sea. Birds wheel and scream, creating a wild melody of their own invention. Due north, nothing is visible but the Arctic Ocean.The next morning, leaving Cape Desire behind, we cross into the frigid Kara Sea, east of Novaya Zemlya. As if recognizing that we’ve abandoned normal space-time, the GPS glitches and for a while shows the boat sitting off the coast of West Africa.The ranger who’s joined us for this leg of the voyage turns out to be another Sasha, blond and quieter than the one we already have. The day after Sasha II’s arrival, we aim the boat toward a legendary place called Ice Harbor—home to the ruins of William Barents’s cabin, which he and his men named the Behouden Huys, or Safe House. It was built using driftwood and lumber from their icebound ship.Barents wasn’t the first European to reach the high Arctic, but he sailed his ships farther north of Europe and Asia than any prior explorer on record. A journal narrating his discoveries—and his months spent stranded—was printed in five languages almost immediately after his death, becoming an international bestseller. Commercial European whaling soon exploded along the Barents Sea and points west, over time nearly driving the North Atlantic right whale to extinction. Europeans never left the region. A similar push for trade routes and imports expanded worldwide and brought industrialization, which in modern times eventually delivered climate change. As we sail toward Ice Harbor, I brace myself to witness the bleak late stages of a process abetted by the characters in my book.For nearly a year, William Barents and his men were stranded on Novaya Zemlya, a pair of large islands extending all the way to 77 degrees north. Five sailors died, including Barents himself.For nearly a year, William Barents and his men were stranded on Novaya Zemlya, a pair of large islands extending all the way to 77 degrees north. Five sailors died, including Barents himself.In the last hours before we arrive at Barents’s cabin, Andrey helps me modify a weak clasp on the GoPro I’ll use when we land. He will later fix the broken hinge on my glasses, the controller on a winch, and whatever is making a mysterious thumping sound near the engine. In his spare time, he sits grinding the rust off an old drawing compass with a dremel, cauterizing frayed ends of ropes, or regluing leather on a shipboard game, like some benevolent god whose gift it is to make the world whole again. At Ice Harbor, we land in mist and fog. Evgeny, Misha, and I disembark with the ranger, then head up the slope and start hiking toward the ruins of the cabin. They don’t appear immediately, so I pull out a book that has a map of the site. One more march over a low rise and a cross marker comes into view. The relics sit not far from the edge of a low plateau bordered on three sides by a rock-strewn beach. It’s ­terrible to imagine how lethal the conditions would have been in this part of the world during winter, exposed to the wind in every direction and the sea on three sides.Now, 423 years later, we see the long timbers that formed the base of the shelter where Barents and his men spent months praying not to die. Blizzard after blizzard came, until more than an inch of ice built up in the cabin’s interior.Pacing out its dimensions—roughly 36 feet long by 22 feet wide—I walk through the space where the crew huddled in fear as a polar bear rampaged on their roof, trying to claw its way in. I stand on the site of the fireplace that couldn’t keep them warm, at one point nearly killing them with toxic fumes from ship’s coal they burned. I wander along the beach where the men dragged makeshift sleds over ice and snow for miles, scavenging firewood. Evgeny comes over and pulls a flask out of his pocket. I swallow a mouthful—whisky—and hand it back. I can hardly believe we’ve arrived at the end of the world.Wonders keep coming, day by day. A bird lands on Sasha’s head while he’s at the wheel. We spot a polar bear running on the beach. The Arctic makes itself known to us, though not always on our terms.The trash-studying biologists have the most worthwhile mission of anyone on the boat: by scanning the ocean and exploring shorelines on foot, they’re using equipment to map where washed-up litter is and isn’t found in the Arctic. But ultimately, the sea and sky decide what they will allow. Plans for exploratory landings can blow up at the last minute. A bear sighting or fog can kill any chance to gather data from a particular spot. It becomes apparent that my ghost-chasing forays, Alexey’s meditation, and the natural challenges thrown up by the sea will make it harder for the scientists to get their work done. On August 16, we head toward the Orange Islands—the Oranskys, in Russian—with a plan to visit the two main land masses, Big Oransky and Little Oransky, which together total about one square mile. Evgeny has heard of a memorial placed on Little Oransky more than a century ago, commemorating its discovery by Barents. Watching for bears, we go ashore amid thrashing waves and fan out to find it. Soon a memorial slab comes into view on the rocky ground, cracked but legible.As we quickly discover, Little Oransky is also a wonderland of birds. Gulls and their aggressive cousins, skuas, shriek and cry their own improvisations—birdsong that Andrey will later call “merry and badass jazz.” They wing back and forth along populated cliffs like morning commuters in some vertical city. Elegant murres with dark eyes and black feet nest in the rock face near the top of the island. They turn their sleek heads to look at us but don’t fly away. Puffins sit in vague wonder, their black and orange beaks just inches out of reach. They don’t seem to know that it’s wise to be wary of humans.When the time comes to go back to the boat, Alexey is nowhere to be found. I run along the rocks above the water calling his name. After a while, he appears on one corner of the cliff, as if stepping in from another universe. He had been off meditating again.The next day, the biologists land with their gear and get some surveying done before we head toward Big Oransky, a split stone slab rising out of the sea. Suddenly, we see walruses on shore and walruses approaching. They’re all around us. They’re huge.We had dropped the anchor, attaching a bobbing, bright yellow buoy to mark its position. The walruses take up the buoy and start playing with it.The crew has seen an anchor buoy stolen by playful walruses before, so it has made them harder to pilfer. But Andrey is worried that a walrus might get caught in the line. The buoy is exiled from the water and brought back to the ship. The walruses stare with what is surely disappointment. But we aren’t done here yet. Sasha appears on deck with his accordion and begins the same Doga waltz he played before. Dozens of walruses swim to where he perches near the gunwale, on the port side of the boat. They listen, watching him. Occasionally, a small mosh pit forms, then dissolves. Mostly his audience floats before him, snorting and hawing with rapt intensity while we look back.Eventually, we move on to run Sasha II back to Cape Desire. As we leave the Oranskys behind, the original Sasha calls belowdecks. He’s spotted a bizarre sight: buildings or smoke or something on the bigger island. Baffled, we watch through camera lenses and binoculars, trying to understand the terrain shifting before our eyes. Someone asks if it could be an optical illusion, which reminds me that a polar mirage had amazed Barents and his men, too.When we get to Cape Desire, I jump out of Mikhalych, as I’ve done before, to drag it to shore. But today I leap too early and end up waist-deep in freezing water. I haul the boat in all the same, but there’s no way to ignore my gaffe. I slip off my boots to pour out water, standing barefoot outside the station in the Arctic air, stripped to short pants and wringing out my clothes in shame.We leave the next day and keep following the beleaguered Barents route back along the coast of northern Novaya Zemlya. Meanwhile, it’s become a pleasure to eat again, and I do so continuously—fried cottage cheese patties, lard, dark bread, borscht, sour cream, and dried fish. Kasha—hot porridge—is a breakfast staple most mornings. Olga cooks a fish and tomato dish. Sasha flips more blini and leads the crew in singing Russian songs after dinner. He offers to teach me a sea shanty, but we’re hard-pressed to find one that isn’t about the problems caused by bringing women on a boat.With visits to the Barents sites wrapped up, we leave the national park and go ashore near the Chaev glacier on the western coast of Novaya Zemlya. Nearly everyone heads out on a morning hike to see a series of tiny, exquisite waterfalls that reveal themselves from above, one after another, as we scramble along the rocks. Afterward some of us stay on shore to climb a low mountain, unnamed on our maps, that sits between the waterfalls and the glacier. Surveying the coastline as we sail, Sasha has noted that the glaciers we see have retreated far from the leading edges shown on his map. I recall that in 2017, researchers found a new island near Chaev, made visible by the disappearing ice.We raise toasts that evening and play a word game, going to bed around 2 A.M. Sasha and I wake up in the middle of the night. We ride Mikhalych back to shore, this time with Andrey along, and then climb the same mountain we’d climbed earlier. I step out from our cabin into the dark coffin of the hallway just as the ship rolls in the trough of a wave. I brace myself against the wall. Nausea drives my lurching stomach up into my skull.I step out from our cabin into the dark coffin of the hallway just as the ship rolls in the trough of a wave. I brace myself against the wall. Nausea drives my lurching stomach up into my skull.In the quiet morning hours, the birds still silent, Sasha moves up the steep, smooth dome of the slope like a mountain goat, while Andrey chooses more ragged rocks that let him climb vertically for a stretch. I also head for the rocks, falling behind in my thick muck boots but catching up in the second half when the footing becomes simple again. Prior to this book project, I spent seven years researching and writing a history of concentration camps. The work was a litany of grief. During that time, the suffering of the living and the dead never left my mind, and I think about it now. My cousin Joe and I grew close in those same years, with our shared love of music and grim jokes, and a lack of faith that things will turn out well in the end. I worried about him the whole time.For a moment, all that falls away. We stay awhile at the top of the cliff, looking out at the boat, the speckless sky, and the sea. I am filled with a happiness vast enough to break me.On August 20, we wind up at the old polar station of Russian Harbor, our last stop before we set out to cross the Barents Sea again. Evgeny warns us that polar bears are common; we have to keep a wide berth when we go around the corners of abandoned buildings. He hands me a small firecracker pistol to startle any animals I meet. Fresh tracks appear everywhere, but we see no more bears.Andrey, who dislikes compliments about himself but is quick to praise others, has already told me that Evgeny has gone on expeditions that in recent years made crucial Arctic discoveries. The next afternoon, while we’re still sitting at anchor, I prod Evgeny into telling me stories about Novaya Zemlya and Franz Josef Land—tales of 19th- and 20th-century explorers saved or damned by their own choices or fate. We take leave of Novaya Zemlya late in the day, most of us standing on deck to watch the shabby ruins of the polar station grow tiny with distance before the island ­itself vanishes.I wake up that night to the smell of smoke. After lifting my head to scan the cabin in the dim light, I see that Olga is awake, too. Tatiana rolls over and, joking or still half-asleep, says, “Someone has burned the kasha.”Olga hits the hallway and is intercepted by a crew member and sent back. I’m dying to know what’s going on, and after waiting a few agonizing minutes, I sneak out to the dining table in my long underwear. All four of the crew are sitting in grim silence; when they start talking it’s in Russian, and I can’t understand. After 15 minutes, Sasha turns to me. “You probably have questions,” he says.Basically, the workhorse engine that powers our boat—designed in the last years of the Soviet Union—is running too hot. Over the next two days, I watch Andrey and Sasha try to fix it. Seals have deteriorated. Coolant has gotten into the crankcase, spoiling the oil’s viscosity and making the engine useless. We’ll have to travel from Russian Harbor on Novaya Zemlya back to Kola Bay—a journey that took us five days on our way out—using sails alone, just as Barents and his men did more than 400 years ago. We have enough food and cookies for an army, so we won’t starve, but there will be a lot of time to kill. Misha gives me a book on sailing, and I practice tying basic knots. Those of us who are able to take shifts at the wheel do so, to spell the crew. We get one fast day of sailing, but soon the wind subsides and we sit, becalmed.That afternoon, Michael, the marine biologist, looks out and notices a bird beside us in the water. It’s a gray and white northern fulmar, paddling with its feet. The bird, he points out, is moving faster than the boat.With the trip unexpectedly extended, I’m in heaven. There’s no engine working at cross-purposes with the waves to make me queasy. No storms threaten. Because of the quiet, dolphins begin to appear in numbers, a dozen or more at a time. I whistle to them. Though they aren’t as responsive to our faces as the walruses were, they swim in sync with the boat and play for long stretches, the choreography of their splashing becoming the snare drum to the crashing cymbals of the sea.The delay is bad for almost everyone else. The crew will likely arrive late for the start of their next trip, which means they’ll have to cancel it and lose income. Marthe will miss her daughter’s birthday. Olga will be gone past the window of vacation she has arranged at work. The crew, which has already tried to manage our conflicting agendas for more than two weeks, must stay on duty much longer than planned. Somehow, everyone is becoming dearer to me. But I have the vague sense that, thanks to all my push-ups and sit-ups, off-key singing, restless enthusiasm, and the long hair I shed like a dog, I’ve gone from amusing to oppressive. I worry about imposing, but I’m still freakishly happy about the whole experience. I spend more time alone on deck, perched out on the prow of the boat, where I watch for whales that never come and I sing to the sea.Destiny arrives in the form of a tugboat. The vessel was assigned days before, and it looks as if we’ll get close enough to port for the tug to start hauling us on Friday.It’s August 30, late enough in the season, and far enough south, that night has begun to move in again. But in the last hours of daylight on our last evening at sea, I hear Misha call my name and say “del-feen” in a musical voice from on deck. I climb up to look. I know this will be it—the final gift the sea will offer.Dolphins soon surround us, arcing in groups of four or five to jump along either side of the boat, then splitting to chase one another ahead or dive under our keel. Several people are on deck now. I whistle and step from port to starboard and back as the creatures retreat. They disappear only to leap up before us once again. They have come to ­escort us home.A half-hour later they leave. Soon after that, tugboat lights appear in the distance. Once the tug is hauling cleanly, most of us go below. Alexey brings out a plastic liter bottle of moonshine donated by a local just before we set out to cross the Barents Sea. I figure that if the liquor hasn’t eaten through the plastic in three weeks, it’s probably safe to drink. They pull out a variety of shot glasses—ryumki—and we make toasts.I set my alarm for 5 A.M., by which time we should be approaching Murmansk. As we draw near the Lenin again, I join in the work of moving our fenders from port to starboard. Andrey and Misha moor the Alter Ego, and I go back to bed. We’ll have one last day together on the boat.A few hours later, I wake up to the first cell service I’ve had since we left. Scrolling through a month of messages with a mix of regret and nervousness, I feel pleased. There seems to be little I missed that matters.Then I see a note with “Joe” in the subject line. Dread hits me like a wave, but I open it. My cousin has died—exactly how isn’t clear, but my mind goes to the darkest place. I’ve already missed the memorial service.Standing up from the table, I go to the ladder and climb blindly up on deck. I can’t sit in my perch at the prow, which faces the harbor and anyone who might approach the boat. I go to the stern and hunker down near the trash and cry. The whole trip, which had filled me with such happiness just a few hours before, turns to ashes. Joe is gone, with his PTSD, his alcoholism, his terrible jokes, and his love for so many people. He’s already been gone for more than a week, while I was out in the Arctic, heedless of his disintegration.I’m suddenly sure the crew is sick of me, and that they regret our whole voyage. Why did I need to see where Barents and his men had suffered? I’ve wasted everyone’s time. All my delight in these people and this place dissolves. I know I’m oversteering emotionally, just as I did with the boat, but I have no defense against this news.After a visit from Tatiana, who wants to know what happened, I pull myself together and go downstairs. Sasha offers to make me fried eggs, but I can’t think about eating. If I lie in my bunk, I’ll inflict myself on Olga and Tatiana while they pack. I stay put while we work out new airline reservations. It takes hours and gives me something to focus on. As we finish, Sasha again offers to make fried eggs. Throughout the voyage, he has continually tried to find the one thing that might make each person happy in the moment. I still don’t feel like eating, but I say yes to his kind offer. He comes back shortly with an exquisite open-faced omelet that the phrase “fried eggs” can’t begin to represent. Soon, however, I feel myself running back to despair. Tatiana needs to mail a package to Saint Petersburg. I realize I have to do an interview the next day in Moscow. I have no shoes with me but my muck boots. I’ve bragged about how much I loathe shopping, and in truth I would rather clean the deck with a toothbrush. But shopping will get me off the boat and give others some peace. If I don’t go buy boots, I might end up in a bar. I head for the mall.Later, Tatiana and I return with a pair of ankle boots so femme that the idea of me wearing them makes the crew laugh. Olga has already left for the train station. The scientists are in a cab headed across the border to Norway. Out of the blue, Alexey asks if I want to go on a hike before dinner to see the Alyosha statue, with its eternal flame that marks the sacrifice of countless dead. Physical activity off the boat sounds perfect. While packing, I discover that my passport is missing, but surely I’ll have time to find it when I return. On deck, as we’re about to leave, Andrey laces up his shoes and comes along. During the voyage he has become friends with Alexey, and he’s good company. I feel the stirring of the same deep pleasure I felt on the mountain, one for which I don’t have a good name. An electric, unsettling joy.My new boots are too dressy and high for the climb up to Alyosha. It’s a hot summer afternoon—a day for tank tops and T-shirts, even here in the lower reaches of the Arctic. I’m stuck wearing my knee-high muck boots through town. Not far into our two-mile ramble, we’re away from the crowds. We’ve begun what novelist Walker Percy called the painful process of reentry, the bumpy ride from transcendent experiences back to daily life. We climb the hill that leads to the statue and reach the top. Then, flashing his palms in the universal gesture for wait, Alexey runs off. He’s left us to go meditate again. Our story has not quite ended. Andrey and I wait for Alexey one last time.When he returns, we walk down the long hill, stopping at grocery stores to gather vegetables for dinner. Back at the boat, Sasha weaves his culinary spells. I finish packing and strip the linens from my bed. I find my passport. I’ll have to leave after all.At some point, they call me for toasts. I missed the first round, but the second is for those who are not present, wherever they may be. I bring my hand up to chime our ryumki together, but they stop me. For this toast glasses don’t touch, they explain, and there are no jokes.I think of Joe, but I don’t know if they’re thinking of him. We begin to eat. Andrey talks about going partridge hunting with a friend. When he found out that it was mating season, and realized the birdsong he’d heard was a mating call, he quit the hunt. He couldn’t bring himself to kill anything singing a love song.Eventually, we start toasts again. Alexey has gone off to sleep. I present the crew with a wild scheme: a second, future expedition next August for a different project. In some mix of fantasy and seriousness, we begin to shape an idea of what it could look like. I’m already thinking of how things will have to be different. It’s not possible to re-create whatever wild magic just took place.The crew brings out another bottle, and I am helpless before all of it. I have no more way to gird myself against the wonder of these people and this boat than I do Joe’s death. A little after one, we gather our bags to leave. Tatiana and I will go with Evgeny to get on a 4 A.M. flight to meet a Russian explorer in Moscow. Though Evgeny was a stranger before the trip, he has set up this interview for my book and invited us to stay at his house. Little Oransky is a wonderland of birds. Gulls and their aggressive cousins, skuas, shriek and cry their own improvisations—birdsong that Andrey will later call “merry and badass jazz.”Little Oransky is a wonderland of birds. Gulls and their aggressive cousins, skuas, shriek and cry their own improvisations—birdsong that Andrey will later call “merry and badass jazz.”Sasha and Andrey carry our luggage. Back we go over the gangplank, down the long dock, out the locked gate, and through the park to a waiting taxi. A dead soldier watches over us from a distance, now finally cloaked in darkness. I hug Sasha and Andrey goodbye. ­Evgeny, Tatiana, and I climb into the taxi. A few hours later we’ll be airborne, vaulted away on the wind in a mechanical bird with functioning engines, leaving the Arctic behind. If there’s something I could have done that might have saved Joe, I didn’t do it. And I won’t find a way to save my parents, either.The future we’re digging for ourselves is at the bottom of a cliff that grows higher every day. But that’s not the same as saying nothing can be done. There are eggs to fry. There is history to remember and glaciers to measure. There is trash to count. So much is already going or gone. But what’s still there is vast, stupendous. I’ve come back to say that this place is singing a love song. It may be shot through with grief and danger, but if you’re listening and you can hear this, it means we’re not dead yet.Outside Online aims to deliver readers the world, dispatching our writers and photographers to the ends of the earth to report the one-of-a-kind stories that have inspired and informed generations of readers. We hear from our audience every day about how much they love our long-form journalism. But it’s no longer sustainable for us to give it away for free. Making a financial contribution to Outside is not tax-deductible, but it will help pay for the writers, editors, fact-checkers, designers, and photographers that stories like these demand—and will ensure we can keep publishing them for years to come. Please support Outside Online today.To inspire active participation in the world outside through award-winning coverage of the sports, people, places, adventure, discoveries, health and fitness, gear and apparel, trends and events that make up an active lifestyle.
            Subscribe to our What You Missed newsletter for the top headlines from the outdoor world, in your inbox six days a week. Looking for something else? Check out             our entire suite of free newsletters here.Upon discovering that her mother had been a member of the group Women Strike For Peace (WSP), Heidi Hutner becomes obsessed with feminist nuclear history. Heidi Hutner | Fulcrum Publishing | June 2020 | 16 minutes (4,305 words)We’re delighted to bring you an excerpt by Heidi Hutner from the anthology Doom With A View: Historical and Cultural Contexts of the Rocky Flats Nuclear Weapons Plant. Edited by Kristen Iverson, with E. Warren Perry and Shannon Perry, the anthology arrives from Fulcrum Publishing in August, 2020.* * *At thirty-five, I was diagnosed with Hodgkin’s lymphoma. One year before my diagnosis, my mother died from complications after heart surgery. At the time of her death, my mother had cancer — lymphoma. Five years prior to Mom’s death, my father passed away from a brain tumor, a metastasis from the cancer melanoma.Two years after I had completed my chemotherapy treatment for cancer, I gave birth to Olivia. My miracle baby.At first, I was ecstatic about the pregnancy. I had always wanted children, and with my cancer, I feared this would never happen. My doctors said I was lucky to give birth to a biological child after chemotherapy (my treatment left me with a 50 percent chance of remaining fertile afterward). But now, a mother-to-be, I was also afraid. How could I protect my child from our family cancer blight?My desire to protect my daughter from a future cancer diagnosis drove me into a rabbit hole of reading and learning about the reasons for my family’s affliction. I began with Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring and moved forward to more recent literature by Sandra Steingraber, Theo Colburn, and numerous others, including the President’s Cancer Panel Report. I learned that the cancer rates today are off the charts: one in two men and one in three women will get cancer in their lifetimes. Carson predicted this plague in 1963. She warned us of humankind’s “hubris” in carelessly polluting our earth with toxic chemicals and ionizing radiation. The epidemiologist Alice Stewart’s study on the grave danger of X-rays on babies in the womb in the 1950s, sounded the alarm about ionizing radiation as well. Today, our world swirls with pollutants — these carcinogens penetrate mothers’ wombs and breasts. Mother’s milk is a toxic cocktail. Newborns today are born with hundreds of synthetic chemicals in their umbilical cord blood. Synthetic chemicals and ionizing radiation change our makeup, harm our genes, and cause mutagenetic damage. More than 80,000 unregulated pollutants fill our environment.We are guinea pigs.* * *Local BookstoresAmazonFast forward about eleven years: one summer day, in 2009, on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, at lunch with a close friend (and cousin) of my deceased mother, Phyllis Resnick, I stumbled upon a story about my mom that I had never heard before. The tale Phyllis told would radically change my life. My then-preteen daughter, Olivia, was by my side. She listened rapt with me as we learned of our maternal nuclear legacy.Phyllis described how in the early 1960s, my mother and she, along with their good friend Thalia Stern Broudy, had been a members of Women Strike for Peace (WSP), an antinuclear group led by Dagmar Wilson and the future congresswoman, Bella Abzug. During the Cold War 1950s and early 60s, the U.S. had detonated one hundred above-ground nuclear test bombs in the Nevada desert and one hundred and six atmospheric test bombs in the South Pacific. The government claimed these test bombs posed no harm and the fallout had not spread, but scientists and medical professionals were concerned. A team of experts in St. Louis, MO, directed by Dr. Louise Reiss, initiated a survey to determine the extent of the impact of the bomb testing. With a chemical makeup similar to calcium, strontium-90, a radioisotope found in fallout, is easily absorbed in teeth and bones. Thousands of baby teeth from across the U.S. were collected between 1958 and 1971 for the St. Louis Baby Tooth Survey. In 1961, preliminary results showed high levels of strontium-90 in baby teeth of children born after 1945 and these levels increased over the time period, as the test-bombing continued. When the mothers of Women Strike for Peace learned the results of the survey, they banded together to stop atmospheric bomb testing. 50,000 WSP members from across the U.S. wrote letters, gathered petitions, lobbied congressional representatives, initiated lawsuits, and protested through marches and street demonstrations. My mother and her cohort of 15,000 WSP members traveled to D.C. to protest, lobby, and meet with their legislators November, 1961. In 1963, the United States, the U.K., and the Soviet Union signed the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, an agreement to halt atmospheric, under water, and outer space bomb testing. The signing of this treaty has been attributed to the efforts of WSP.The government claimed these test bombs posed no harm and the fallout had not spread, but scientists and medical professionals were concerned.After discovering this remarkable story about WSP, I became obsessed with feminist nuclear history. I wondered: Why had I never been told this tale when my mother was alive? What other vital nuclear histories involving women had been buried? So began my journey of exploring women’s antinuclear tales, traveling to nuclear disaster sites, and meeting with members of impacted communities. On this path, I met Kristen Iversen, the author of Full Body Burden, an investigative memoir about growing up next door to Rocky Flats, the former nuclear weapons facility in Arvada, Colorado. Kristen invited me to visit her in Colorado. She would introduce me to experts, scientists, and community members there. I brought my then eighteen-year-old daughter, Olivia, with me. She was about to leave for college. I wanted to share our maternal antinuclear and activist legacy with her before she left home.* * *I drove the Prius rental from the Denver airport to Boulder and arrived at the Colorado Chautauqua National Historic Landmark in the afternoon, where we were to stay during this visit. The sight of the tall, flat, conglomeratic sandstone unsettled me as we entered the park property. The immense rocks looked unreal, like something biblical or darkly fantastical — a mountain in a science fiction film that contains, within it, a dangerous and secret realm. The sharp upward angle of the earth leading to the tall rocks threw me off balance. Beyond those foreboding crags sits the closed Rocky Flats Nuclear Facility, now a Superfund site and wildlife refuge, a grieving land at the base of the snowcapped Rocky Mountains. The terrain is laced with plutonium, uranium, beryllium, cesium 137, many other forms of ionizing radiation, and a long list of toxicants.Olivia asked me to stop the car for a moment so she could get out and take pictures of the mountain-scape. She walked toward the trailhead, filled with pretty young families with dogs and small children heading upward on the wide sloped path, leading toward the crags. She snapped photos of the sky and rocks and wildflowers and returned to the car. After, we headed to the big lodge to register and collect keys for a periwinkle-blue, wood-shingled cottage.The sign over its door said, “Morning Glory.” Our temporary home.Early the next morning, while Olivia still slept, I hiked in the hills just beneath the crags, through fields of wild grasses and flowers — asters, blazing stars, western wallflowers, stonecrops — and into the cool of the evergreen trees. It was hard to make sense of these two very different but overlapping realities: a stunning Colorado landscape and nuclear horror. As I hiked, I tried to quiet my mind and push away the frightening scientific facts and stories that I had read about Rocky Flats. Mothers, children, and former workers all sick with cancers. Dead-too-soon loved ones. Infertility. Deformed animals. A contaminated land.After my hike and an early breakfast, Olivia and I met Kristen Iversen in the Chautauqua parking lot. She would be our tour guide for the day, showing us the area surrounding Rocky Flats. Tall and blonde, Kristen wore a long, flowing, colorful skirt and blouse with a wide leather belt and silver buckle cinched at the waist. In her arms, she held her small dog, Emma, a papillon. Kristen looked the part of a Colorado gal who had grown up riding horses. This was her territory. She had seen much cancer in her friends and neighbors. She had also worked at the nuclear plant as a young adult and raised her two sons in Arvada, the town adjacent to the Flats.Kristen sat in the passenger seat as I drove, and my daughter crouched down in the back with the windows firmly sealed shut. Olivia wore an oversized sweatshirt and red baseball hat with the embroidered words, “Make America Kind Again.” I glanced back and wondered, Should I have brought my daughter here? Is it safe? All it would take is the smallest bit of plutonium to enter her lungs and her health could be compromised, or the health of her children, and their children’s children.We traveled down Indiana Street, past fields of brown grass, dry scrub bushes, gently rolling hills, and the unmarked property of the former plant. Bicyclists flew by. I wondered if they knew about Rocky Flats and the dangerous air they were breathing.Kickstart your weekend reading by getting the week’s best Longreads delivered to your inbox every Friday afternoon.Sign upOlivia asked Kristen questions: “Those cows, are they contaminated? What are those people doing playing miniature golf? Aren’t they concerned?”“Studies show that local cows have plutonium in their bodies,” Kristen replied. “And, yes, it’s amazing that people just go on as if everything is fine.”Kristen pointed to a group of houses. “Over there, that’s where Bini Abbott had a horse farm. Many of her horses had birth defects, organs outside their bodies, and some were sterile. Some of the women in the neighborhood were sterile, too. I told you about the rancher, Lloyd Mixon, who had a deformed pig, Scooter? He would take Scooter with him to city council meetings and try to get the government to tell him what was going on.” We drove on, past more construction. “Oh, look, this was where the Jackson Turkey Farm used to be,” Kristen sighed. “The family who owned it said DOE officials would come by unexpectedly to test the turkeys, and sometimes take them away. No one ever found out what they did with the turkeys or what they discovered.”We headed to Kristen’s childhood home, which looked like a 1960s Disney movie set: barn, bridge, creek. “That barn and field over there held my horses,” she said. “But the water in the creek, the whole area, has been affected by off-site plutonium contamination. New people live here now. I guess they don’t know…” We gazed at the bubbling water that ran under a small wooden bridge — a tempting area for children to play in — potentially polluted with plutonium. There were no “stay out” signs or warnings.“I don’t get it,” Olivia said.“Yes,” Kristen sighed. “It’s very sad.”Further on, we approached Standley Lake. The water was wide and still, bounded by land covered with the dry grasses and scrub bushes, and a few thin, sickly looking trees. Kristen told us the lake was a drinking water source for the cities of Westminster, Northglenn, and Thornton, even though plutonium is in the sediment. There were signs for boat rentals — paddleboard, canoes, and kayaks.“People aren’t supposed to swim here,” Kristen noted. “It’s dangerous to kick up the sediment. But they waterski and fish.”Olivia asked, “Do they eat the fish?”“Yes, many do.” Kristen replied.We angled up a bit further and parked on the side of the road, with a view of the lake, near a white clapboard home. An older man exited the front door and carried a box to the rear of the house. Kristen said he was the father of her childhood friend, Tamara. Tamara grew up in this lakeside house, Kristen explained. Tamara had been diagnosed with brain cancer, but her parents didn’t believe the plutonium had anything do with it. I watched, with disbelief, as Tamara’s father walked back into his house, not wiping off his feet or removing his shoes.The final stop on our tour was the new housing development, Candelas. Candelas looked like new suburbia in Anywhere, USA, with wide roads, and large houses in muted colors. Kristen pointed out that many of her scientist colleagues believe the community isn’t safe for residence. Plutonium has been detected in the soil, although real estate brokers were not required to inform prospective buyers about this contamination or about the history of Rocky Flats. Plutonium had also been detected in a nearby drinking water source.As I parked the car in front of the sales office, I realized just how close we were to the Refuge. Too close.“I wouldn’t live here in a million years,” Olivia blurted out incredulously.I turned my head around and saw fear in my daughter’s sky-blue eyes. I debated getting out of the car but decided to go for it — I would not be giving birth to more children, so I convinced myself it would be okay. Olivia would stay in the car.Kristen and I stepped out of the vehicle and walked toward the office. The entry door was only a few feet away, but with each step, the invisible plutonium in the air or on the sidewalk made my heart beat faster. Might I bring it back into the car and endanger Olivia? No turning back now. But then I thought with shame about all the children born and raised here. Surrounding us were homes filled with families and playgrounds and recreation areas. These families live with plutonium contamination from birth to death. Innocent new people move in every day. They come to new developments like Candelas, where it is less expensive to buy a house than in Boulder. They have no idea of the history of Rocky Flats. Or if they do, they know only of the official (incorrect) announcements declaring the contamination has been cleaned up. The location appears pristine — ideal, a playland for the rich and outdoorsy. There are no signs, no indications of the past anywhere. The only marker of the dark history is artist Jeff Gipes’ ‘Cold War Horse.’ But many drive by that eerie symbol, not knowing what it means. How ironic that this snowcapped land of hikers, climbers, skiers, bikers, the culture of Patagonia, Black Diamond, Marmot, should be laced with invisible plutonium and other contaminants.The cheery real estate agent greeted us with brochures as we entered the model ‘homes-for-sale’ office. She cheerily played up the benefits of raising kids here in Candelas: the excellent new schools, a new swimming pool and rec center, the hiking trails running from the development through the “natural habitat” of the refuge of Rocky Flats with its “elk, deer, owl.” Standley Lake, she said, was a great place to boat and fish, right nearby. We could “rent boats or bring our own.” Kristen and I exchanged glances.Fear rose up in me as the agent spoke, and my hand flew automatically to my neck — checking my lymph nodes — where a mark remains from having tissue removed when I had Hodgkin’s lymphoma. My cancer ties me to Rocky Flats, even though I am not from there, but so many local residents have the same blemish on their neck from having tumors or biopsy tissue removed. The proverbial downwinders’ scar.How the hell do they allow people to live here? My mind raced, as the agent continued her monologue. Not one word was mentioned about plutonium from the former plant site. Or the risks of raising kids here. Or the rare cancers in the community. I trembled quietly with rage as she smiled her Teflon smile, handed us paperwork with price points, and pointed us toward the entrance of one model house. It had the standard stainless-steel kitchen, large walk-in closets, large picture windows, and high ceilings. Through the window glass, I could see the snowcapped Rocky Mountains in the distance. If the mountains could speak, I was sure they would be screaming.This is the American Dream.* * *Suburban enclaves, and the freeways that take us to them, were built in large part in response to Cold War atomic anxiety. The government feared nuclear attack could wipe out American cities and our primary population. So, freeways were built and suburban communities were erected “safely” away from major population centers. Strangely, some of these dream communities were developed to support bomb-making factories, as Kate Brown writes in Plutopia. These shiny new houses and shiny new communities, it was thought, would make workers’ wives happy and happy wives would make happy and productive workers for the weapons’ plants. We saw this in Hanford, WA, Oakridge TN, St. Louis MO, and in the towns surrounding Rocky Flats in Colorado. Families living in these shiny locations were kept in the dark about the dangers that lurked. Cold War domestic secrets.My cancer ties me to Rocky Flats, even though I am not from there, but so many local residents have the same blemish on their neck from having tumors or biopsy tissue removed. The proverbial downwinders’ scar.Operating from 1952 to 1992, the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons facility was located approximately 15 miles northwest of Denver, a city built by an influx of miners during the gold rush in the nineteenth century. During the years of its operation, the plant constructed more than 70,000 triggers for nuclear bombs. Rocky Flats would be the site of two major secret plutonium fires, blowing radioactive poison into sections of Arvada and Denver in 1957 and 1969. Hundreds of smaller fires also took place, as well as regular leaks, spills, and atmospheric plutonium releases. Plutonium clouds blew over houses, swimming pools, schools, churches, farms, fields, and streams. Rocky Flats is known for powerful Chinook winds — winds that would blow plutonium dust into local neighborhoods. Locals did not know that Rocky Flats was a weapons factory for most of its years of operation. Workers employed there were forbidden to speak of their work and often didn’t comprehend the full extent of the factory’s activities.By 1989, The FBI and EPA suspected criminal negligence at Rocky Flats, which led to a raid, led by FBI agent Jon Lipsky. A federal grand jury began an investigation, a settlement was negotiated, the court documents were sealed, and the plant closed. The story of this federal grand jury is fraught and complex, and cover-ups are suspected in the sealing of the documents and lack of full prosecution. The Rocky Flats cleanup was officially completed in 2004; however, numerous scientists, nuclear experts, local citizens, and antinuclear activists argue the cleanup is far from finished. Unknown but large amounts of plutonium and other contaminants remain on the land in what has been turned into a Superfund site, a designation made under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980. The primary industrial site (the Superfund area — 485 acres) was never completely remediated. There is a buffer zone, also heavily contaminated, although the EPA claims this area is fully remediated. The surrounding area, now called a National Wildlife Refuge, was not remediated. Significant contamination has been detected there in the soil and groundwater. Many other toxic and radioactive contaminants have also been found at Rocky Flats in addition to plutonium: americium, uranium, cadmium, PCBs, beryllium, and more. A 2019 study found plutonium “hot particles” in the soil frighteningly close to the homes abutting the Flats.Like a mother’s womb, we like to think of the home as a safe space. Radiation pollution undoes all that. Ingested and internalized radiation travels through the mother’s bloodstream and crosses the placenta. External radiation, such as X-rays and gamma rays, penetrates the womb. Wombs and homes, as permeable spaces, put the unborn and children at grave risk. Science shows us that women and children are most vulnerable to ionizing radiation exposures. Women are twice as likely to develop cancer from exposure to radiation and almost twice as likely to die from these cancers as adult males. Boys are five times more likely to develop and die cancer from radiation exposures as adult males, and girls are seven or more times likely to develop and die from cancers as adult males. Baby girls are most at risk. Yet safety standards are all based on an adult male body — “reference man” — a white, twenty-something adult male.Rocky Flats is “a national sacrifice zone,” says Robert Alvarez, associate fellow at the Institute for Policy Studies and former senior policy advisor to the secretary at the US Department of Energy. “That’s what it is, although no one will say so officially. How much remains buried there? A tremendous amount — plutonium doesn’t go away. No one has done this yet — it’s costly and complex — but someone needs to go into those houses nearby in Arvada and take samples. We don’t know how much plutonium is in them.”Houses and families do not belong next to radioactive sacrifice zones.Home sweet home. Home is where the heart is. Home, home on the range. Home is where it starts. Dream home. Don’t sit home. Love starts at home. Home, home is where I want to be / pick me up and bring me down. My home is my castle. This space in which we live and raise our families occupies so many cliché, trite, and nostalgic phrases and song lyrics, yet we know home may be a place of horror, where domestic violence remains hidden. We long for the perfect dream home, but we know secret dangers lurk there. Post-World War II, those dangers include toxic and radioactive contamination.* * *Denial is rampant in the community around Rocky Flats. History erased. No signage. Too little public information. Misinformation. It’s all about dollars and cents and real estate. But there is community team of active folks working to protect the families. They recently halted the construction of a parkway that was to run through Rocky Flats, and they have worked with schools to halt children’s field trips. There’s more to go. The Refuge is now open to the public for recreation, despite tremendous evidence indicating that people should stay out. New housing continues to go up on contaminated land next door. Scientists like W. Gale Biggs, Harvey Nichols, and Anne Forgarty, who have been studying the soil, water, and air on the flats for years, are deeply concerned. But they are aging. Nichols, now retired from university teaching and research asks, “Who will do this work when we are gone?”Houses and families do not belong next to radioactive sacrifice zones.Mothers like the women of Women Strike for Peace from back in the early 1960s, carry on the work today, in Colorado. They are at the forefront of precautionary actions to protect the children and the families living near Rocky Flats. Over cups of coffee and tea, at kitchen tables, in cafes, the mothers told me their stories.Elizabeth Panzer’s son Nathan has a very rare heart cancer, only seen in .05 percent of the population. There is no cure for his disease, he had surgery, and spent years on chemo, and his family lives with no certainty of his future. Shaunessy McNeely’s father died of the same very rare heart cancer as Nathan and lived only a few blocks from Nathan and was diagnosed in the same year. Elizabeth Panzer explains: “When we moved here, nobody warned us that this housing and land might be polluted with plutonium. So many people in Arvada don’t want to think about the dangers here. The government says it safe and they want to believe it. I wanted to believe it, too. But my son could die any day and I think there may be a cancer cluster here. We need studies. People need to know.” Panzer and her family chose to stay in their house so Nathan could continue to live a normal life during his illness. Sometimes she questions that decision. “What about the health of my other children? And if I sell my house and move away, what about the next family? What about those kids?” For a long time, to protect Nathan, Elizabeth remained silent. Over time, she became more outspoken, more involved in local actions to protect the community. Nathan, miraculously, continues to live. It’s several years since his diagnosis.“I grew up under four miles from Rocky Flats. I had a pillow seat in my bedroom window growing up,” Tiffany Hansen explained. “I spent many nights looking out at the plant’s lights, but I had no idea what was really going on.” It wasn’t until a few years ago, after developing an ovarian tumor and experiencing other “debilitating health” symptoms (including Graves’ disease), that she Googled and discovered the Rocky Flats’ contamination story. Hansen then read Kristen Iversen’s memoir and became deeply upset with the news that she had grown up next to a bomb factory: “We played outside all day in that stuff, exposed, unaware. I was hysterical when I found out. I called many of my old friends and discovered too many stories of cancer.”“We thought we were living the dream,” Hansen continued. Her father owned an electrical contracting company that did work at the Rocky Flats site. He was well compensated. They had a nice house with a pool, she had fancy toys like “four wheelers,” and her mother drove a Corvette. In addition to her ovarian tumor, Hansen has had one miscarriage (common to women who live nearby), and she had a benign lymph tumor on her neck as a child. In her youth, Hansen was often hospitalized for mysterious debilitating symptoms. She bears the downwinder’s scar on her neck: “Just like Kristen describes in her book about her own scar.” Her brother, who worked at the plant, has heart and thyroid problems. Hansen’s childhood best friend had a brain tumor in the third grade. Another friend had ovarian cancer and passed away at forty-three. Hansen’s high school boyfriend had stage four thyroid cancer and he survived, as did his mom; his dad passed away from thyroid cancer.Tiffany knew had to “do something to help.” She set up the Rocky Flats Downwinders group, initiated two health surveys and a hemp soil remediation project. Tiffany is joined in these efforts by Elizabeth, Shaunessy, Shaunessy’s mother, Elaine, and others like physician Dr. Sasha Stiles.“I cannot stay silent anymore and let such suffering happen to more children,” Elizabeth told me. “The denial must end.”Again and again, I hear my daughter’s words, “I wouldn’t live here in a million years.”* * *Heidi Hutner, PhD, teaches, speaks, and writes about ecofeminism and environmental justice. Hutner’s writing has been featured in the New York Times, Ms. Magazine, DAME, Tikkun, Spirituality and Health, Yes!, Common Dreams, Garnet News, and Proximity Magazine. She has written for academic journals and books published by Oxford University Press, University of Virginia Press, Palgrave, Rowman and Littlefield, and others.  Excerpted from the anthology Doom with a View, edited by Kristen Iversen. Copyright © 2020. Reprinted with permission of the publisher, Fulcrum Publishing. All rights reserved.Editor: Sari Botton
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
Dear Reader,It’s been a wonderful five years! But sadly after today I will be leaving Longreads.Let me tell you about how you can read my “This Week in Books” newsletter going forward, since I know you would all surely be bereft without it.I will continue this project at my new substack, which over the weekend, in a galaxy-brained mania, has… evolved… beyond a simple newsletter. I would like to unveil to you, dedicated reader, the wonder and ruin that awaits you at… The End of the World Review; a micro magazine and teensy tiny literary review that is deeply alarmed by the imminent end of the world, but meanwhile just vibing. The End of the World Review will feature some of my favorite writers from Longreads plus new voices, as well as my classic weekly books newsletter, as seen in your inboxes since time immemorial.You can choose to receive just the books newsletter (it’s still free), or you can support my new aspirational apocalypse magazine! Either way, to subscribe, go here. To follow on twitter, go here.If you are short on cash but want to be counted among the elect, DM me @endworldreview or email me endworldreview@gmail.com and I’ll give you a code for a $1/month subscription or a free one if you need it.If you are long on cash, then you might as well subscribe; after all, it is the end of the world.I want to thank Mark Armstrong, Mike Dang, and the whole wonderful team at Longreads. It’s been a great few years, and I’ll really miss it. I’ve really loved every minute of my Longreads career: working with brilliant writers to produce accolade-accruing essays; working with yet more brilliant writers to produce book reviews, author interviews, and reporting on important topics like the climate crisis; excerpting cool new books by yet more brilliant writers; writing this nerdy as all get-out newsletter. I’ve loved it so much that… I’m not stopping.So long and see you soon,Dana Snitzky
@danasnitzky This is an exquisite essay, all its bends elegant, its turns refined. Drawing on Gwendolyn Brooks and Kamau Brathwaite, Aracelis Girmay describes her careful attempts to shield her young son from being touched by the malevolent hand of Whiteness for as long as she can; it’s disturbing to read how his white classmates have already succumbed to its perverse logic.It does not occur to us to talk to our kids about Whiteness just yet, but increasingly I think we must. For example, I am startled, in February, by my son’s White schoolmate who runs into the hall to announce to his parent that Martin Luther King Jr. was killed because of the color of his skin. These months later I am again startled by the very young White children who speak openly and, it seems, without fear about George Floyd’s murder. We are on a Zoom call with my child’s class. One of his White classmates has gone to a march with her family, in the middle of a pandemic, to march for Black Lives. The power of this is not lost on me. I am moved by their family’s investment and risk, a risk I do not take. I study the child’s face. The baby still in her voice, her cheeks, the way she holds her mouth. She says, “George Floyd was killed because…” And I click the sound off. My youngest says, “I can’t hear, Mommy.” Just a second, I tell them both, just a second.Troy Patterson writes about the sermon at the heart of Ralph Ellison’s Juneteenth, which “exhort[s] worshippers to approach it as something like Passover—a day of deliverance on which to tell stories that keep history alive in memory.”Brenda Wineapple reviews Wendell Bird’s Criminal Dissent: Prosecutions Under the Alien and Sedition Acts of 1798, a study of early American legal history which reveals that under the Adams Administration, the Alien and Sedition Acts were used to prosecute way more people than previously believed — not just newspapers and editors, but also regular people who spoke against Adams on the street. “When the very tipsy Luther Baldwin of New Jersey cried in a ‘loud voice’ (according to the indictment) that President Adams ‘is a damned rascal and ought to have his arse kicked,’ he was arrested for seditious speech. (He pled guilty and was fined $150 plus court costs.)”Eddie S. Glaude, Jr., writes about James Baldwin’s sympathy to the Black Panther philosophy and his dedication to telling an honest version of American history rather than one of triumphant progress. Glaude points to an impromptu speech Baldwin gave in 1968 — an introduction for Martin Luther King, Jr., at an S.C.L.C. fundraiser hosted by Marlon Brando: “By 1968, when [Baldwin] gave his speech [introducing King] in Anaheim, he saw clearly how the passage of the Civil Rights and Voting Rights Acts, a few years earlier, might offer white America the sense of self-congratulation that Black Power was now denying it. He knew that the civil-rights movement could easily be conscripted into the story of how Americans, in their inherent goodness, had perfected the Union. The history being made could be bent in service of the lie.”In July of 1968, just a few months after King’s assassination and against the backdrop of American cities burning, Baldwin gave an interview to Esquire. He set the tone of the exchange from the very start:Q. How can we get the black people to cool it? A. It is not for us to cool it. Q. But aren’t you the ones who are getting hurt the most? A. No, we are only the ones who are dying fastest.Saikat Majumadar writes about the explosion of queer literature in India after the decriminalizing of gay sex in 2018; Majumadar argues that after the legal victory, there was social pressure for writers to make celebratory and “out” narratives of queer life.The celebratory narrative of post-377 India found clearest voice in the publication, by Penguin India, of Afghan-American journalist Nemat Sadat’s debut novel, The Carpet Weaver, a bildungsroman about a queer boy growing up in the masculinist, patriarchal culture of Afghanistan amid the warring currents of global ideologies. Sadat has been fond of telling the story of how his novel, rejected by US publishers, found ready acceptance in India, where the recent decriminalization of homosexual love made readers eager for this sort of narrative. Fiction was now expected to celebrate this newfound freedom and legitimacy, a fact that was brought home to me personally when the queer activist Chintan Girish Modi, in his popular column “The Queer Bookshelf,” gently accused my own novel, The Scent of God, of hushing queer love, pushing it back into the closet.Sarah Mesle reviews Stephanie E. Jones-Rogers’s They Were Her Property: White Woman Slave Owners in the American South, which I can attest is a deeply messed up read; the book is about white enslaver women’s tradition of “gifting” black people to one another on special occasions. It reads like a horror novel, not through any stylistic effort of the author, but just because the dry recounting of these things is freaky as hell. As Mesle writes, “Get Out is a horror movie; They Were Her Property is historical scholarship. But when it comes to America’s racialized past, horror and history are hard to keep apart.”Images of black protestors on horseback remind Nell Painter of her childhood rides with her father and bring her closer to her Western roots, which the whitewashed version of American history had made it difficult for her to claim. “Like so many facets of U.S. history, cowboy history has been lily-whited-out, via the movies’ exaltation of the cowboy as a white man. In so many ways, too much of U.S. history reads as a story of white men…. This is about to change. Although the current upheavals have begun with reforming policing, that’s only a start. History is being remade, including the history of the West. This new history, visualized in images of black women and men on horseback, brings me into more personal, more intimate connection with the political protests that demand wide-ranging, far-reaching improvements in our national life.”*
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
The architecture of the modern web poses grave threats to humanity. It’s not too late to save ourselves.The Doomsday Machine was never supposed to exist. It was meant to be a thought experiment that went like this: Imagine a device built with the sole purpose of destroying all human life. Now suppose that machine is buried deep underground, but connected to a computer, which is in turn hooked up to sensors in cities and towns across the United States.The sensors are designed to sniff out signs of the impending apocalypse—not to prevent the end of the world, but to complete it. If radiation levels suggest nuclear explosions in, say, three American cities simultaneously, the sensors notify the Doomsday Machine, which is programmed to detonate several nuclear warheads in response. At that point, there is no going back. The fission chain reaction that produces an atomic explosion is initiated enough times over to extinguish all life on Earth. There is a terrible flash of light, a great booming sound, then a sustained roar. We have a word for the scale of destruction that the Doomsday Machine would unleash: megadeath. Nobody is pining for megadeath. But megadeath is not the only thing that makes the Doomsday Machine petrifying. The real terror is in its autonomy, this idea that it would be programmed to detect a series of environmental inputs, then to act, without human interference. “There is no chance of human intervention, control, and final decision,” wrote the military strategist Herman Kahn in his 1960 book, On Thermonuclear War, which laid out the hypothetical for a Doomsday Machine. The concept was to render nuclear war unwinnable, and therefore unthinkable.Kahn concluded that automating the extinction of all life on Earth would be immoral. Even an infinitesimal risk of error is too great to justify the Doomsday Machine’s existence. “And even if we give up the computer and make the Doomsday Machine reliably controllable by decision makers,” Kahn wrote, “it is still not controllable enough.” No machine should be that powerful by itself—but no one person should be either.The Soviets really did make a version of the Doomsday Machine during the Cold War. They nicknamed it “Dead Hand.” But so far, somewhat miraculously, we have figured out how to live with the bomb. Now we need to learn how to survive the social web.People tend to complain about Facebook as if something recently curdled. There’s a notion that the social web was once useful, or at least that it could have been good, if only we had pulled a few levers: some moderation and fact-checking here, a bit of regulation there, perhaps a federal antitrust lawsuit. But that’s far too sunny and shortsighted a view. Today’s social networks, Facebook chief among them, were built to encourage the things that make them so harmful. It is in their very architecture.I’ve been thinking for years about what it would take to make the social web magical in all the right ways—less extreme, less toxic, more true—and I realized only recently that I’ve been thinking far too narrowly about the problem. I’ve long wanted Mark Zuckerberg to admit that Facebook is a media company, to take responsibility for the informational environment he created in the same way that the editor of a magazine would. (I pressed him on this once and he laughed.) In recent years, as Facebook’s mistakes have compounded and its reputation has tanked, it has become clear that negligence is only part of the problem. No one, not even Mark Zuckerberg, can control the product he made. I’ve come to realize that Facebook is not a media company. It’s a Doomsday Machine.Read: Breaking up Facebook isn’t enoughThe social web is doing exactly what it was built for. Facebook does not exist to seek truth and report it, or to improve civic health, or to hold the powerful to account, or to represent the interests of its users, though these phenomena may be occasional by-products of its existence. The company’s early mission was to “give people the power to share and make the world more open and connected.” Instead, it took the concept of “community” and sapped it of all moral meaning. The rise of QAnon, for example, is one of the social web’s logical conclusions. That’s because Facebook—along with Google and YouTube—is perfect for amplifying and spreading disinformation at lightning speed to global audiences. Facebook is an agent of government propaganda, targeted harassment, terrorist recruitment, emotional manipulation, and genocide—a world-historic weapon that lives not underground, but in a Disneyland-inspired campus in Menlo Park, California.The giants of the social web—Facebook and its subsidiary Instagram; Google and its subsidiary YouTube; and, to a lesser extent, Twitter—have achieved success by being dogmatically value-neutral in their pursuit of what I’ll call megascale. Somewhere along the way, Facebook decided that it needed not just a very large user base, but a tremendous one, unprecedented in size. That decision set Facebook on a path to escape velocity, to a tipping point where it can harm society just by existing.  Limitations to the Doomsday Machine comparison are obvious: Facebook cannot in an instant reduce a city to ruins the way a nuclear bomb can. And whereas the Doomsday Machine was conceived of as a world-ending device so as to forestall the end of the world, Facebook started because a semi-inebriated Harvard undergrad was bored one night. But the stakes are still life-and-death. Megascale is nearly the existential threat that megadeath is. No single machine should be able to control the fate of the world’s population—and that’s what both the Doomsday Machine and Facebook are built to do.The cycle of harm perpetuated by Facebook’s scale-at-any-cost business model is plain to see. Scale and engagement are valuable to Facebook because they’re valuable to advertisers. These incentives lead to design choices such as reaction buttons that encourage users to engage easily and often, which in turn encourage users to share ideas that will provoke a strong response. Every time you click a reaction button on Facebook, an algorithm records it, and sharpens its portrait of who you are. The hyper-targeting of users, made possible by reams of their personal data, creates the perfect environment for manipulation—by advertisers, by political campaigns, by emissaries of disinformation, and of course by Facebook itself, which ultimately controls what you see and what you don’t see on the site. Facebook has enlisted a corps of approximately 15,000 moderators, people paid to watch unspeakable things—murder, gang rape, and other depictions of graphic violence that wind up on the platform. Even as Facebook has insisted that it is a value-neutral vessel for the material its users choose to publish, moderation is a lever the company has tried to pull again and again. But there aren’t enough moderators speaking enough languages, working enough hours, to stop the biblical flood of shit that Facebook unleashes on the world, because 10 times out of 10, the algorithm is faster and more powerful than a person. At megascale, this algorithmically warped personalized informational environment is extraordinarily difficult to moderate in a meaningful way, and extraordinarily dangerous as a result.These dangers are not theoretical, and they’re exacerbated by megascale, which makes the platform a tantalizing place to experiment on people. Facebook has conducted social-contagion experiments on its users without telling them. Facebook has acted as a force for digital colonialism, attempting to become the de facto (and only) experience of the internet for people all over the world. Facebook has bragged about its ability to influence the outcome of elections. Unlawful militant groups use Facebook to organize. Government officials use Facebook to mislead their own citizens, and to tamper with elections. Military officials have exploited Facebook’s complacency to carry out genocide. Facebook inadvertently auto-generated jaunty recruitment videos for the Islamic State featuring anti-Semitic messages and burning American flags.Read: Mark Zuckerberg doesn’t understand journalismEven after U.S. intelligence agencies identified Facebook as a main battleground for information warfare and foreign interference in the 2016 election, the company has failed to stop the spread of extremism, hate speech, propaganda, disinformation, and conspiracy theories on its site. Neo-Nazis stayed active on Facebook by taking out ads even after they were formally banned. And it wasn’t until October of this year, for instance, that Facebook announced it would remove groups, pages, and Instragram accounts devoted to QAnon, as well as any posts denying the Holocaust. (Previously Zuckerberg had defended Facebook’s decision not to remove disinformation about the Holocaust, saying of Holocaust deniers, “I don’t think that they’re intentionally getting it wrong.” He later clarified that he didn’t mean to defend Holocaust deniers.) Even so, Facebook routinely sends emails to users recommending the newest QAnon groups. White supremacists and deplatformed MAGA trolls may flock to smaller social platforms such as Gab and Parler, but these platforms offer little aside from a narrative of martyrdom without megascale.In the days after the 2020 presidential election, Zuckerberg authorized a tweak to the Facebook algorithm so that high-accuracy news sources such as NPR would receive preferential visibility in people’s feeds, and hyper-partisan pages such as Breitbart News’s and Occupy Democrats’ would be buried, according to The New York Times, offering proof that Facebook could, if it wanted to, turn a dial to reduce disinformation—and offering a reminder that Facebook has the power to flip a switch and change what billions of people see online.The decision to touch the dial was highly unusual for Facebook. Think about it this way: The Doomsday Machine’s sensors detected something harmful in the environment and chose not to let its algorithms automatically blow it up across the web as usual. This time a human intervened to mitigate harm. The only problem is that reducing the prevalence of content that Facebook calls “bad for the world” also reduces people’s engagement with the site. In its experiments with human intervention, the Times reported, Facebook calibrated the dial so that just enough harmful content stayed in users’ news feeds to keep them coming back for more.Facebook’s stated mission—to make the world more open and connected—has always seemed, to me, phony at best, and imperialist at worst. After all, today’s empires are born on the web. Facebook is a borderless nation-state, with a population of users nearly as big as China and India combined, and it is governed largely by secret algorithms. Hillary Clinton told me earlier this year that talking to Zuckerberg feels like negotiating with the authoritarian head of a foreign state. “This is a global company that has huge influence in ways that we’re only beginning to understand,” she said.I recalled Clinton’s warning a few weeks ago, when Zuckerberg defended the decision not to suspend Steve Bannon from Facebook after he argued, in essence, for the beheading of two senior U.S. officials, the infectious-disease doctor Anthony Fauci and FBI Director Christopher Wray. The episode got me thinking about a question that’s unanswerable but that I keep asking people anyway: How much real-world violence would never have happened if Facebook didn’t exist? One of the people I’ve asked is Joshua Geltzer, a former White House counterterrorism official who is now teaching at Georgetown Law. In counterterrorism circles, he told me, people are fond of pointing out how good the United States has been at keeping terrorists out since 9/11. That’s wrong, he said. In fact, “terrorists are entering every single day, every single hour, every single minute” through Facebook.The website that’s perhaps best known for encouraging mass violence is the image board 4chan—which was followed by 8chan, which then became 8kun. These boards are infamous for being the sites where multiple mass-shooting suspects have shared manifestos before homicide sprees. The few people who are willing to defend these sites unconditionally do so from a position of free-speech absolutism. That argument is worthy of consideration. But there’s something architectural about the site that merits attention, too: There are no algorithms on 8kun, only a community of users who post what they want. People use 8kun to publish abhorrent ideas, but at least the community isn’t pretending to be something it’s not. The biggest social platforms claim to be similarly neutral and pro–free speech when in fact no two people see the same feed. Algorithmically tweaked environments feed on user data and manipulate user experience, and not ultimately for the purpose of serving the user. Evidence of real-world violence can be easily traced back to both Facebook and 8kun. But 8kun doesn’t manipulate its users or the informational environment they’re in. Both sites are harmful. But Facebook might actually be worse for humanity.Read: How Facebook works for Trump“What a dreadful set of choices when you frame it that way,” Geltzer told me when I put this question to him in another conversation. “The idea of a free-for-all sounds really bad until you see what the purportedly moderated and curated set of platforms is yielding … It may not be blood onscreen, but it can really do a lot of damage.”In previous eras, U.S. officials could at least study, say, Nazi propaganda during World War II, and fully grasp what the Nazis wanted people to believe. Today, “it’s not a filter bubble; it’s a filter shroud,” Geltzer said. “I don’t even know what others with personalized experiences are seeing.” Another expert in this realm, Mary McCord, the legal director at the Institute for Constitutional Advocacy and Protection at Georgetown Law, told me that she thinks 8kun may be more blatant in terms of promoting violence but that Facebook is “in some ways way worse” because of its reach. “There’s no barrier to entry with Facebook,” she said. “In every situation of extremist violence we’ve looked into, we’ve found Facebook postings. And that reaches tons of people. The broad reach is what brings people into the fold and normalizes extremism and makes it mainstream.” In other words, it’s the megascale that makes Facebook so dangerous.Looking back, it can seem like Zuckerberg’s path to world domination was inevitable. There’s the computerized version of Risk he coded in ninth grade; his long-standing interest in the Roman empire; his obsession with information flow and human psychology. There’s the story of his first bona fide internet scandal, when he hacked into Harvard’s directory and lifted photos of students without their permission to make the hot-or-not-style website FaceMash. (“Child’s play” was how Zuckerberg later described the ease with which he broke into Harvard’s system.) There’s the disconnect between his lip service to privacy and the way Facebook actually works. (Here’s Zuckerberg in a private chat with a friend years ago, on the mountain of data he’d obtained from Facebook’s early users: “I have over 4,000 emails, pictures, addresses … People just submitted it. I don’t know why. They ‘trust me.’ Dumb fucks.”) At various points over the years, he’s listed the following interests in his Facebook profile: Eliminating Desire, Minimalism, Making Things, Breaking Things, Revolutions, Openness, Exponential Growth, Social Dynamics, Domination.Facebook’s megascale gives Zuckerberg an unprecedented degree of influence over the global population. If he isn’t the most powerful person on the planet, he’s very near the top. “It’s insane to have that much speechifying, silencing, and permitting power, not to mention being the ultimate holder of algorithms that determine the virality of anything on the internet,” Geltzer told me. “The thing he oversees has such an effect on cognition and people’s beliefs, which can change what they do with their nuclear weapons or their dollars.”Facebook’s new oversight board, formed in response to backlash against the platform and tasked with making decisions concerning moderation and free expression, is an extension of that power. “The first 10 decisions they make will have more effect on speech in the country and the world than the next 10 decisions rendered by the U.S. Supreme Court,” Geltzer said. “That’s power. That’s real power.”In 2005, the year I joined Facebook, the site still billed itself as an online directory to “Look up people at your school. See how people know each other. Find people in your classes and groups.” That summer, in Palo Alto, Zuckerberg gave an interview to a young filmmaker, who later posted the clip to YouTube. In it, you can see Zuckerberg still figuring out what Facebook is destined to be. The conversation is a reminder of the improbability of Zuckerberg’s youth when he launched Facebook. (It starts with him asking, “Should I put the beer down?” He’s holding a red Solo cup.) Yet, at 21 years old, Zuckerberg articulated something about his company that has held true, to dangerous effect: Facebook is not a single place on the web, but rather, “a lot of different individual communities.”Today that includes QAnon and other extremist groups. Back then, it meant mostly juvenile expressions of identity in groups such as “I Went to a Public School … Bitch” and, at Harvard, referencing the neoclassical main library, “The We Need to Have Sex in Widener Before We Graduate Interest Group.” In that 2005 interview, Zuckerberg is asked about the future of Facebook, and his response feels, in retrospect, like a tragedy: “I mean, there doesn’t necessarily have to be more. Like, a lot of people are focused on taking over the world, or doing the biggest thing, getting the most users. I think, like, part of making a difference and doing something cool is focusing intensely … I mean, I really just want to see everyone focus on college and create a really cool college-directory product that just, like, is very relevant for students and has a lot of information that people care about when they’re in college.”Read: What we wrote about Facebook 12 years agoThe funny thing is: This localized approach is part of what made megascale possible. Early constraints around membership—the requirement at first that users attended Harvard, and then that they attended any Ivy League school, and then that they had an email address ending in .edu—offered a sense of cohesiveness and community. It made people feel more comfortable sharing more of themselves. And more sharing among clearly defined demographics was good for business. In 2004, Zuckerberg said Facebook ran advertisements only to cover server costs. But over the next two years Facebook completely upended and redefined the entire advertising industry. The pre-social web destroyed classified ads, but the one-two punch of Facebook and Google decimated local news and most of the magazine industry—publications fought in earnest for digital pennies, which had replaced print dollars, and social giants scooped them all up anyway. No news organization can compete with the megascale of the social web. It’s just too massive.The on-again, off-again Facebook executive Chris Cox once talked about the “magic number” for start-ups, and how after a company surpasses 150 employees, things go sideways. “I’ve talked to so many start-up CEOs that after they pass this number, weird stuff starts to happen,” he said at a conference in 2016. This idea comes from the anthropologist Robin Dunbar, who argued that 148 is the maximum number of stable social connections a person can maintain. If we were to apply that same logic to the stability of a social platform, what number would we find?“I think the sweet spot is 20 to 20,000 people,” the writer and internet scholar Ethan Zuckerman, who has spent much of his adult life thinking about how to build a better web, told me. “It’s hard to have any degree of real connectivity after that.”In other words, if the Dunbar number for running a company or maintaining a cohesive social life is 150 people; the magic number for a functional social platform is maybe 20,000 people. Facebook now has 2.7 billion monthly users. On the precipice of Facebook’s exponential growth, in 2007, Zuckerberg said something in an interview with the Los Angeles Times that now takes on a much darker meaning: “The things that are most powerful aren’t the things that people would have done otherwise if they didn’t do them on Facebook. Instead, it’s the things that would never have happened otherwise.”Of the many things humans are consistently terrible at doing, seeing the future is somewhere near the top of the list. This flaw became a preoccupation among Megadeath Intellectuals such as Herman Kahn and his fellow economists, mathematicians, and former military officers at the Rand Corporation in the 1960s.Kahn and his colleagues helped invent modern futurism, which was born of the existential dread that the bomb ushered in, and hardened by the understanding that most innovation is horizontal in nature—a copy of what already exists, rather than wholly new. Real invention is extraordinarily rare, and far more disruptive.The logician and philosopher Olaf Helmer-Hirschberg, who overlapped with Kahn at Rand and would later co-found the Institute for the Future, arrived in California after having fled the Nazis, an experience that gave his desire to peer into the future a particular kind of urgency. He argued that the acceleration of technological change had established the need for a new epistemological approach to fields such as engineering, medicine, the social sciences, and so on. “No longer does it take generations for a new pattern of living conditions to evolve,” he wrote, “but we are going through several major adjustments in our lives, and our children will have to adopt continual adaptation as a way of life.” In 1965, he wrote a book called Social Technology that aimed to create a scientific methodology for predicting the future.Read: The silence of the never FacebookersIn those same years, Kahn was dreaming up his own hypothetical machine to provide a philosophical framework for the new threats humanity faced. He called it the Doomsday Machine, and also the Doomsday-in-a-Hurry Machine, and also the Homicide Pact Machine. Stanley Kubrick famously borrowed the concept for the 1964 film Dr. Strangelove, the cinematic apotheosis of the fatalism that came with living on hair-trigger alert for nuclear annihilation.Today’s fatalism about the brokenness of the internet feels similar. We’re still in the infancy of this century’s triple digital revolution of the internet, smartphones, and the social web, and we find ourselves in a dangerous and unstable informational environment, powerless to resist forces of manipulation and exploitation that we know are exerted on us but remain mostly invisible. The Doomsday Machine offers a lesson: We should not accept this current arrangement. No single machine should be able to control so many people.If the age of reason was, in part, a reaction to the existence of the printing press, and 1960s futurism was a reaction to the atomic bomb, we need a new philosophical and moral framework for living with the social web—a new Enlightenment for the information age, and one that will carry us back to shared reality and empiricism.Andrew Bosworth, one of Facebook’s longtime executives, has compared Facebook to sugar—in that it is “delicious” but best enjoyed in moderation. In a memo originally posted to Facebook’s internal network last year, he argued for a philosophy of personal responsibility. “My grandfather took such a stance towards bacon and I admired him for it,” Bosworth wrote. “And social media is likely much less fatal than bacon.” But viewing Facebook merely as a vehicle for individual consumption ignores the fact of what it is—a network. Facebook is also a business, and a place where people spend time with one another. Put it this way: If you owned a store and someone walked in and started shouting Nazi propaganda or recruiting terrorists near the cash register, would you, as the shop owner, tell all of the other customers you couldn’t possibly intervene?Anyone who is serious about mitigating the damage done to humankind by the social web should, of course, consider quitting Facebook and Instagram and Twitter and any other algorithmically distorted informational environments that manipulate people. But we need to adopt a broader view of what it will take to fix the brokenness of the social web. That will require challenging the logic of today’s platforms—and first and foremost challenging the very concept of megascale as a way that humans gather. If megascale is what gives Facebook its power, and what makes it dangerous, collective action against the web as it is today is necessary for change. The web’s existing logic tells us that social platforms are free in exchange for a feast of user data; that major networks are necessarily global and centralized; that moderators make the rules. None of that need be the case. We need people who dismantle these notions by building alternatives. And we need enough people to care about these other alternatives to break the spell of venture capital and mass attention that fuels megascale and creates fatalism about the web as it is now.I still believe the internet is good for humanity, but that’s despite the social web, not because of it. We must also find ways to repair the aspects of our society and culture that the social web has badly damaged. This will require intellectual independence, respectful debate, and the same rebellious streak that helped establish Enlightenment values centuries ago.We may not be able to predict the future, but we do know how it is made: through flashes of rare and genuine invention, sustained by people’s time and attention. Right now, too many people are allowing algorithms and tech giants to manipulate them, and reality is slipping from our grasp as a result. This century’s Doomsday Machine is here, and humming along.It does not have to be this way.
          TheAtlantic.com Copyright (c) 2021 by The Atlantic Monthly Group. All Rights
          Reserved.
        





It’s always feast or famine in Rock Springs. In the 1970s,
this wind-worn mining town in southwest Wyoming was the site of an immense
energy boom. Men from across
the country moved in to make fast money in coal, oil, gas, or trona (the raw
material for soda ash, which in turn is used to make glass, paper, baking soda,
and other products). My dad worked at the Jim Bridger power plant for nearly 15
years, first dumping huge trucks of coal ash, then laboring in the warehouse.
He met my mom during the ’70s boom.Then the oil
fields dried up. Demand for trona fell sharply, and soon workers were getting
laid off at Jim Bridger (thankfully for us, my dad was able to keep his job).
As one resident, Tammy Morley, told me, “It seemed to me like the boom left all
at once. The town was dead. The oil fields got sucked dry. All the rest just
went away.” When I was growing
up, a persistent anxiety gnawed at our lives. My friends and I rode our BMX
bikes across the endless stretches of dusty prairie, and local kids started
their own punk and metal scene—so, in some ways, it was as good a place as any to
call home. But there was always an underlying uncertainty about what would
happen to our town, which bubbled up in destructive ways. Money was tight for
most people. The suicide rate was staggeringly high. There was a lot of meth
use and the start of an opioid epidemic. I graduated high
school in 2004 and tried to go to school in Colorado, but I dropped out. When I
came back to Rock Springs in 2005, the hydraulic fracturing boom had begun. The
town and its surrounding areas sit on vast underground stores of natural gas
and shale oil. And the mad rush to extract this untapped store of energy
changed everything.Suddenly, every
hotel was filled with roughnecks from across the country. Rent got much more
expensive, and stucco neighborhoods sprouted up like an invasive plant species.
Guys with huge work trucks blasted around town. Most of my friends got jobs
with Halliburton or one of the other companies doing fracking out in the
massive Jonah Field. At the time, we had the biggest Halliburton fracking facility
in the country, its arsenal of red trucks and heavy-duty equipment on
militaristic display. Schlumberger had its own battery of blue trucks and
equipment on the other side of town. There was suddenly, too, a lot of money. But this
blessing, as so much else in this country, would turn out to be a nightmare in
disguise. This is the story of Rock Springs’ last boom, as told by the people
who lived through it (some of their names have been changed or withheld to
protect their privacy). Joe Myer: When you drove through the
area at night, all you saw was drilling rigs.Orlando Webb: When I graduated high school, I worked out in the oil field for
different companies. So I saw the boom come and go. I started working there
when I was 18. That type of labor wasn’t my passion or what I wanted to do. I
did it because it was good money, and I got benefits and things like that. You
have to pay for life somehow.      Chris Schmidt: I worked in the oil field
for almost two years. I was a field pump technician for Halliburton. We would
fix and rebuild these huge valves that pushed water and chemicals during the
fracking process. The pumps were constantly breaking down because they were
working 24 hours a day. They would take one pump offline, and, while we fixed
that one, they’d put another on the well. We fixed pumps for 14-hour shifts—and
oftentimes longer. Every day, we’d show up at the Halliburton shop at 4:30
a.m. to get on the bus that chartered us all out to the Jonah Field. We’d
relieve the crew in the field, and then we’d sit in the truck and wait for
something to break. Sometimes it was 18 hours of nonstop hard labor, but then
other times there might be like three days when you wouldn’t leave the truck.
It was usually freezing outside, so you really did not want to get out of the
truck.The whole time I worked out there, I was honestly
pretty fucking terrified. My second day, this guy in the shop had this huge
water tank lifted up on a forklift, and, instead of strapping it down, he tried
to drive really slow. When the tank started to wobble, he got out. It ended up
coming down on him and literally ripping his face off—from where his hairline
started all the way down to his nose. I was sitting in the shop and heard this
horrible scream coming from one of the bay doors. This guy was crawling on his
hands and knees with his face hanging off. Brian: As weird as it sounds, I actually really miss my job in the
oil field. I was a centrifuge technician. Pretty much all my crew did was
related to cleaning drilling equipment and fluid. It wasn’t that dangerous for
me, unless we were having massive problems with well bores to where the rig
could burn down, which happened a few times. But for the most part it was real
safe. It was hard work but super chill overall.It was a different social climate than most jobs,
which I enjoyed. When someone had a problem with you, you’d walk off-site and
fight. And then you were good. You’d tell someone to eat a pile of shit if they
told you to do something you didn’t want to do. You’d get fired from any other
job if you did that.The camaraderie from working out there was very real.
You’d work with these guys for so fucking long, such long shifts. If someone
started shit with you at the bar, these guys would beat the fuck out of that
person. They actually had your back. There were weird drug addicts and shit,
but most of the people out there were good people trying to make a living for
their families. There was more camaraderie in the oil field than any other job
I’ve had. Even working in oil fields in other states, you end up running into
people that you met years and years ago, and it’s awesome to see those people. Andrea: I think it was a fairly
common perception for people in Rock Springs to see college as a waste of time
and money. You could make so much easy, quick money in town. Once you start
making that kind of money, it’s hard to stop. I saw this a lot at the high
school, kids saying, “Why should I go to college when I can work in the coal
mines or at the power plant?” But for a lot of these kids, they didn’t get a trade
they could apply outside the oil field. Many of them would do the same stuff
over and over again out there. Had they gone to college and taken classes in
welding or mechanics, say, they would’ve set themselves up for the future a bit
more. But again, I could always understand why they’d see college the way they
did. Especially when you have the cars, trucks, house, and big toys—you have to
keep up with the payments, and it’s hard to get out of that cycle.Not a lot of those kids saw that the boom would end.Brian: I was drinking heavily for
about eight years while I was working in the oil field and paying for my dad’s
cancer and all that shit. Unfortunately, I almost drank myself to death. But
then I woke up one morning and finally decided to make a shift. I honestly
don’t think I’d be alive right now if I didn’t leave Rock Springs. Chris
Schmidt: There was a lot of drug use
in the oil field. The party lifestyle in that line of work is thrown in your
face all the time. That was probably the biggest negative for me. Chris Hawks: One of the first things you
see when you drive into Rock Springs is a giant billboard about meth and going
to jail. Nate Martin: Meth is a rural drug, and
it’s also connected to the oil field. We’ve all heard the stories of people
working these long shifts and 100-plus-hour weeks with this dangerous
equipment—and some of them do meth to help them get through. So some people
take it for work reasons, but of course there’s a lot of recreational usage, as
well. The fact that you could easily cook it yourself made it widely available
in places like Rock Springs. It’s harder for people to make now since there
have been restrictions on some of the ingredients, but it was pervasive at the
time. Since the town is isolated, you could just make meth in your trailer or
anywhere else. My friend had a trailer on the outskirts of town, and we’d have
these raging parties out there. We knew no one would call the cops because the
trailers on either side of my friend’s were both meth labs. Pete: Doing meth is like being
myself but times 10. You’re really excited and love everything, you want to
talk with everyone about everything. But then you don’t want the buzz to end.
It’s great, and it feels good, but everything goes downhill once you start using
the needle. You use that fucking needle and you become a person you never
wanted to be.Injecting it is ridiculous as far as how much it fucks
you up. It’s like the movies, man. You hit it and it puts you in a completely
different world, almost like you’re dreaming. I smoked meth for a long time
before I injected it. I always thought people were nuts for shooting dope. My
buddy who just passed away was actually the first person who hit me with a
needle. I fell in love with it. I was doing a lot of dope with my ex. She and I moved
out of my buddy’s house. She was my best friend for around 10 years before we
ever got together. We started doing dope together in our house out north of
town. When I tried to commit suicide, it was all the other shit we were dealing
with plus doing dope, so it was all amplified times 10. I was going to work
and being generally unstable, doing a bunch of mushrooms and other drugs, too.
It doesn’t work. Maybe it does if you’re good at it, but I wasn’t good at it. I
was trying to be in a relationship and live life and do drugs at the same time.
I sucked at it. When I told my girlfriend we should stop shooting dope, she
said, “Well, you can,” and kept doing drugs in front of me. We’re really good
friends still, but it was some shit we had to go through.Mary: Back in the day, in the 1990s
and early 2000s, Rock Springs was a pretty awesome town to grow up in. But when
I graduated, it changed because of the boom and the drugs. It went to shit.
Nobody cared about anybody else anymore. People who came in only saw it as a money-making
town—and where that could happen really quickly. People from all over were very
enticed by that. And then they realized it was a good place to get fucked up
and do drugs, and word got out to people who sold drugs. You could make money
quickly, rip people off, rob people.I didn’t really start doing drugs until around 2005. I
remember going to football games on Friday nights when the whole town would
show up. But then drugs, especially OxyContin, took hold of a lot of people. I
lost so many friends when OxyContin came around, both losing them to death and
just losing people as friends—people who you thought were family but fell in
too far. Everybody and their mother did Oxy: lawyers, doctors, all sorts of
people doing it behind the scenes. The epidemic was very real. It was crazy how
fast things would unravel for people once they started doing OxyContin. The first time I tried it, I actually threw the other
half of the pill out the window because it made me sick. I said I’d never do it
again. What felt like a few weeks later, I was fully addicted.Walt: I lived in an old warehouse
on Pilot Butte off and on for many years. That whole area was ridiculous. It’s
the drugs, booze, parties, the shitty bars that are gross but somehow
comfortable. It’s the whole attitude, the danger, the excitement of that
danger. That’s the culture.A
few months after we moved to Rock Springs, this drunk woman is pounding on our
door late at night. She’s yelling after my mom. Something about Pedro and if my
mom was sleeping with him. I’m surprised my mom stayed inside. She’s a little
scary herself. The woman eventually left, but not before hitting our truck.
Shortly after, we learned that she found Pedro and apparently murdered him.That
street was a carnival of shit all the time. You never knew, when you’d walk into
a house, if some giant dude would be standing on a kitchen counter trying to
shoot heroin in his arm.Joe Myer: I remember pallet parties
out in the woods where dudes were getting guns pointed in their faces. People
would set these huge fires in the desert. I’ve lived in other places, but none
so gnarly as Rock Springs.Kathleen: I remember when I turned 21
and started going to the bars. It’s more common now for women to be heavily
tattooed. At that time, it was still novel here. I had tattoos on my chest with
words on them. Guys would be very rude about it. There would be like 20 guys
surrounding me and my friend at the bar because we were the only women there. I
definitely felt like prey in a way. Guys would get really mad if you turned them down.
I’ve been called a cunt and everything else by guys I turned down. There’s
definitely a lot of hunger. Many of those guys were from out of state, so they
were only looking for someone to warm them up at night.My dad always asked me why I didn’t settle down with
an oil field guy. It wasn’t for me. There were so many men, but a lot of the
oil field guys seemed kind of the same. They’re there for work, and it’s all a
big money game. They don’t care about the place. That’s their mentality. It
could be scary, for sure. Since the guys had a lot of money, they’d want to buy
you drinks, then they’d expect things from you afterward.Dudley Gardner: You can look at the Astro
Lounge and see it as a continuation of what was happening with the prostitution
on K Street in the 1970s. It’s one of the oldest strip clubs in the country.
It’s a rocking and rolling place.Stacy: Since the ratio of men to women
is so high, I grew up being very comfortable around men, which isn’t to say
that I didn’t have some negative interactions. Sexual harassment and abuse are
definitely prevalent there. Women are such a commodity, which made for very
different interactions between genders. I never lacked for male attention,
that’s for sure.I used to do theater in high school and would do
performances at the community college, as well. The day I turned 18, the Astro
Lounge called and asked me to come strip for them. I have no idea how they knew
I’d turned 18. I remember being in the kitchen of my childhood home in Rock
Springs and talking to this guy on our yellow rotary phone. He said he heard I
could dance. He offered me $2,000 just to go down there and talk to them. I said,
“Fuck no.” I think that says a lot about the male-female dynamics in Rock
Springs.Rock Springs was always one of those places where
you’d feel on edge and hyperaware of your surroundings. There was always
something that could go wrong. It was a tough place to grow up in a lot of
ways, especially as a woman. There’s something you feel in your body when you
come into that town that makes you feel a bit sick. Your body remembers the
trauma of what it was like to be there.Laura: I worked at a bar and felt
like I had the best gig, because I got to meet people from all over the place.
A lot of those oil field workers were super excited to be making such good
money. But man—when it ends, it ends. There’s no life. That’s when you see the
crumbling.I managed a bar for about eight years. The high ratio
of men to women is no joke. There were tons of men during the boom. We were
busy on the weeknights because that’s when everyone was in town. You’d look
around, and there would be 80 to 100 men, from the higher-ups all the way down to
the grunts. We weren’t unique in that way. That was every bar you’d go to: just
hordes of men. A lot of the service workers were female, which drew a stark
contrast.There’s a lot of extremity. You have these guys who
work 70 hours a week. When they’re off, they’re binge drinking. That’s why I
left the bar industry in Rock Springs. I did enjoy my job for a long time. I
loved booking live music. But looking around, you see how that turns into life
for some people. That was a little terrifying. I didn’t think I could do it
much longer. Some people end up turning the bar scene into their life.Chris Schmidt: I don’t think we’re a
special or unique generation. We reflect a lot of the culture that’s always
defined Rock Springs. From new mines opening to fracking in the oil field or
construction, the entire life of Rock Springs has revolved around a boom cycle
that’s not sustainable. Laura: My dad worked in coal; it’s what we do. We would take tours
out there as kids. You’d get this little black rock candy and a hammer. It’s
cool when you’re a kid but seems kind of weird and dark when you’re an adult. Ashley: Maybe five to seven years
ago, there was a boom, but Rock Springs was in a bust phase when I went to
junior high and high school. I graduated high school in 2019. My dad works in
the oil field, so I’m able to gauge the boom-and-bust cycle based on how much
work he has.To run an oil field operation, you have to invest a
lot of money in industry-related expenses to get the insurance, certifications,
and equipment, not knowing if you’re going to be able to use that equipment
again the next year. So I think the boom-and-bust cycles facilitate a constant
unease about your financial situation. The culture can become very negative
when that’s what you and everyone around you are feeling.Wes Carter: I’ve known a lot of people
who killed themselves. It also depends on your definition of suicide, because
I’ve known a lot of people who O.D.’d or drank themselves to death. Mike: It seems like every year
someone from our graduating class dies of suicide or overdose.Brian: At this point, I’ve known
over 15 people who killed themselves in Rock Springs. A lot of people in
that town self-medicate. Regardless of whether your parents were alcoholics or
addicts, the conditioning is different with suicide being around.Jesse Reed: I don’t see Rock Springs
going through another boom. It will never be like it was, not with the way
things are going now. They just closed up some of those places: Halliburton,
Schlumberger, some of the others. I know a lot of people who got laid off. The
oil industry isn’t looking good right now. We had the biggest Halliburton
facility in the country, then they laid everybody off. There’s no money in the
city budget. I hope it gets better, but I just don’t know. I hope something
changes. Right now, man, it’s scary.Les Georgis: Power plants are
transitioning to natural gas, and that will be the death knell for electric
power from coal, and any coal mines. You don’t have the cost of mining or
transportation. You build a pipeline, ship it in, and that’s that. It will be
the death knell for the Jim Bridger plant and mine, as well. Point of Rocks has
their bar out there. It will most likely fold when the power plant closes.It’s the same problem at Wamsutter. I don’t know how
many people actually work at that plant. I can’t imagine what will happen to
it.Chelsea: It’s hard to imagine what
Rock Springs will look like in a hundred years. It’s so dependent on oil, coal,
and fuel resources like that, but those things aren’t infinite. And it’s not a
place that shifts much. They’re not looking for what’s next. Kara: I do wonder if Rock Springs
would ever become a ghost town. Maybe it wouldn’t deteriorate that far, but I
think it’s going to wither more as the coal industry fades away. I can see all
those new subdivisions going vacant and people staying in the older
neighborhoods.Laura: There’s pressure for you to
get married, buy a $400,000 house, and have a lifted truck and all the toys.
You see all your friends with these expensive toys and houses. But what happens
if you lose your job? There’s no industry to temper that or help people
transition and develop new skills. You can’t have that lifestyle and then
decide to go work at the Post Office or something like that. You can’t manage
those expenses unless you work one of those high-paying energy jobs. There’s no
way. When I was in high school, kids who graduated could
work in the mines and make a killing. That’s not the case anymore, and we
haven’t replaced it with anything. What are people looking forward to as far as
their career? I think women manage it better because we’ve had to: Women have
always thought of multiple careers, like teaching, nursing, getting into
banking, or moving somewhere else to see what’s out there. Women just don’t get
paid as much. For men, it’s pressurized. You either leave completely and go to
school or do something else, which is fairly unlikely; or you have to go into
some type of mining or mineral extraction. What do you do when those jobs
aren’t there anymore?Nate Martin: What Wyoming will do when
coal dies out is the multimillion-dollar question. There doesn’t seem to be
any appetite at all as far as a concerted effort to diversify the state’s
economy. There are people working on it, but it’s going to be hard. It already
is hard. Rock Springs has a few other things going for it—the trona mines most
notably. Right now the state is trying to execute this land deal where they’re
going to buy a bunch of land that’s rich in trona and try to mine it. It
honestly sounds insane and completely stupid, especially since the economy is
getting destroyed by the pandemic. [Editor’s note: A private company ended
up outbidding the state for the land.] But what will happen to Rock Springs? It’s going to
shrink. It’s going to become quiet. I grew up during a bust. The boom that
brought my parents to Rock Springs was long over by the time I was coming of
age. It didn’t boom again until the year I left. My whole experience of the
town is during a bust period, and that’s what it’s entering into again. But the
difference now is that there’s not a boom on the other side of this bust. Coal
is not coming back. Natural gas is abundant and cheap, so it’s not going to be
the moneymaker it once was. People are moving away from fossil fuels in
general. Laura: There have been people who try to push Wyoming toward
renewable energy. Before he left office, Governor Matt Mead proposed plans for
economic development outside of mineral extraction because he could see the
writing on the wall with coal. But not many people got on board. He was trying
to supplement Wyoming’s economy and help the state before all the mines and coal industry crumbled. Unfortunately,
soon after he left office, mines in Gillette and Kemmerer closed, and it nearly
happened in Rock Springs.I feel like we’ve gone backward. People here have
doubled down on mineral extraction. Who knows how the pandemic will affect all
this? Some of those oil, gas, and coal companies have used Covid-19 as an
excuse to leave Wyoming, but I think they were on their way out anyway. Nate Martin: There’s going to be a very
serious reckoning facing Rock Springs in terms of, “Who do we want to be? What
do we want to be? What kind of town do we want?” But I think a lot of people in
Rock Springs ignore those types of questions. They latch onto the economy
that’s there—the jobs that are there—and they ride it like a horse. You have
the stereotype of the rugged individual that’s prevalent here in Wyoming, but
in reality, the Western mining town has no control over its own fate.Natalie: I worked in the open-pit
mine at Jim Bridger. I worked as a glorified shop hand and then on the
production line, which was extremely tedious.I had an interview to work underground at Black Butte,
but it made me feel claustrophobic to be down there. It’s barely wide enough to
drive a pickup through. There’s a lot of groundwater, which I didn’t know going
in. I was wearing my steel toes, but most people wear waders. The water went up
to the top of my boots, and yeah, it was pretty cold. The temperature stays
around 35 degrees in that mine. I work in one of the trona mines now. Basically, you
get all your gear on, including a respirator that can let you breathe for about
an hour if there’s carbon dioxide in the air. You go down, and thankfully it’s
wider than the coal mines, and it stays about 65 degrees down there. It’s easy
to forget that you’re 800 feet underground. I go to my work table and wait for
my boss to come out of his morning meeting to let me know what needs to get
done.Two union organizations have approached us, but, right
now, we’re not unionized. When one union was talking to us, our company
basically said they’d give us the money we would’ve paid in dues as bonuses. But
that never happened.Chris Hawks: I remember driving through
not long ago and looking at this hill that they had strip-mined. The landscape
was totally different. Flying over it going from Salt Lake to Denver, you could
see the coal seams. The amount of earth they’d moved was absolutely staggering.J.J. Anselmi is the author of Heavy: A Memoir of Wyoming, BMX, Drugs, and Heavy Fucking Music, and Doomed to Fail: The Incredibly Loud History of Doom, Sludge, and Post-metal.Our top story picks in business writing this year.Through December, we’re featuring Longreads’ Best of 2020. After revisiting hundreds of business stories picked by the team this year, we’ve narrowed down our favorites. Enjoy these nine reads, including coverage of the wildest startup collapses and in-depth explorations of pandemic insurance, TikTok content houses, 5G, and the state of the fossil fuel industry.If you like these, you can sign up to receive our weekly email every Friday.* * *Carolyn Rafaelian spent 15 years building a jewelry empire, making her company, famous for its $30 expandable wire bracelets, one of the fastest-growing fashion brands ever. But what led to Alex and Ani’s fall? Aaron Gell’s piece has it all: an odd alliance between a spiritual “earth mother” founder and an Army major-turned-CEO, business decisions influenced by astrology and New Age practices, a $1.1 billion gender discrimination lawsuit against Bank of America, and even a spinoff into a “university”that was meant to share the company’s life lessons with the world.Buzzwords aside, the curriculum mostly aimed to impart an essential truth behind Alex and Ani’s appeal: Its products were not just glittery trinkets but spiritual armor designed to protect, inspire, and ennoble the bearer as she made her way through the world. Retail employees at the company’s “bangle bars” were known internally as “bar tenders” for their patience and empathy. They’d draw out customers’ personal stories — what AAU president Dennis Rebelo called “story birthing” — prescribing just the right stones and talismans (the Eye of Horus for protection, light, and reason; the dragonfly for grace, change, and power) for each unique journey.Nathan Wolfe, a former epidemiology professor at UCLA, started a company — Metabiota — focused on helping industries and governments build resilience to epidemics. When they partnered with German reinsurance provider Munich Re five years ago, they developed what is essentially the world’s first pandemic business insurance. But, as Wolfe explains to Ratliff, nobody bought it. Through Ratliff’s lens, Wolfe is compelling (“an Indiana Jones-like virus hunter”), as is his look into Metabiota’s work on disease surveillance and pandemic modeling.As the human and economic devastation multiplied in tandem across the globe, Metabiota’s employees suddenly found themselves living inside their own model’s projections. Just two years earlier, the company had run a large set of scenarios forecasting the consequences of a novel coronavirus spreading around the globe. “I guess part of what I’m struggling with emotionally is that it’s almost like we’ve been attacked by a cliché,” Oppenheim told me later. “No one can predict the exact timing and location and dynamics, but the broad contours are a story that people have walked through specifically before.”“In many ways, the Foxconn debacle in Wisconsin is the physical manifestation of the alternate reality that has defined the Trump administration.” The deal the administration and the state’s Republican leaders made in 2017 for the Foxconn project was huge: a $10 billion investment from the Taiwanese electronics company, a 20 million-square-foot LCD factory, and 13,000 jobs. It would put Southeastern Wisconsin on the map as a world-class manufacturing hub: “Wisconn Valley,” or the Silicon Valley of the Midwest. Today, none of that exists. Dzieza’s investigation is thorough and brutal from start to finish (and is sleekly designed, too).The company had little progress to show the new administration. Rather than the 1,040 people Foxconn intended to hire by the end of 2018, per its contract with the state, or even the 260 needed in order to receive subsidies, an audit found the company had managed to hire only 113. At the Mount Pleasant campus, it had erected a single structure, a 120,000-square-foot space that sat virtually empty. Its very name, “the multi-purpose building,” seemed noncommittal. As for the promised LCD factory, the “Fab,” Foxconn boasted in a letter that a contractor had moved 4 million cubic yards of dirt. As 2018 came to an end, the company froze budgets and canceled planned career fairs. The project entered a complete stall.In this fun deep-dive into the fascinating and fickle world of TikTok content mansions and collab houses in Los Angeles, Jennings follows internet-famous teens navigating a new system of talent management and fame, which is compared to the studio system of classic Hollywood when stars were tied to companies in long-term contracts. You’ll read about content creators who’ve leveraged their massive followings into lucrative sponsorships and deals with brands, feuds with rival houses, shady managers sharking for opportunities in a fledgling industry, and money that doesn’t seem to exist.By the end of October, the Inspir3 House started to turn on its founder. “I’ve known him forever, so when he started telling all these lies, I was sure to tell everybody to protect themselves,” Justin says. Nupur says they’d have meetings during which Chase would talk for hours about what was going to happen with their careers — he’d allegedly promised lucrative sponsorship deals and a potential reality show. A charity called U R the Future had reached out to hire the members to do activities, such as cleaning up beaches and handing out pizzas to homeless people, and then post the videos on their social channels, but Chase allegedly asked the house members to pay for things the charity was supposed to have covered (for instance, the pizza). U R the Future eventually pulled out.Nupur also says all the money she earned during her stay with Inspir3 came from her own TikTok livestreams, where viewers would send her digital gifts that could be transferred to cash, without any help from Chase. That was, until CBS reached out for a brand promotion: Nupur was nervous to negotiate with such a large company, so she forwarded the email to Chase, who set the payment to $1,500 with a 15 percent fee. But Nupur never got the money, even as Chase badgered her for his 15 percent. She eventually found out he had CBS pay his PayPal account instead of hers, and when she confronted him, he claimed his PayPal account wasn’t working. She says she still hasn’t gotten the money.“What could drive two yogic, environmentally conscious, vegan brownstoners to kick out their unemployed tenants during a global pandemic?” In a can’t-put-down tale of gentrification and grift, Read traces the undoing of Gennaro Brooks-Church and Loretta Gendville, ex-partners who accumulated their wealth through a network of yoga studios, Airbnb rentals, and rooms in illegally converted properties. As bosses and landlords, they were a complete mess, and their “empire seemed to operate on a shoestring”: think overworked staff with low pay and no benefits, nonexistent leases, unpaid gas bills and fines, and rat sightings at parties. By the time the pandemic hit in March, the couple had nine mortgages on six properties, so you can take a guess at why they suddenly appeared on the doorstep of one of them, 1214 Dean Street, over the summer. While I don’t like the phrase “hate-read,” this one certainly is. And it’s a good one.They squeezed every drop of money they could out of every setup. Brooks-Church offered workers free yoga classes in exchange for a day of labor in his building business. Gendville offered free classes to guests when the couple began renting out both of their Carroll Gardens brownstones on Airbnb and Vrbo for at least $200 a night. Multiple guests at the Douglass Street listing complained in reviews that it looked as if someone had been living in the rooms right up to the moment they arrived. The couple and their children, according to yoga teachers, would sometimes sleep in the yoga studios because every other property was occupied.And still they kept expanding. In 2016, as the next wave of gentrification gathered speed, the couple spent $1.4 million to purchase two properties in Flatbush and East New York. They took out additional mortgages on two of their other homes, accruing more than $2 million in debt in only four months. And why not? Brooklyn home sales continued to break records, and the market’s consensus was as giddy as it was unsustainable.Over 10 years ago, a relatively unknown Turkish scientist named Erdal Arıkan made a breakthrough in the field of information theory — polar codes. This discovery eventually helped Huawei, a Chinese telecommunications company, to take the lead in the global 5G technology race. Levy’s profile of Arıkan and his wider look at Huawei offer context on who will drive technology for the world’s communications system for years to come.Huawei was ecstatic. But it was not just Huawei’s win; it was China’s too. Finally, a Chinese company was getting respect commensurate with its increasingly dominant power in the marketplace. “Huawei-backed polar code entering the 5G standard has a symbolic meaning,” one observer told a reporter at the time. “This is the first time a Chinese company has entered a telecommunications framework agreement, winning the right to be heard.”Fossil fuel giant Shell flew Malcolm Harris to a private planning workshop so he could talk about global warming from his millennial perspective. In turn, he meets and chats with a number of employees, and — having not signed an NDA — shares a frank, fly-on-the-wall account of what he hears and learns. TL;DR: big oil companies are talking about climate change. They may even invest in progress. But at the end of the day, their future still rests in oil and gas. The policymakers at Shell simply want the public to think they’re part of the solution, when “[in] reality, they’re a problem trying to avoid being solved.”By gathering millennial employees from throughout the company, along with experts on the cohort and senior management, the strategies team surely hoped to infuse the firm’s leadership with a drip of youth consciousness, the way some oligarchs are rumored to inject themselves with young people’s blood.If Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is going to rally millennials around Green New Deal legislation, then it’s a good time to become a green-energy company — or at least buy a few of those and rebrand that way. Climate protesters are just another market reality, one that can be profitable when apprehended correctly, even for a big, old oil and gas firm. The question was how to see that generational conflict coming, how to meet it and harness it and ride it into the future.Enjoyed this story about MedMen? Here’s another favorite on a startup collapse: Mo Tkacik’s Bustle profile of Rebekah Neumann and an account of WeWork’s rise and fall.Right from the start, MedMen was slated to become the next big cannabis startup: it had famous fans at its ribbon-cutting ceremony in Venice, California, a partnership with Gwyneth Paltrow’s Goop, and a slick marketing campaign. But the company, founded by Adam Bierman and Andrew Modlin, ran into trouble soon after: Bank fraud. Excessive spending. Illegal political contributions. Instead of soaring high, it unraveled into a “cautionary tale of American Wild West capitalism,” becoming known as the “WeWork of weed” to the rest of the industry.Where the traditional dispensary experience could feel grungy and illicit, the MedMen in “WeHo,” with its wood-paneled interior, aimed for sleek sophistication. Strains of weed were displayed in well-lit glass cases, and built-in iPads allowed customers to browse information about the offerings. The weed was stored in stainless steel drums in a back room that resembled an open kitchen in a high-end restaurant. After ordering, customers could watch through a window as uniformed staff, called “Budtenders,” retrieved it.Hey team! I have an ask. Let’s chat async about ways we can ladder up our skills in the new year and strategize some quick wins. We’ll break up into two teams so we can parallel-path roadmaps, then meet in a few weeks to synergize and find alignment. Sigh.I’ve revisited this brilliant piece numerous times this year, and it gets better each time. Young writes sharply about the language we encounter in the workplace — from empty corporate-speak to marketing fluff — that takes up space, impedes communication, and even creates the illusion that you’re doing more work than you really are. It’s spot on.The front of the plaid packet said UPTAPPED: ALL NATURAL ENERGY. The marketing copy said, “For too long athletic nutrition has been sweetened with cheap synthetic sugars. The simplicity of endurance sports deserves a simple ingredient — 100% pure, unadulterated, organic Vermont maple syrup, the all-natural, low glycemic-index sports fuel.”It was a packet of maple syrup. Nothing more. Whenever I hear a word like operationalize or touchpoint, I think of that packet — of some anonymous individual, probably with a Stanford degree and a net worth many multiples of my own, funneling maple syrup into tubelets and calling it low-glycemic-index sports fuel. It’s not a crime to try to convince people that their favorite pancake accessory is a viable biohack, but the words have a scammy flavor. And that’s the closest I can come to a definition of garbage language that accounts for its eternal mutability: words with a scammy flavor. As with any scam, the effectiveness lies in the delivery. Thousands of companies have tricked us into believing that a mattress or lip-gloss order is an ideological position.* * *Read all the categories in our Best of 2020 year-end collection.
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
Three nights before Christmas 2016, I was standing in my bathroom when a gallop broke out across my chest. It was ventricular tachycardia, a dangerous kind of arrhythmia where only one side of the heart pumps and does so at high speed, denying blood from moving through it. At the age of 23, I’d had arrhythmias all my life, but had never felt anything like this. Twenty minutes later, with the arrhythmia still going, I was in the back of a parked ambulance. Alone with the EMTs, I braced for the shock of a defibrillator.The pain was overwhelming, like being grilled alive. It ran out from a center point in my chest and flowed into every organ, every limb, into my fingers and toes. Later, waiting in the trauma section of the Mount Sinai emergency room, doctors shocked me again.Months of testing followed. I started taking drugs that would help reduce my arrhythmias, but in addition, my doctors suggested they replace my pacemaker with something called an ICD. The ICD would be a fail-safe, a tiny defibrillator inside my body that could go everywhere that I went.When I came across an FDA safety notice warning that some ICDs, namely those made by a company called St. Jude, could be hacked, I was only days away from surgery. Once hacked, the devices could allow an external actor to gain control of the ICD, reprogram its functions, and inflict all kinds of damage—even trigger death.The week before surgery, I texted my nurse practitioner about the FDA warning. She responded quickly, “Don’t worry. We’re using a different brand,” as if the issue was settled. In the blur of acute disease, I ignored the instinct to dig further into what exactly these cybersecurity concerns might mean or what other concerns might be hiding just below the surface.When they first came to market in the 1980s, ICDs (implanted cardioverter-defibrillators) were implanted rarely, mostly in patients who had already experienced a life-threatening episode of ventricular tachycardia or even cardiac arrest. They were often called “secondary prevention” tools — meaning a patient has already experienced a life-threatening event and the device had the potential to stop a second event. In the 40 years since, clinical guidelines have changed dramatically, and the use case for ICDs has broadened. The United States has become the biggest market in the world for ICDs, with new ICD implantations increasing almost ninefold from 1993 to 2006. Doctors now implant at least 10,000 new devices each month in the United States. Many of these devices are now used for “primary prevention,” meaning a patient hasn’t yet experienced an event that could be stopped by an ICD, but they might be at risk for one.In the past 13 years, these devices have also been fully integrated into the so-called Internet of Things—millions of everyday consumer items being programmed for and connected to the internet. Once connected to the internet, the devices ease the work of physicians and hospitals, who can now manage the device and monitor the patient’s condition remotely. Patients are typically charged each time their device sends data to the hospital. Think of it as a subscription—for your heart.ICDs are just one increasingly popular medical gadget in a rising sea of clinical and commercial wireless health devices. Whether it is the growing suite of cardiac-monitoring devices available at home and on the go or an Apple Watch outfitted with diagnostic software, we are outsourcing more and more of our health to internet-enabled machines.Having now lived with an ICD for more than three years and a pacemaker for the preceding 14, I understand intimately the consequences of being a body paired to the grid. If your smart fridge loses connectivity, maybe your food goes bad a few days early. But if a wireless ICD experiences a failure, the result could be lethal. I am stalked by the fear of the device misfiring and have wondered endlessly whether the documented security risks posed by these devices could end up harming me.The first cardiac device I had was a pacemaker, implanted when I was nine years old. Though pacemakers and ICDs have overlapping patient demographics and are sometimes bundled in the same device, they have drastically different functions. Pacemakers help a patient’s normal heart rhythm cycle, while ICDs are tiny defibrillators meant to terminate dangerous arrhythmias and prevent cardiac arrest. In everyday life, defibrillators wait in hospitals and public spaces (gyms, churches, movie theaters) for disaster to strike — they are tools you seek out in an emergency. But an ICD brings the emergency response to you. It is watchful, an active listener. I think of a pacemaker as a heartbeat assistant; an ICD is an arrhythmia assassin.For as long as I’ve had one, I’ve been acutely aware that a pacemaker is a sensitive machine and can be derailed by plenty of things: airport security; laser tag vests; the seats in 4D amusement park rides; store security towers; cellphones; and still, somehow, microwaves. All of these things could disrupt the pacemaker, reprogram it, even stop it cold. As a child in the grocery store, I ran through the theft towers quickly, like I was trying to shoplift. I sat on the sidelines while friends ripped through laser tag arenas at birthday parties. Fewer than two years into post-9/11 hysteria, I panicked as a nine-year-old when a TSA agent came toward me with a security wand. I bolted, running farther into the terminal at Boston’s Logan Airport. I only made it a few yards before I was stopped by a knee to my chest, a muscled agent pulling me to the ground. My panic had made me into an apparent security threat.Doctors also posed a risk to my new device. During regular office checkups, ominously called “interrogations,” they would place a large magnetic wand over the pacemaker to take control of it. Between in-office interrogations, every three months, my physicians mandated that I do “home monitoring,” which involved a complicated and archaic process. I would hook myself up to a transmitter box that would screech out a dial-up tone to a stranger sitting in a call center somewhere via the receiver of a landline phone. And just like in-office interrogations, I needed to place a heavy round magnet over the device. Because a heavy magnet disrupts a pacemaker, I would sit in a wave of dizziness and nausea while a distant tech received the information. The whole process often lasted 15 or 20 minutes. When it was done, I would sit back in the kitchen chair, spent, waiting for the blood to return to my head.I don’t have to do this anymore. Remote-monitoring pacemakers were first sold to the general public around 2007; currently, the industry standard for remote monitoring involves routers paired via Bluetooth to wireless-enabled cardiac devices. These routers sit in a patient’s bedroom and run constantly, pulling data at regular intervals and transmitting it straight to their doctor via the internet. No phone calls and no magnets involved. Ideally, a patient never even knows their data is being collected.Clinically, the benefits of remote monitoring are twofold: The patient doesn’t have to enter a medical setting to be monitored, which reduces the likelihood of iatrogenic disease — illness caused by the interference of the medical system. At the same time, doctors get more data than they’ve ever had access to, allowing them, ideally, a window to disease prevention. (I, along with many other patients, take issue with the second proposition, given that we cannot access our own data; there’s a substantial activist movement toward data liberation that includes cardiac patients who have fought for more than a decade to gain access to the information generated by wireless-enabled pacemakers and ICDs.)“[The benefits of remote monitoring have] been held up over the years with just being able to diagnose something early,” said Dr. Leslie Saxon, a cardiologist and electrophysiologist who runs the Center for Body Computing at the University of Southern California. In 2010, Saxon led a study in partnership with device manufacturer Boston Scientific that found improved survival rates for patients who were monitored with remote monitoring, as compared with patients who were only followed with periodic in-clinic visits. “We also learned that we could learn how to program and make these devices a lot better if we were looking at all this data all the time,” she said.But as remote monitoring has become more widespread, concerns about the cybersecurity of the practice have only grown. Since 2011, the FDA has issued at least 11 warnings and many recalls on pacemakers and ICDs over concerns relating to cybersecurity and safety. This includes the 2017 notice for St. Jude devices that I found just before my surgery. The security defect affected at least a half-million patients and was ultimately resolved by a software patch sent directly to their remote monitors.Manufacturers like Medtronic often advise that patients keep their monitors turned on and connected so this sort of patch or upgrade can be delivered. But patches, often quietly sent to the devices, can leave patients in the dark: There is no streamlined process to let patients know when a vulnerability has been identified in their specific device or when a patch might be on its way. And researchers have argued that retroactive patches are no replacement for baked-in security. “The main concern is if vendors continuously rely on reactively resorting to pushing patches instead of securing their devices by design,” Fotis Chantzis, a security engineer who used to hack medical devices for a major health care institution and the lead author of Practical IoT Hacking: The Definitive Guide to Attacking the Internet of Things, told OneZero. “Usually these patches fix a particular vulnerability,” he continued, “but keep in mind that there is also this view of the security community that every bug can potentially be exploited given the right circumstances.”Device companies and doctors are often quick to insist that the cybersecurity concern is overblown. For years, they’ve maintained that while the routers can communicate with and gather data from patient devices, they can’t actually control the devices or deliver reprogramming directives. Dr. Rob Kowal, chief medical officer for cardiac rhythm and heart failure at Medtronic, told OneZero, “[Remote programming is] not possible,” at least with his company’s current home routers.There are two kinds of connections involved in remote monitoring: the connection from the patient’s implanted device to the router, which is often Bluetooth, and the connection from the router back to the data portal seen by the physician, which can use anything from a home Wi-Fi network to a hardline Ethernet cable or a phone line. Manufacturers insist that these channels have now been made secure.But many related FDA warnings have warned that hackers could, in fact, assume control and reprogram a patient’s device. Researchers and white hat hackers have demonstrated that the connections from the device to the router and from the router to the data portal are exploitable. Hackers have made headlines over the past decade-plus by exposing vulnerabilities in pacemakers and ICDs from every major developer, including St. Jude’s (now Abbott), Medtronic, and Boston Scientific.In 2018, researchers Billy Rios and Jonathan Butts from cybersecurity firm Whitescope demonstrated that they could hack into both cardiac devices and insulin pumps built by Medtronic, with potentially deadly results: They could shock a patient’s heart into cardiac arrest or administer a lethal amount of insulin. They told Wired that the devices lacked basic security functions: Medtronic’s MiniMed line of insulin pumps used radio frequencies that were easy to figure out, and there was no encryption on communications between the pumps and their remote controls. Rios and Butts also discovered that the company’s pacemakers didn’t use code signing, a standard security function that authenticates the legitimacy of things like software updates.Bill Aerts, Medtronic’s former director of product security until 2016, is now the executive director at the Archimedes Center for Healthcare and Device Security at the University of Michigan, which was founded by the researcher who, in 2008, co-authored the first major paper on cardiac device security. “Like anything else,” Aerts told me, the level of security built into such devices “was a matter of demand and costs.” He went on to say, “It took a while to educate the engineering community about these risks… Then the boss says, ‘No, that’s going to cost too much to add that extra functionality [security features].’ And so that took a while to get people to believe that, yes, it’s worth investing in.”The company took more than a year and a half to respond to the security concerns flagged by Rios and Butts and was apparently reluctant to offer solutions. “They are more interested in protecting their brand than their patients,” Rios told CNBC at the time. In an article from CBS News, Butts put it bluntly: “We’ve yet to find a device that we’ve looked at that we haven’t been able to hack.”Have you heard the one about Dick Cheney? Talk to a cardiac device patient long enough and they’re bound to bring it up. The former vice president first got an ICD in 2001. In 2007, as the battery ran down, he needed to have it replaced. At the time, Cheney was a candidate to be one of the first patients to wear an ICD with wireless monitoring. But there was a problem: national security. Even before independent hackers raised the alarm, his doctors were worried that a potential terrorist could gain access and trigger the ICD to shock him to death. Cheney and his doctor decided to disable the wireless function before implantation, which required a custom adjustment from Medtronic.Cheney’s special treatment wasn’t disclosed until 2013, when he and his cardiologist collaborated on a book about his heart saga titled — what else — Heart. The sensationalism of the claim, that the vice president could invite a terror attack through his own heart, made it somehow easier for doctors and manufacturers to dismiss the concerns of average patients. Who are you to worry? You’re not Dick Cheney, after all.For the general public, concerns around medical device cybersecurity first emerged in 2008, not long after the debut of remote monitoring. But I and hundreds of thousands of other patients were never given the option of a custom ICD with the wireless function disabled. Instead, we live with the knowledge that it could be hacked, with few people taking our concerns seriously.To be clear: There is no documented evidence that a patient’s ICD or pacemaker has ever been hacked for malicious purposes. But the potential for hacking is hardly theoretical. What exists for now are two parts of an equation that have been proven independently: 1) Devices can be hacked; and 2) devices can cause unintentional and catastrophic harm. Put together, they would equal an opportunity for direct control over a patient’s life and safety in a way never previously seen in medicine.Devices misfire, sans hacking, all the time. A 2017 study published by the American Heart Association found that during a two-year period, about 10% of ICD patients experienced shocks of some kind. But within that population, 38% of shocks delivered by the device were inappropriate—meaning patients were cardioverted or defibrillated when they didn’t need to be.Some patients who experience a needless shock to the heart will suffer no obvious or immediate side effects. Some may have psychological side effects, like anxiety or depression related to the fear the device will shock them again. And then there are the more serious consequences. In 2017, Boston Scientific disclosed that a patient had died when their ICD malfunctioned. The device’s memory had been corrupted after exposure to radiation similar to what someone might be exposed to in radiation treatment for cancer. But the patient hadn’t received any such treatment, and Boston Scientific wasn’t able to establish where this exposure might’ve come from. The FDA’s public database of medical device reports contains pages of entries regarding the deaths of ICD and pacemaker patients, citing everything from lead fracture to memory failure, but these reports often decline to cite a device problem as firmly causal in a patient’s death. It is hard to pin down a number of deaths related directly to ICDs because autopsies are rarely performed, and U.S. law requires family consent for device removal after death.A 2015 study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association investigated a small sample of pacemaker and ICD patients who had died suddenly. The researchers found that about half of the sudden-death cases with ICDs that they observed had some form of “device concern” present, highlighting issues including hardware failures, undersensing, improper programming, and lead fracture.I was told that if my device ever fired, a shock would come with a short warning sound ringing out from below my skin. I don’t know what the alarm sounds like, but I imagine it as something just loud enough to fill the seconds before defibrillation with an appropriate sense of panic.When I woke up from surgery in January 2017, the world was sideways — literally. It had lasted for so long, nearly 10 hours, that I developed acute vertigo from how my body was arranged on the table; the ICD had actually knocked me off balance. For the first several months of living with the ICD, I kept the remote monitor plugged in and turned on. It sat on the dresser in the corner of my bedroom, constantly lit up green.My fear of the device infected every moment of the day. In the months after implantation, I walked around in a state of gloom like I was awaiting an invitation to my own funeral. I sunk quickly and comfortably into a depression that turned me almost completely housebound, worried about every potential action that could invite the device to fire: Could a coffee send me into an arrhythmia? Would exercise trigger cardiac arrest? Was I opening myself up to invisible risks by keeping myself constantly paired to the internet? Rather than a savior on my side, the ICD was both a permanent reminder of how close I’d been to death and still remained and a constant threat that the pain I experienced in defibrillation could return at any moment. All illusion about afforded freedoms melted away like the cheap marketing it was. I felt the least free I’d ever been, a permanent inmate in the prison of my own skeleton.I was perversely relieved when I learned, years later, that the psychic effects I felt were not unprecedented. In 2013, a comprehensive review of 25 separate studies into the psychological effects of living with an ICD found that at least 30% of patients showed “signs and symptoms of depression and poor quality of life” after having an ICD implanted, with most of that population meeting the criteria for post-traumatic stress disorder, and many experiencing worse symptoms as time went on. For months after its implantation, I told almost no one about the device. I wasn’t sure if I actually believed that my safety depended on keeping it a secret or if I was searching desperately for some form of control.My anxiety has lessened with time, but still the question nags at me, settling into a more ambient concern. I no longer spend every second of the day worrying and waiting for another shock, mostly because I’ve learned not to think about it. What bothers me more now is the cavalier way the medical community has decided unilaterally that the threat of hacking does not matter for the average person, and that the side effects are outweighed by the lifesaving nature of the device. Their counter, when it comes to hacking, is not that harm is impossible, but rather that it’s unthinkable: Who would even want to hack a patient? And if nobody comes to mind, is the problem worth fixing?When I moved to a new apartment last summer, I neglected to unpack my remote monitor from its box, letting it collect dust on a high closet shelf for months.My hesitance over engaging with it retreats and returns like this in cycles. Some doctors have argued that overpublicizing negative information about medical devices unnecessarily adds to hysteria in a way that affects patient compliance. “You have to make sure that the reaction to [a problem like hacking] doesn’t introduce more risk than the potential for a problem,” Dr. Saxon told me. Removing a problematic device, for example, reintroduces all the standard risks of surgery.But it’s hardly just the threat of hacking that worries me. It’s a feeling instead of living as a guinea pig for an opaque set of private interests, and a feeling that I can’t trust an industry that would ever put unsecure devices inside patients in the first place.It’s tacitly accepted, especially in health care, that this continued development naturally means improvement; that the further we get from the early 20th-century days of unsterile surgery, from the time before anesthesia and antibiotics, the safer our medicine becomes. But instead, by entangling medicine with the Wild West–like tech industry, the medical IoT poses a new suite of therapies meant to save lives that can also be hacked and sabotaged to endanger them.“There is a rising challenge in terms of making sure it’s secure, because some of these devices are, you know, it’s a huge marketplace, there’s a rush to get products out,” said Aerts of commercial medical tech. “Companies either aren’t always willing to invest the time and money it takes to build security into those products or they are new to the marketplace and just don’t understand it.”What’s worse is that the rapid normalization of people willing to pair their medical data, health monitoring, and disease management to the internet in some ways perpetuates itself. Connected medical devices like pacemakers, ICDs, and continuous glucose monitors for diabetes management, as well as commercial wellness products like fitness wearables, create a flywheel effect that amplifies further use on both sides. Before medical and health IoT devices took off, people generally went to the doctor when they felt unwell. Now people are also going to the doctor when they feel fine but a machine is telling them something is wrong. Diagnostic cardiac tools, for example, like the Apple Watch’s arrhythmia detection, have the potential to drive more people into the health care system and could end up helping to increase the population of cardiac device users.There’s already some evidence that connected cardiac devices are being overprescribed, perhaps due to the positive bias the devices can engender in doctors and manufacturers. A 2011 study in JAMA found that in a population of more than 100,000 ICD patients, more than one-fifth received an ICD without meeting the standard clinical guidelines for implantation. Many of them had never experienced any kind of ventricular arrhythmia.I have had my ICD for nearly four years now. In that time, it has never once shocked me. I should feel relieved that the device has not yet gone off, but instead, the longer it sits inside my body without having saved my life, the more I think about the device’s ability to end it. Much of my experience of the health care system has been one of escalating calamity: The solution to one problem invariably causes an even bigger one. Even my very first pacemaker seems linked inextricably to the fact that I later became eligible for an ICD: About 10 months into living with it, I developed an arrhythmia that my doctors later determined was somehow caused by interference from the pacemaker itself. The heart surgeries I’ve had over the years have contributed to a layer of scar tissue on my heart that predisposed me—and likely contributed to—the incident that led to the ICD. When it comes to the security of the ICD itself, it’s less an absolute question of whether the costs outweigh the benefits and more a philosophical one. Not only do I feel less safe, but I am now also acutely aware of the ways in which I might have been destined to end up at this point, tracing the steps that led me here back through the maze of treatment.The timeworn credo of medicine is “first, do no harm.” It’s hardly a fast rule anymore, but the principle comes into sharp relief when discussing the danger posed by medical devices. Doctors and manufacturers often take a statistical approach when discussing the cost-benefit relationship of these devices: Real harm is minuscule, comparatively. ICDs save lives all the time, so that justifies their use. But this gets the principle completely backwards. The question is not supposed to be will this patient get sicker if you don’t intervene, but rather, will someone get sicker if you do?This year, my doctor mentioned that their office hadn’t received a transmission from my ICD in a while. When I got home, I reluctantly pulled the monitor out from my closet and plugged it in by my dresser. I began the process of pairing the monitor with the device in my chest, but the monitor was having trouble connecting to my Wi-Fi. I tried it a second time, and then a third: A startup sequence ended in a flashing red light. I stopped trying to pair the devices. I breathed a sigh of relief, feeling as if, even momentarily, I’d regained control over myself, and put the monitor back into the closet.Written byA newsletter that puts the week's most compelling tech stories in context, by OneZero senior writer Will Oremus. Take a lookOur top picks in Crime Reporting for 2020.Through December, we’re featuring Longreads’ Best of 2020. After taking a plunge into the murky world of crime, we narrowed down our favorites. Enjoy these Best of Crime reads, showcasing gripping tales and insights into the human psyche. If you like these, you can sign up to receive our weekly Top 5 email every Friday.* * *Van der Leun’s piece details the plight of Kwaneta Yatrice Harris — who, incarcerated for killing an abusive partner, wrote her letters from solitary confinement in a Texas prison. This year a lot of us have spent vast expanses of time isolated from family and friends — and so for many, this story will strike a chord. When van de Leun discusses pandemic lockdowns, she states, “Those who were alone began to physically throb for human connection.” This is a powerful concept — if we, with all the distractions of Zoom and Netflix and pets, can still ache for human connection when isolating, consider what it must feel like for those locked in solitary for months, with their senses so deprived of stimulation they magnify to “smell the guard’s perfume, hear the click of shoes echoing from far away.” By talking to Harris, van de Leun gives us an inkling of what it is like to live in a condition that is “classified as torture by the United Nations, serves no rehabilitative purpose, and causes mental health to deteriorate in as few as ten days.” A registered nurse, Harris is terrified of COVID-19, and the unsanitary conditions she finds herself in — her unit is rarely cleaned, and she showers in one of three showers shared by forty-two women. This essay also echoes another horrific event of 2020 — the death of George Floyd, killed during his arrest in Minneapolis. The racism that Black people experience at the hands of the police can extend to prison wardens. In Texas in 2015, a Black man named Mark Sabbie was feeling unwell — he was given a disciplinary ticket for “creating a disturbance” by “feining [sic] illness and difficulty breathing.” He was cuffed in his cells and left alone — and found dead the next morning. An emotional read: but an important look at how the challenges wider society has faced in 2020 are magnified inside the microcosm of a Texas prison.What does it mean to be “criminally insane”? The official answer sounds simple — to have a mental illness that impairs you from telling the difference between right and wrong. But mental illness is a nuanced spectrum — and, to many, it seems impossible to decipher someone’s state of mind during a crime. This story is a fascinating exploration into the complexities of the insanity plea in the United States — which, even though there are “lots of tests and things you can do to kind of back up your intuition … in the end, it’s kind of this gut feeling.” Using the case study of Anthony Montwheeler,  Fischer explores what can happen when a gut feeling isn’t enough. Montwheeler apparently played the system. Charged in 1996 with kidnapping his wife and son at gunpoint he was found “guilty except for insanity.” Twenty years later, he claimed he faked mental illness by studying a copy of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders and mimicking behavioral traits — to avoid incarceration in favor of a state psychiatric hospital — and now wanted to be discharged. After he spoke at a hearing for a total of eight-and-a-half minutes, a review board decided Montwheeler was “no longer affected by a qualifying mental disease or defect,” and the state was legally required to discharge him. Had Montwheeler been pretending all those years? It seems no one really knows for sure, but what we do know is that after his release he went on to murder his third ex-wife, Annita Harmon. This case is a rarity — the insanity defense is pursued in fewer than one percent of all criminal trials. But, however hard to define, mental health is still an obvious factor in crime: “37 percent of prisoners and 44 percent of jail inmates have been told by a mental health professional at some point in their lives that they suffer from a mental disorder.” Fischer shows that while the insanity defense may be flawed,  there is still a clear link between mental health and criminality — with a lack of mental health care, and the resulting issues, apparent. Greenberg is meticulous in his detailed analysis of Marcus Hutchins’ character, a hacker who some view as a criminal, and others as the savior of the internet. It’s a thrilling story, with many twists and turns, but also an exploration into people’s moral complexities.Hutchins stopped the worst malware attack the world had ever seen — christened WannaCry. In the space of an afternoon, it destroyed, by some estimates, nearly a quarter of a million computers’ data — before Hutchins found the kill switch. He was celebrated as a hero, but Hutchins himself knew “what it was like to sit behind a keyboard, detached from the pain inflicted on innocents far across the internet.” Three years earlier he had been the chief author of Kronos — a type of malware focused on stealing banking login credentials. After disabling WannaCry, Hutchins’ previous work with Kronos was discovered and he was arrested. The hacker world rallied in support — which left Hutchins ravaged by guilt for what he had done, but even the judge in his trial concluded that “one might view the ignoble conduct that underlies this case as against the backdrop of what some have described as the work of a hero, a true hero.” This is a thought-provoking insight into the gradual descent into a criminal world, the climb back out again, and the layers of gray in between.It feels jarring to put the terms “beautiful” and “lynching” in the same sentence — but this personal essay about the 1947 lynching of Willie Earle is beautifully written. Guess’ writing is almost lyrical — as she explains how the wind blew “history into my path” in wonderfully descriptive language.When Guess moved into her farmhouse in Georgia she found a box of old newspapers from the mid-1940s through the early 50s. She stored them in the woodshed until a blustery autumn storm disturbed them and scattered them about the property. One headline that appeared, like “a bird I had been expecting in this landscape that carries memories of racialized violence,” read “State Seeks Death Sentence For All 31 Lynchers.” Not ready for the emotional toll of exploring this incident further, Guess tucked the paper away, but the story wanted to be told, and a few weeks later the wind blew the conclusion across the garden: “28 White Men Get Blanket Acquittal in South Carolina Mass Lynch Trial.” It was Willie Earle who was killed, to avenge the fatal stabbing of a cab driver named Thomas Brown. Arrested, then almost immediately kidnapped from jail, Earle had no opportunity to stand trial — his guilt or innocence was never proven. His murderers were given that chance, but despite ample evidence and confessions, were found innocent.Guess’ work focuses on dismantling racism in Georgia, so it seemed fate that this story, literally, landed at her feet. She went on to research the history of the Willie Earle murder, discovering it was considered the last lynching in South Carolina, and, although the trial was a miscarriage of justice, it marked the end of mob violence and the beginning of a rumbling that eventually became the Civil Rights Movement.Amongst one or two other things, 2020 was the year people learned the names Joe Exotic and Carole Baskin. The Netflix series Tiger King landed on our screens at the same time that many of us were in lockdown due to COVID-19, and was binge-watched by millions. This story by Rachel Nuwer was written before we met these characters on Netflix while clutching our loo rolls and hand sanitizer, and her piece sheds a brighter light on their complicated personalities.Nuwer’s piece explores the murder-for-hire plots that Exotic instigated against Baskin, but her focus also remains firmly on the animals around which the story revolves. Exotic was not only convicted of murder-for-hire — but of 17 wildlife crimes, including illegally killing five tigers and trafficking them across state lines — a significant conviction when there is still no oversight over big cat ownership by the federal government. This investigation goes beyond the larger than life characters and the human drama, and actually shows us the lives of the animals that are owned by America’s big cat people.* * *Read all the categories in our Best of 2020 year-end collection.
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
For the sake of the story. For the love of the South.Rachel Lord Elizondo and Natasha Trethewey both lost their mothers to partner violence in Georgia.y life changed forever on my mother’s 52nd birthday when a sheriff’s deputy told me that she and my father were both dead. I doubled over and cried out from the pain. When I close my eyes, I can still see the blue lights flashing on the gray of the pines on that cold February night. As I try to drift off to sleep, I picture my mother’s last moments. My father breaking in, my mother running toward the door. The moment the shot rang out — did she turn back, call out for help, try to call 911 or one of us?These pieced-together, painful memories and imagined last moments are part of a gaping wound inside me that still festers — still refuses to heal.Natasha Trethewey, author of Memorial Drive: A Daughter’s Memoir, has a wound like this, too. She gives me a name to describe the feeling I have of not being able to fully move forward, of still having one foot stuck back on that cold February night and all the warning signs leading up to it. In the prologue of her memoir, Trethewey describes a dream she had of her mother and former stepfather, her mother’s murderer, just three weeks after her mother’s murder. When Trethewey wakes up, she is left with a question her mother asked her ringing in her head: “Do you know what it means to have a wound that never heals?” While there are differences in our story — mine a murder-suicide by a biologial father, hers a homicide by a former stepfather — both of our mothers were shot and killed in acts of domestic violence in Georgia. And I can’t help but feel that not enough has changed since Trethewey lost her mother in 1985.On a late September day that felt blissfully cool for rural south Georgia, I call Trethewey for an interview. We've exchanged a few emails back and forth, but this will be the first time we have ever spoken. Although separated by geographic distance — she lives in Illinois now, I still live in the same rural area where I grew up and where my parents died — and the decades between our personal tragedies, we make a connection almost instantly.I start by asking about the factors that she feels contributed to her mother’s murder.“Perhaps one thing that’s embedded in all of the things that you said … has to do with language,” she says. Trethewey is a Pulitzer Prize-winning poet, so it’s not surprising that she begins with language. “There are all kinds of cliches or the little statements that people make that are rooted in the role of women, and it goes back a long way … Embedded in so much of our language is this idea of the role of women and whether it is appropriate or not for the husband to discipline a wife.“My mother was told things like ‘stand by your man,’ regardless of what he may be doing to you. There’s also, ‘She made her bed, now she should lie in it.’ All of these kinds of sayings and the language then gives way to other notions about whether women choose their victimhood. I used to have to talk to my father about this, and I’ve written a poem about this. … My father would constantly say, ‘But she hated violence. Why would she marry a guy like that?’ Because my father, when he was a graduate student in New Orleans, he was also a boxer. My mother couldn’t stand that violence, so it made no sense to him that she would end up with this violent man, and I had to say again and again, it’s not like he just started beating her on the first date. That’s not how it happens, and people don’t understand that a woman, even someone who is educated, is employed and not dependent on her husband for her livelihood or her children’s care, could still find herself in a situation that was very hard to extricate herself from. “ … Something that still troubles me even now, when I was going back through, reading the court documents and the police reports, they continued to refer to my mother as his wife, even when she was his ex-wife. She was his ex-wife for two years before he actually killed her. She was his ex-wife, the first time he tried to kill her, and yet, as long as the documents kept saying that, to me — a poet who is so focused on language — it still added into the record some ownership of her. They can’t even get the language right. Somehow she’s still his, meaning to do with what he will.”Trethewey’s reflections on language remind me of the night of the murder when a relative said he “wished my parents could have gotten along.” I wish they could have gotten along too — but more than anything, I wish my father did not beat her, did not give her black eyes in front of us, did not choke her and his children, did not stalk and harass her, did not constantly manipulate language and lie, did not use manipulated Christianity to make it seem as if he was in the right, and, finally, that he did not violate a temporary protective order and kill her. It was not so much a matter of them “getting along.”I am also reminded of how many times I have had to list my parents as “married” on life insurance policy forms. They had been separated and in the process of a divorce when he murdered her.Trethewey and I compare our stories. We were both young women when our mothers were murdered. Both of our mothers were employed and well-educated. Trethewey's former stepfather killed her mother in a suburb outside of Atlanta, while my father committed the murder-suicide in my mother’s house in Ben Hill County in south-central Georgia. Trethewey was the child of an interracial marriage in Mississippi — her mother was Black and her father was white — when such marriages were still illegal; I am white, and I was born in Georgia. Trethewey’s mother had sought help from a shelter; my mother didn’t. Her mother lived in an apartment complex with dozens of neighbors around; mine could have screamed at the top of her lungs and not been heard.Trethewey’s mother, as a Black woman, faced increased risk. According to the National Coalition Against Domestic Violence,  an estimated 51.3% of Black adult female homicides are related to intimate partner violence. Additionally, in 2017, for female victim/male offender homicides, Black females had the highest rate at 2.55 per 100,000, meaning a rate higher than their white, rural counterparts.The rural landscape where my mother was killed presented its own unique challenges, such as neighbors not being able to hear or being within running distance, gun ownership being more prevalent, and limited resources in terms of victims services and access to medical care.I ask Trethewey for her opinion, wondering if these differences and similarities can reveal how the system failed our mothers in their own unique way. We went from being the interviewer and the interviewee, the virtually unknown freelance writer and the well-known poet and memoirist, to just two people whose lives were marred by the ugliness of domestic violence. Two women angry with the state of Georgia, their lawmakers, and all the systems that seemed to fail their mothers and so many people before and after them. Trethewey, 35 years out from her experience, sees the opportunity for connection.“I’m interested, too, about what is similar about our experiences, even as there are other divergences,” she says. “I mean, as we’ve been sitting here talking, I’ve been wanting to ask you things. I’m curious about how someone else lives through it and deals with it … I guess what I wanted to know from you, I mean, do you carry the kind of grief that I carry about losing your mother? … Did you love your father? How do you feel carrying that burden?”Answering her questions — thinking about how much I miss my mother, how I am carrying this burden daily, my constantly evolving feelings toward my father — is painful. I was my mama’s baby. I found a treasure trove of artwork I drew for my mother on holidays and special occasions and other notes and drawings I gave her just because. Pictures from school with sentences in sloppy block letters explaining how much I loved her. We found gifts from her students, handwritten notes from my sister, family photos we forgot existed, memorabilia from my brother’s time in the Boy Scouts. She had saved it all. I weep while writing about her, even as I write this now. When something good happens, for just a millisecond I think of telling her before I am reminded of that horrible night. I dream of her nearly every night.I have since dedicated myself to the cause of domestic violence awareness because it is the biggest way I know that I can still channel my love for her. I tell her story, my story, over and over again until I am numb to the details in hopes that it will save another woman’s life.As for my father, I spent my life trying to make excuses for him, constantly trying to reason with myself on why I loved the man who could be so awful. I wanted to believe he was the person who bought me candy at the store as a child and helped me convince my mother to take stray dogs in and whose face lit up when he played with my nephew. I wanted to believe he was the person who cut my mother fresh flowers because he wanted to, because he loved her, not because he was trying to convince her to stay with him because he had continued to abuse her.I wanted to try and believe he was more of the good parts than the yelling at night, the hole punched in the wall on my mother’s side of the bed when I was a child, the “You can run, but you can’t hide.” In the end, he shot and killed my mother and then himself and selfishly left my siblings and me to pick up the pieces of such a terrible tragedy, the ripples of which we will see for decades, probably even generations.When I speak with Nancy Bryan, the executive director of Ruth’s Cottage & The Patticake House, a women’s shelter that covers the region where my mother lived and worked, she brings up the issue of gun violence early on. (The shelter has a murder-suicide in its history, when one of the founding members of the shelter, Joy Hill, was murdered by her partner in 2002.) “It’s particularly challenging because gun ownership is really encouraged and prevalent [here], and the data show that the presence of guns escalates the homicide rate,” Bryan says. "Most of these women die from gunshot wounds. That’s the number one indicator.”An “indicator” refers to the lethality indicator assessments shelter staff fill out with clients when working on requesting a temporary protective order. While an order can technically be put in place for the perceived threat of physical violence, as Bryan tells me, in her experience, it is nearly impossible for victims to get one unless there is a history of physical violence in the county my parents lived in. These matters, the act of deciding whether to issue a temporary protective order or not, a matter that is literally life or death in some cases, are left up to county judges.Georgia was recently ranked 10th in the nation for its rate of men killing women, according to the Georgia Commission on Family Violence. Reauthorization of the Violence Against Women Act (which, going back to Trethewey’s point about language, is problematic in itself as it takes the abusers out of the equation), has been stalled in the Senate due to the influence of the gun lobby. According to the Georgia Commission on Family Violence, firearms were the cause of death in 73% of recorded domestic violence fatalities in 2019 in Georgia. My parents will be included in the data for 2020.Bryan tells me there is additional cause for concern with the state of Georgia. Although there is a federal law (18 U.S.C. 922 (g) (9)) that allows for abusers convicted of certain misdemeanor crimes of domestic violence to not legally be allowed to have guns, Georgia does not have this law on the books. “Georgia is the only state that won’t [pass this law],” Bryan explains, the frustration palpable in her voice..All the states surrounding Georgia — Alabama, Tennessee, South Carolina, North Carolina, and Florida — have passed a state law that mirrors the federal law, Bryan says. Local Georgia judges say that they aren’t authorized to enforce federal law, and local law enforcement officials say they can’t enforce federal law without a judge’s order.Then Bryan tells me something I did not know about my mother’s own temporary protective order, which she obtained just weeks before her murder. “That order, technically could have forced your father to turn over all his guns,” she explains. “Does it mean he absolutely could never get his hands on [a gun]? No, but it is a good step in bringing it home, and it may have made him think. And that is something that you can do with those orders. They are very powerful." While I was worried about my mother and frustrated with the constant harassment he was inflicting upon her, I did not really consider the issue of the guns in his possession. It seemed normal. He always had a gun with him. Most people I knew did. Mama kept her revolver in her purse, and I told her on the phone the day she was murdered to keep it close by. I hoped it would protect her. I did not know the 500% increased risk of lethality with a gun in the hands of an abuser. I did not know about lethality assessments at all.With Trethewey’s mother, the murder weapon had not been obtained legally and his final intentions were the same as my father’s. Her stepfather had stolen the gun, she told me in her interview. And this is notable, too, because there is a link between stolen guns and violent crimes. According to Everytown Research, the majority of the 23,000 stolen firearms recovered by police between 2010 and 2016 were recovered in connection with crimes, including more than 1,500 violent acts. In Memorial Drive, Trethewey writes, "When they arrived, Joel still had the gun he'd used to kill her. It lay on the nightstand beside the bed, and as the officers entered the room to arrest him he said he'd planned to use it on himself. Said it as if that fact should elicit their sympathy, that it would somehow lessen the gravity of what he'd done to her."Trethewey and I share common wounds. We both share the need to write our pain, to attempt to figure out why these horrible events transpired in our lives. Trethewey’s entire memoir is a decades-long attempt at writing through, despite the pain, trying to answer the questions that race through my own mind: “Could she have been saved?  Why did this happen?”I go through the chain of events over and over. Trethewey does the same when she relays scenes of her stepfather coming to a football game she cheered at in high school, where he later told investigators he had planned to kill her. She does the same when she talks about the police officer assigned to watch her mother’s apartment leaving his watch. She wants to know why this happened, why this exact chain of events occurred and led to her mother’s murder.We found so much of ourselves in each other. I focused on the way, as she writes in the memoir, she held onto a police officer telling her over the phone her mother was shot. Shot, not killed. I did the same thing when I learned my parents were dead. I heard that an ambulance was on the way. I told myself an ambulance did not come for someone who was dead. They came for someone who could be saved, someone who only needed to be taken to a hospital. We were both wrong in the end of course, but that holding onto language, that hope that our mothers were alive, that was the same.As I told her my story, my mother’s final moments and everything that transpired that day, she told me I reminded her of herself after her own mother’s death.“You sound just like I remember myself,” Trethewey says. “The detail with which you told that story and that matter-of-factness. That distance that you’re able to maintain when telling it is so familiar to me. I could hear myself.” Over the course of our interview, Trethewey tells me that she still weeps when talking about her mother and what happened. That the memoir has only brought these wounds back up to the surface. That time has not necessarily made it any easier. I know as she says this that I am catching a glimpse into my future.“I gave an interview and somebody asked me about that 19-year-old girl that I was and asked me if I could tell her anything, if I could say anything to her, what would it be, and I said, I’d say the same thing to her that I said back then, ‘Do you know what it means to have a wound that never heals?’”And after so many years, the wound still remains.Trethewey urged me to write down everything I can now, while I still remember. She wrote in her book, “If you had told me early on how much of my life I would lose to forgetting — most of those years when my mother was still alive — maybe I’d have begun then trying to save as much as I could.” Trethewey and I connected so deeply over our common tragedies; orphans of this terrible epidemic that our state — our nation — is facing and not adequately addressing.I asked Trethewey how it felt for her to know that her story was so impactful to me. That reading it helped me not to feel so alone. But also, if it made her angry that another young woman, just three years older than she had been when her mother was murdered, had to be told of such a similar tragedy nearly 35 years later. That another woman had to walk through the door of the home where her mother was murdered and walk out a completely different person.“I love thinking that, well, what you just said and what you said in the very beginning, knowing that you were not alone. I think that’s why there’s something so … is it uplifting?" she says. "It’s something about the way I feel being able to talk to somebody who has gone through a very similar experience. I don’t get this opportunity at all. I don’t. I’m trying to think if I’ve ever talked to anyone else who grew up in a similar situation and is carrying a similar psychic burden. I don’t think so. And the idea of meeting a young woman, so close in age to how I was back then. That’s astonishing to me.”“But when it comes to the idea of another young person going through such a similar experience three decades later?” I ask. “It’s hard to answer because, obviously, I would want for something like that to never happen again, and yet why am I not surprised that it does? Because I’m not surprised that that happens anymore than I’m surprised that the police kill Black people a lot because it is just the world that we live in. I think maybe, as with the police brutality protests that we’re seeing now, bringing so much more awareness about that issue to people, maybe the work that I do in my book, work that you’re doing in writing about this issue and writing about your own experience, testifying about it when you talk to people, certainly this has got to bring more awareness. That’s all I can hope. I can hope for that.”She and I share that hope.Rachel Elizondo is an emerging writer for South Georgia who is interested in writing about the overlooked people, places, and issues affecting the rural south. She is currently working on finishing a draft of her memoir “Three Napkin Roses,” which explores her experience as a restaurant worker and the dangerous precipice so many Americans risk falling from. Since the murder-suicide of her parents, she is also working to document her mother’s story, in hopes that it too will become a memoir. When not writing, Rachel serves as a Community Relations Coordinator for a health system in South Central Georgia and works with Ruth’s Cottage & the Patticake House as a Board Member. She also enjoys spending time with her husband and playing with her niece and nephews.  HOME FEATURESVIDEOSFOLKLOREGENERAL STOREPODCASTFOODWAYSCOCKTAILSPHOTO ESSAYSABOUT USTEAMCONTACT NEWSLETTERCUSTOMER SERVICE PRIVACY POLICY SUBMISSIONSMEMBERSHIPS  THE BITTER SOUTHERNER ©2021 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.From a solitary cell in Texas, Kwaneta Yatrice Harris writes letters documenting the torturous conditions, despite the risk of retribution.In a solitary cell in a central Texas prison, as a global pandemic and protests raged, Kwaneta Yatrice Harris was eating cold bologna sandwiches on the better days. On the worst days, she was given nutraloaf, also known as discipline cake: a rectangle of meat, potatoes, margarine, syrup, liquified egg, and anonymous vegetable.The food was slid through the door of a room the size of a walk-in closet where Harris has been held since 2016. Eventually, she will be returned to a general population unit to serve the rest of her sentence, the estimated end of which is in 2058, when she will be eighty-six. Throughout her time in prison, Harris, like many incarcerated people, has been subject to questionable disciplinary cases brought by guards, including, most recently, the offense of “aiding” me to telephone her under a fraudulent name. She did not do this, but she is still being penalized. Punishments vary: nutraloaf is one of them; more time in solitary is another.Like most people in women’s prisons, Harris has endured worse. I first wrote to her in March 2019, while conducting background research, and we have been corresponding ever since. She has noted that she and those in her unit “sleep, shower, toilet, and groom in camera-free spaces” overseen by male officers. “Black women’s bodies were playthings for slave masters and now are playthings for white prison guards,” she wrote. “Violence against us is not only tolerated, but it’s routine.” She had seen, she told me, a young woman, straight out of a juvenile facility, tackled by six guards, and other “girls . . . slammed so hard it appears they ‘bounce’ off the concrete.”In jails and prisons, there are no unmonitored phones. There’s no internet, no social media, no amateur videos. State violence remains hidden. “Oh, how I wish the [correctional officers] wore body cams,” Harris wrote. “If [the public] only knew the horrors inflicted. . . . I bet the prisons wouldn’t be as filled.”The over 230,000 women and girls incarcerated in the United States have singular stories but share common backgrounds. Studies suggest that 60 percent of women incarcerated in federal prisons have a history of sexual or physical abuse, and in some state prisons, as many as 94 percent of the female population has been physically or sexually abused before entering the criminal justice system. A 2015 Human Rights Project for Girls report showed that the vast majority of girls in the juvenile justice system have been sexually or physically abused before their incarceration, often severely and on multiple occasions.These trauma histories—largely unacknowledged or dismissed by attorneys, judges, and juries—often play a role in gender-based criminalization. Harris was convicted of shooting and killing a boyfriend, an Air Force retiree, and then stealing money from him. In interviews for a salacious TV docudrama series in which Harris refused to take part, the white male judge said that Harris’s “levels of depravity are top five of any I’ve ever known,” and her own white male defense attorney seemed puzzled: “I don’t know why she went down this path that she did,” he said. “She had a very good mother and she was raised to be a good person.” Harris had attended private school and her mother was an upstanding citizen, but she had also been molested as a child, gang raped and kidnapped at twelve, and physically abused by her first and second husbands.“The lawyers—my lawyer—did not want to hear about my history of sexual assault and specifically what my victim did and has done to me,” she wrote to me. Over their on-off relationship of many years, Harris wrote, her boyfriend had been abusive and manipulative. He made nonconsensual sex tapes, which he used to threaten her; hacked her computer with spyware; and sent emails calling her a “slut,” a “whore,” and a thief to her colleagues at the hospital where she worked as a registered nurse. Harris wrote that her legal team did not wish to disparage a veteran. As a twelve-year-old, she added, she had dropped charges against her rapists and kidnappers, which the attorneys worried might make her seem “lying or promiscuous.” Harris did not push the attorneys. “The stigma and shame of allowing myself to continually accept abusive behavior is stronger than the shame of being a convicted murderer.”In her time behind bars, she had met many others like her: a woman who had arrived in prison “marked with all types of scars”; another who woke the dorm by screaming in the night, reliving torture at the hands of her husband; one who had been trafficked as a child, forced to sleep in a chicken coop. White women who speak about rape and abuse have historically been dismissed as manipulators; Black women like Harris face even more skepticism and scorn, even though they experience higher rates of intimate partner and sexual violence.In 2015, after six years in prison, Harris was accused of forging a judge’s signature on paperwork to lessen her sentence. She maintains that evidence shows another woman in the facility—likely a member of an Aryan gang—committed the act. In any case, Harris has now spent twenty-two to twenty-four hours a day in isolation, for over 1,600 days, awaiting a hearing. This is where she remained as the coronavirus spread through Texas’s 103 facilities. As of June, over 7,821 incarcerated people had tested positive in the state and at least seventy-nine had died. Over 1,321 staffers had tested positive, and eight have passed away. A riderless horse walked across a field to honor the fallen officers.On May 14, as the numbers rose, the Supreme Court struck down a bid by two elderly incarcerated men for better virus protections in Texas prisons, where social distancing is impossible, bleach often in short supply, and medical care scarce or nonexistent. That same day, the Texas Department of Criminal Justice (TDCJ) uploaded a video of barefaced incarcerated individuals sewing masks by hand. One woman said that she and the others were “excited” to make masks, instead of the American flags they regularly sewed. The TDCJ denies that it uses slave labor or chain gangs, though work is mandatory and unpaid, and any jobs that take place outside of the prison perimeters, such as those in a field, are overseen by an armed officer on horseback.Harris did not work because she was in “restrictive housing,” or “administrative segregation,” which is what Texas calls its solitary confinement. In late 2017, the state announced that it would do away with solitary confinement as a form of punishment, but the reform, in practicality, only affected seventy-five people, according to a 2019 report by the Texas Civil Rights Project. Solitary has been classified as torture by the United Nations, serves no rehabilitative purpose, and causes mental health to deteriorate in as few as ten days. After the pandemic lockdowns, many know this. Millions of people stayed at home for months, increasingly distressed, cut off from community. Those who were alone began to physically throb for human connection.But true solitary is nothing like shelter-in-place: no quilts or sunlight, no fridges or Netflix or Zoom, no quick bike rides or walks around the block or brown-bag cocktails on the sidewalk at a six-foot distance. I’ve been told by several individuals who have lived in solitary for months and years that the experience magnifies the senses: You can smell the guard’s perfume, hear the click of shoes echoing from far away. You will clean every corner of your cell on your knees, which grow calloused. You’ll become desperate for touch. A woman in California kept a pet cricket and tore off one of its legs so it couldn’t leave her. A man in Minnesota nurtured a baby mouse and taught it to sleep by his head in a Folger’s jar.Texas currently keeps over 4,000 people in segregated cells, for an average of five years, but up to twenty-five, at a cost of $46 million annually. That’s more people in solitary than the rest of the country’s prisons combined. The TDCJ declined to comment on the official reason for Harris’s confinement.My initial contact with Harris was a form letter that I have sent to many, as part of a long-term project on women in prison. She replied, asking me to focus on the issue of parenting while incarcerated: “Bars and razorwire doesn’t erase motherhood.” Eighty percent of women in detention facilities are mothers, and Harris has three children. She also wanted to correct what she felt were common stereotypes. “Every prosecutor describes women convicted of murder as cunning, diabolical, monster, and evil,” she wrote. “I’ve yet to encounter these ‘monsters,’ although I’ve met plenty of women with mental illness, untreated and undiagnosed.”Our correspondence was a lens into the lives of women held in jails and prisons in the United States, where Black women are incarcerated at twice the rate of white women—attributed, in part, to racist policing practices, including car stops and arrests, as well as to mandatory minimum sentences. Harris’s experience at Dr. Lane Murray prison—nicknamed “Miserable Murray”—was, she wrote, one of “forever punishment.” She relayed the emotional toll of family separation and the unabating physical discomfort, particularly in the summers, where temperatures soared above 100 degrees in sealed-in spaces—“torture,” she wrote, especially for a premenopausal woman experiencing hot flashes. Seventy-five percent of Texas facilities are un-air-conditioned, and the state claims it would be too expensive to install cooling features. Meanwhile, Texas Correctional Industries, a for-profit company that provides goods and services resulting from the unpaid labor of people incarcerated in the state, made $76.7 million in sales in 2018. Over the past twenty years, there have been over two dozen deaths and untold illnesses from high temperatures.Those are the official numbers. In October 2019, Harris informed me that a nineteen-year-old—the same age as Harris’s eldest daughter—had been transferred into the prison from a juvenile facility as a minor and kept in solitary for trauma-related behavioral issues. She tried to fake suicide to “go to the air-conditioned psych center.” There had been four attempts by different women that month, Harris wrote, but this young woman succeeded. “She only meant to ‘pretend.’”Incarcerated people often report that deaths attributed to suicide or natural causes are, in fact, due to violent acts, a lack of medical care, or fatal living conditions. It is now broadly acknowledged, due to the ubiquity of video footage, that law enforcement claims about how deaths happen and who is responsible are often false. In prisons, the claims are harder to refute. Recently, there has been a focus on two deaths in New York: Layleen Xtravaganza Cubilette-Polanco, an Afro-Latina transgender woman in psychiatric crisis who died of an epileptic seizure while unattended in a solitary unit, and Jamel Floyd, a Black man who died of a heart attack after officers pepper-sprayed him inside his cell. In Texas in 2015, Mark Sabbie, a Black man who was feeling unwell and was not exhibiting violent behavior, was tackled by six officers and pepper-sprayed as he said “I can’t breathe” multiple times. After the attack, Sabbie was given a disciplinary ticket for “creating a disturbance” by “feining [sic] illness and difficulty breathing.” Sabbie was left alone, cuffed, in his cell and found dead the next morning.But most events in detention facilities are concealed from view, and the incarcerated people who speak of abuses are society’s most marginalized—often discredited because of their backgrounds, lacking outside support, and unable to offer proof because of the opacity of their institutions. Harris was housed in a state where the number of times that officers have used force against incarcerated people jumped by 66 percent between 2009 and 2019, even while the immense prison population has decreased.A more subtly insidious form of oppression is exhibited in excessive disciplinary write-ups. A 2018 national study found that women are often disciplined at higher rates for smaller, subjective infractions, such as “disrespect” or “disobedience,” or more absurd breaches like “reckless eyeballing.” Low-level tickets can result in the revocation of “good credits,” which can shorten a person’s sentence. One study found that over two years, women incarcerated in California had the equivalent of 1,483 years added to their sentences through such revocations.While the TDCJ denies the use of write-up quotas, reporting in the Houston Chronicle has shown that quotas have been used in some Texas prisons. Harris had been threatened with a disciplinary for an “extreme hairstyle” when she tried to wear her hair in a naturally curly style, and has received tickets for telling a pen pal she was taller and thinner than the guard believed her to be, and for giving an indigent woman with stomach flu a 7 Up.The disciplinaries Harris has received since she was accused in 2015 have been minor, but a fraud offense is considered a major charge and would bolster the state’s upcoming forgery case against her. Usually journalists aren’t able to witness the production of an invented disciplinary ticket. But in this instance, I know that the charge of fraud is fabricated because I essentially observed its fabrication. It is an aperture into how detention facilities operate without accountability or oversight.On March 16, as New York City, where I live, was ordered to shelter in place, I emailed Harris to check in, using a messaging system run by Securus Technologies, a private corporation with an annual revenue of $700 million, which is known for charging exorbitant fees to incarcerated people and their family members, who are often poor.My email was printed out and delivered to Harris’s cell. I sent her my phone number and asked her to call; we had never before discussed the possibility of phone contact. To respond in writing, Harris used regular mail; she had no direct email access. However, as my post office grew overwhelmed and its workers fell ill, I stopped receiving letters, and then they came at a lag. As the virus spread, I wanted to open a quicker line of communication.On March 29, after some research, I learned that I had to be on Harris’s official phone list for her to call out. The online system required a bill and an ID that matched the submitted number. Like nearly 70 percent of U.S. cell phone owners, I am on a family plan. My husband pays our phone bill, so I uploaded his information with his permission. I wrote Harris another one-way email, telling her my husband’s name: “the number is technically his, I guess.” In mid-April I received a letter from Harris, dated March 16, informing me of the prison’s policies for those in segregation, who are limited to a single five-minute call every ninety days, with immediate family only. “Hence—I can’t call you,” she wrote. “But, here in restrictive housing we have been asking people to call the prison . . . we have not had hot water in our sinks in our cells since March 11.”Harris was not permitted a TV, so she listened to NPR all day. She was terrified of the coronavirus. Her unit was rarely cleaned, and she did not have materials to disinfect her cell. To take a shower, she stripped, was cuffed behind her back, and escorted to one of three showers shared by forty-two women, a guard holding each arm. But now, she observed that the officers stationed nearby had no hand-washing station. She decided to stay in her cell twenty-four hours a day and clean herself in her sink, a task complicated by the fact that the water had been running ice-cold for nearly a week. When the new warden, Karen Stroleny, passed through on her rounds, Harris spoke up for the group—an interaction confirmed by another woman on Harris’s unit, who wrote me separately. “[The warden] calmly and nicely explained to me, ‘It’s no rule that you have to have ‘hot’ water,’” Harris wrote. “Sorry, I can’t call—hope this helps.”That was the only direct communication I had from Harris for months. Then, in late April, Harris’s mother, with whom I had never before been in contact, texted me a letter and a prison report. “Ma—Listen, Urgent!” Harris wrote. “I just returned from inmate court regarding this major case on Justine . . . I got punished 15 days restriction. I do not need a major case on my record! Scan to Justine.” The report read:Offender: Harris, Kwaneta Yatrice . . . did violate a posted TDCJ rule requiring no misrepresentation of personal information . . . in that offender Harris aided Justine vanderleun [sic] to register her phone number under a fraudulent name attempting to communicate with unauthorized person using the offender telephone system.I called the office of Warden Stroleny and told her secretary that I had added my own number to the phone list, on my own volition and under my husband’s name. I followed up two days later, to no avail. Families of those in prison often complain that they are ignored or treated rudely by staff when they try to advocate for their loved ones’ well-being. Harris’s mother was worried. “They’re feeding her nutraloaf,” she said when we spoke, lowering her voice so Harris’s daughters wouldn’t hear. Harris wondered, her mother said, why the people in charge of the prison “hate her when they don’t even know her. . . . I tell her that we know her, and we love her.”On May 6, I sent Stroleny an email, copying bosses and communications people. I laid out what had happened and wrote that any blame was mine alone: “She had no role in any of my actions when attempting to speak with her.” Within thirty minutes, Jeremy Desel, chief of communications, responded. “If a journalist attempts to use the offender telephone system, they have forfeited their status as a journalist and are banned from our facilities,” he wrote. Desel did not acknowledge the charges against Harris.That afternoon, Warden Stroleny called me. She informed me that she had gathered evidence in the case, that the disciplinary was “justified,” and that Harris had used a “third party” to contact a “reporter.” The original complaint against Harris listed nothing about speaking with a reporter or a third party, and rather related a charge of fraud, involving me falsifying my name. I protested. “I don’t want to be rude or ugly, ma’am,” Stroleny said, before hanging up.Harris and I regularly wrote about how women are criminalized for defending themselves against sexual or physical violence. “All traumatic events in my life were preceded by sexual assault, from conception to incarceration,” Harris wrote in one letter. Many women in prison had been required to choose, she wrote, “between a coffin and a prison cell.” In December 2019, I wrote to Harris about one of the first such recorded cases, which involved an enslaved Missouri woman named Celia, who was raped repeatedly by her white master, a man who purchased her when she was fourteen. In 1855, after futile attempts to convince the man’s daughters to stop him, a pregnant Celia attacked him as he entered her cabin one night. She was convicted of murder in an all-white, all-male courtroom, gave birth to a stillborn child, and was hanged—an inelegant parallel to the first woman to die of COVID-19 in federal custody: Andrea Circle Bear, a member of the Cheyenne River Sioux tribe, who died after giving birth by C-section while on a ventilator in a Texas prison for a minor drug charge. In one letter, I told Harris of a slogan that I’d read about when studying liberation movements some years before: “La lucha continua,” or “the struggle continues.”Harris replied that she had read stories similar to Celia’s. Her great-grandparents were sharecroppers in Tennessee, and her great-grandfather was often told to “go off in the fields, boy,” by a white landowner, who then raped her great-grandmother. Harris’s great-grandmother gave birth to eighteen children, “but if the baby came out ‘pink,’ . . . they had to get rid of it.” The existence of such a child meant “death for all.” Harris’s grandmother was “lucky,” Harris wrote. Rumor had it that a midwife looked at the baby’s face and decided to keep her. “She lived . . . because she had blue eyes.”Passing as white, for Harris’s grandmother, came with its own horrors: she was sent to do errands in a faraway town to get the cheaper, better quality products reserved for white people. On her way, she was raped by a group of white boys. On another occasion, a different group of white boys saw her talking to her eight-year-old friend Bobby, who was Black. Assuming that Bobby was speaking with a white girl, the boys “chased lil Bobby down, hanged him, set him on fire.”Harris’s grandmother never forgave herself. She died at ninety-six. “My mother said when the Alzheimer’s took over, she would relive the rapes and little Bobby dying. Over and over and over again.”A week after I spoke with Warden Stroleny, I followed up with Desel with a list of clarifying questions “about the Kwaneta Harris incident.” The disciplinary offense caused Harris and her family enormous stress, but Desel had forgotten about it. “I have no idea what you’re talking about,” he said in a voicemail. “We have 140,000 offenders . . . I don’t know what the, quote, Kwaneta Harris incident of last week even is so you’ll have to enlighten me.”I followed up with Desel again, providing context. He did not reply. On June 23, I contacted him for this article. I was not banned, he replied, which was a “worst case scenario,” though it was unlikely that I would ever be able to interview Harris “because of the issue.” On that day, the listed online communications policy for “offender interviews” only referred to in-person interviews and did not mention that journalists could not speak with incarcerated people by telephone (though an obscurely placed lengthy directive, which Desel sent me, did note that “telephonic media interviews” were prohibited).By June 25, the policy had been changed online. It now specifies that telephone contact between media and the incarcerated population is prohibited. This means that, during coronavirus lockdowns, while visitation is indefinitely closed, incarcerated individuals in Texas can only reach the media through letters, which are monitored and can be censored by prison staff.Since the postal service picked back up, I have heard from Harris again several times. She wrote that she suspected her disciplinary was related to her writing letters about the prison, “chronicling the daily battles.” She wrote that some sympathetic officials recognized that the disciplinary was meritless but did nothing. “The blue line stretches to [correctional officers] and the entire criminal justice system. . . . Just as the three accomplices stood by, witnessing George Floyd’s death. It’s the same here. Different dancers, same music.”If Harris wasn’t happy with a disciplinary, Stroleny had told me on the phone in May, “she can grieve it.” Stroleny was referring to the Offender Grievance System, among the only formal processes available for incarcerated people to resolve issues with prison administration. The process, called “rigged” in a 2017 Prison Justice League report, is run by employees of the TDJC. Both a 2008 State Audit survey and a 2015 Prison Justice League survey found that the majority of incarcerated people who made grievance reports experienced staff retaliation, and that only a slim minority received satisfactory resolutions. During Harris’s first grievance hearing, at which she presented our communications and my emails laying out my own actions, the board found “no valid reason to warrant overturning this case.” Still, Harris pushed forward with an appeal.She continued to write me, though she presumably risked retribution: more time in solitary, more nutraloaf, additional restrictions. She did so because she observed that the public seemed increasingly interested in criminal justice reform, in the abolition of police and prisons, in the issues of racism and state violence. But the focus was so often on the millions of men affected. She wanted to do her “part . . . push [my] pen until the ink runs dry.” She hoped through communicating to the outside, “maybe, just maybe, women can get a little light, too.” She hoped that “our daughters will not be punished for making a bad choice when the option didn’t exist for a good one.” I looked back at how she signed her letter in December, the letter about Celia and her grandmother. La lucha continua, she wrote in her distinct, urgent script. Kwaneta.Justine van der Leun is an independent journalist.Sign up for the Dissent newsletter: We need to imagine new structures of care to cope with the current crisis—and the next one.For insights and analysis from the longest-running democratic socialist magazine in the United States, sign up for our newsletter: Austin Frerick, who launched a bid for Iowa’s third congressional district on an antimonopoly platform, dropped out when party leaders made it clear that they preferred his better-funded opponents. Photo courtesy of Austin Frerick.Early voting locations in the Indianapolis metro area in 2016, via IndyStar.An Eritrean refugee in Khartoum. Photo by John Power.Khartoum as seen from the river Nile. Photo by John Power.Common migration routes from East Africa to Europe. Route information adapted from the International Organization for Migration, August 2015, by Colin Kinniburgh. Countries party to the Khartoum process are shaded in orange (note: not all shown on this map).At the 1936 International Conference of Business Cycle Institutes, sponsored by the Austrian Institute for Business Cycle Research, Vienna. Ludwig von Mises is seated in the center with mustache and cigarette. Gottfried Haberler also pictured, at right. (Source) In 1896, William Jennings Bryan, a Democrat from Nebraska, ran for president on a fusion ticket with the Populist Party. This cartoonist from a Republican magazine thought the “Popocratic” ticket was too ideologically mismatched to win. Bryan did lose, but his campaign, the first of three he waged for the White House, transformed the Democrats into an anti-corporate, pro-labor party. Cartoon from Judge (1896) via Library of CongressSketch for a 1976 poster by the New York Wages for Housework Committee (MayDay Rooms / Creative Commons)Keith Vaughan, “Drawing of a seated male nude,” 1949. Courtesy the estate of Keith Vaughan / Creative Commons.Political strategist Jessica Byrd. Courtesy of Three Points Strategies.Stacey Abrams, Minority Leader of the Georgia House of Representatives and Democratic candidate for governor of Georgia. Photo courtesy of David Kidd/Governing.A drawing made for the author by a five-year-old girl in detention at the South Texas Family Residential Center in Dilley, Texas (Courtesy of Nara Milanich)A drawing made for the author by a five-year-old girl in detention at the South Texas Family Residential Center in Dilley, Texas (Courtesy of Nara Milanich)A drawing made for the author by a five-year-old girl in detention at the South Texas Family Residential Center in Dilley, Texas (Courtesy of Nara Milanich)Mayor Bill de Blasio inaugurates a new bus line in the Bronx, September 2017 (New York City Department of Transportation / Flickr)Luxury condominium towers under construction in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, 2013 (Michael Tapp / Flickr)Hydrocarbons from the Williams Central compressor, photographed with a FLIR thermal imaging camera and a normal digital camera, Brooklyn Township, Pennsylvania, 2014. © Nina Berman/Marcellus Shale Documentary Project 2014.Composite of drilling rig image from Rome, Pennsylvania and hundreds of images taken by a Hop Bottom, Pennsylvania resident of the volume of truck traffic passing in front of a neighbor’s home over four days of the operation of a nearby shale gas well pad. © Nina Berman/Marcellus Shale Documentary Project 2015.The nightmare situations preppers imagine are already happening—to people whose wealth and status don’t protect them. Above, Hurricane Maria relief efforts in Puerto Rico, October 2017 (Agustín Montañez / National Guard)From the music video for “Unforgettable,” by French Montana, featuring Swae Lee (FrenchMontanaVEVO / Youtube) Wizkid performing at Royal Albert Hall, London, September 2017 (Michael Tubi / Alamy Live News) The cover of L’antinorm, published by the Homosexual Front for Revolutionary Action (FHAR), February 1973. The subtitle reads “Workers of the world, stroke yourselves!”Jair Bolsonaro, at a debate about violence against women in Brazil’s chamber of deputies, September 2016. Photo by Marcelo Camargo/Agência Brasil. Jair Bolsonaro, at a debate about violence against women in Brazil’s chamber of deputies, September 2016. Photo by Marcelo Camargo/Agência Brasil. The front page of the Canard, February 28, 2018. Courtesy of Le Canard enchaîné. Selling drugs in the shadow of an abandoned factory, North Philadelphia. Photo by George Karandinos.Bundle of $10 bags of heroin. Photo by Fernando Montero Castrillo.On a dilapidated Havana street, an elderly man searches through the garbage. February 2018, Havana, Cuba. Photo by David Himbert / Hans Lucas Studio.A state employee reads the newspaper at the reception of the Defense Committee of the Revolution (CDR). March 2016, Havana, Cuba. Photo by David Himbert / Hans Lucas Studio.A street vendor selling tropical fruits in front of a Benetton shop in Old Havana. May 2017, Havana, Cuba. Photo by David Himbert / Hans Lucas Studio.At the University of Bristol, February 28 (Bristol UCU / Facebook)Students rally in support of the lecturers’ strike, February 23 (Bristol UCU / Facebook)Part of a much larger painted banner in Bristol, February 28 (Bristol UCU / Facebook)AMLO mural in Mexico City, 2007 (Randal Sheppard / Flickr)MORENA supporters at a rally in Itzapalapa, Mexico City, April 2015 (Eneas De Troya / Flickr)Audience members waiting for the program to begin at a MORENA rally, March 2016 (Eneas De Troya / Flickr)MORENA supporter leafletting against energy reforms, 2013 (Eneas De Troya / Flickr)Andrés Manuel López Obrador on the campaign trail during his previous presidential run, May 2012 (Arturo Alfaro Galán)Courtesy of Robert GreeneAt a protest against the alleged Pizzagate conspiracy, Washington, D.C., March 25, 2017 (Blink O’fanaye / Flickr) [W]hen  we refer to all Kurdish fighters synonymously, we simply blur the fact that  they have very different politics. . . right now, yes, the people are facing  the Islamic State threat, so it’s very important to have a unified focus. But  the truth is, ideologically and politically these are very, very different  systems. Actually almost opposite to each other. —Dilar Dirik, “Rojava vs. the World,” February 2015The Kurds, who share ethnic  and cultural similarities with Iranians and are mostly Muslim by religion (largely  Sunni but with many minorities), have long struggled for self-determination. After  World War I, their lands were divided up between Iraq, Iran, Syria, and Turkey.  In Iran, though there have been small separatist movements, Kurds are mostly subjected  to the same repressive treatment as everyone else (though they also face Persian  and Shi’ite chauvinism, and a number of Kurdish political prisoners were recently  executed). The situation is worse in Iraq, Syria, and Turkey, where the Kurds  are a minority people subjected to ethnically targeted violations of human  rights.  Iraq: In 1986–89,  Saddam Hussein conducted a genocidal campaign in which tens of thousands were  murdered and thousands of Kurdish villages destroyed, including by bombing and  chemical warfare. After the first Gulf War, the UN sought to establish a safe  haven in parts of Kurdistan, and the United States and UK set up a no-fly zone.  In 2003, the Kurdish peshmerga sided with the U.S.-led coalition against Saddam  Hussein. In 2005, after a long struggle with Baghdad, the Iraqi Kurds won constitutional  recognition of their autonomous region, and the Kurdistan Regional Government  has since signed oil contracts with a number of Western oil companies as well  as with Turkey. Iraqi Kurdistan has two main political parties, the Kurdistan  Democratic Party (KDP) and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK), both  clan-based and patriarchal.Turkey: For  much of its modern history, Turkey has pursued a policy of forced assimilation towards  its minority peoples; this policy is particularly stringent in the case of the  Kurds—until recently referred to as the “mountain Turks”—who make up 20 percent of the total population. The policy has included forced population transfers; a  ban on use of the Kurdish language, costume, music, festivals, and names; and  extreme repression of any attempt at resistance. Large revolts were suppressed  in 1925, 1930, and 1938, and the repression escalated with the formation of the  PKK as a national liberation party, resulting in civil war in the Kurdish  region from 1984 to 1999.Syria: Kurds  make up perhaps 15 percent of the population and live mostly in the  northeastern part of Syria. In 1962, after Syria was declared an Arab republic,  a large number of Kurds were stripped of their citizenship and declared aliens,  which made it impossible for them to get an education, jobs, or any public  benefits. Their land was given to Arabs. The PYD was founded in 2003 and  immediately banned; its members were jailed and murdered, and a Kurdish  uprising in Qamishli was met with severe military violence by the regime. When  the uprising against Bashar al Assad began as part of the Arab Spring, Kurds  participated, but after 2012, when they captured Kobani from the Syrian army,  they withdrew most of their energy from the war against Assad in order to set  up a liberated area. For this reason, some other parts of the Syrian resistance  consider them Assad’s allies. The Kurds in turn cite examples of discrimination  against them within the opposition.
 Proclamation of the reclaiming of Alcatraz by the Indians of All Tribes, November 1969 (National Parks Service)Entrance to Alcatraz in 2008 (Babak Fakhamzadeh / Flickr)Letter from the Indians of All Tribes to the National Council on Indian Opportunity, January 1970 (National Parks Service)Sign on Alcatraz during occupation, 1969–60 (National Parks Service)Members of the People’s Guard on motorcycles, 1920. Courtesy of Eric Lee.Armed group of the Menshevik People’s Guard, 1920. Courtesy of Eric Lee.Eleven-year-old Liza Greenberg, daughter of David and Suzanne Nossel. Photo by Todd Gitlin.Protest against neoliberalism in Colombia, 2013



 
The unmasking of the Salisbury poisoning suspects by a new digital journalism outfit was an embarrassment for Putin – and evidence that Russian spies are not what they once were. By Luke HardingLast modified on Tue 23 Jun 2020 07.45 EDTIn 2011 I was in Libya reporting on the civil war. Rebels backed by the US, the UK and France were advancing on the capital, Tripoli. The insurgents moved forward through bombed-out towns as Muammar Gaddafi’s forces retreated. Coastal cities in the west and east, oil refineries, Roman ruins and temples – all fell, one by one, as the regime lost ground.These were dangerous times. In the town of Zawiyah I found locals celebrating victory in the main square. They were shooting in the air and doing wheelspins and skids in their cars and trucks. Gaddafi’s soldiers had left the previous night, fleeing down the road. I saw a small boy, maybe eight years old, stomping on a Gaddafi flag. “The city is ruined. No problem – we will rebuild it,” one local, Tariq Sadiq, told me.The signs of battle were everywhere. The square’s four-star Zawiyah Jewel Hotel was a ruin. The lobby was filled with rubble. Mattresses where Gaddafi’s soldiers had slept lay strewn among crates containing mortar cases and empty plastic water bottles. The air crackled with jubilant gunfire.The celebrations turned out to be premature. From their new positions, and without warning, Gaddafi’s army began shelling the square. I took shelter indoors. First one mortar, then six more. Each was a loud thunderclap, a sudden affirmative whomping, followed by puffs of black smoke.At that moment, I wasn’t much interested in the types of munitions that were raining down. There was a simple urge: to escape. My role, as I saw it, was to tell the stories of those unwittingly caught up in conflict. I had brought to Libya the usual tools of a frontline correspondent: flak jacket, satellite phone and first-aid kit, carried in a rucksack.A man named Eliot Higgins was following events in Libya, too – not from the front line, but from his home in the east Midlands. Specifically, from his sofa. It was a safer place to be – and, as it turned out, as good a perch as any from which to analyse the conflict, and to consider questions that, in the heat of battle, were interesting, but seemingly unanswerable. Questions such as: where did the rebels get their arms?Higgins recalls growing up as a shy “nerd”. According to his brother Ross, Higgins was an obsessive gamer and early computer enthusiast. He liked Lego, played Pong on an antediluvian 1980s Atari and was a fan of Dungeons and Dragons. He spent hours immersed in the online roleplay game World of Warcraft, where participants pooled skills and collaborated across virtual borders. His instincts were completist: he wanted to finish and win the game. This would prove useful later on.Higgins tried for a career in journalism and enrolled on a media studies course in Southampton. It didn’t work out, and he left without a degree. Next, he earned a living via a series of unlikely administrative jobs. One day Higgins logged on to the Guardian’s Middle East live blog. Libya was the centre of international attention. Higgins made his own contributions to the comment section of the Guardian blog, using the name Brown Moses – taken from a Frank Zappa song. The blog often featured videos uploaded by anti-regime fighters. There was fierce debate as to whether these images were authentic or bogus.One such video showed a newly captured town. The rebels claimed it was Tiji, a sleepy settlement with a barracks that had been recently bombed by Nato jets, close to the border with Tunisia, and on the strategic main road leading to Tripoli. There was a mosque, a white road and a few little buildings with trees around them. The video showed a rebel-driven tank rolling noisily down a two-lane highway. There were utility poles.Higgins used satellite images to see if he could identify the settlement and thereby win the discussion. The features were sufficiently distinctive for him to be able to prove he was correct: the town was Tiji. “I’m very argumentative,” he says. It was the first time he had used geolocation tools. He realised he could collect user-generated videos and later work out exactly where they had been filmed.Shortly afterwards his first child was born. Higgins combined his new childcare duties with online research. Meanwhile, the uprisings in the Arab world spread. Soon Syria was at war, too.What began as a way of scoring points over online adversaries evolved into something bigger. Smartphones with cameras, social media, Facebook, Twitter, Google Earth, Google street view, YouTube – the digital world was multiplying at an astonishing rate. This stuff was open-source: anyone could access it. By cross-checking video footage with existing photos and Google maps, it was possible to investigate what was going on in a faraway war zone.These techniques offered interesting possibilities. Open-source journalism might be applied to the realm of justice and accountability. Sometimes soldiers filmed their own crimes – executions, for example, carried out on featureless terrain. If you could identify who and where, this could be evidence in a court of law. The shadow cast by a dead body was a strong indication of time of death.At home, and surrounded by his daughter’s discarded toys, Higgins unearthed a number of scoops. He found weapons from Croatia in a video posted by a Syrian jihadist group. The weapons, it emerged, were from the Saudis. The New York Times picked up the story and put it on the front page – an indication of how armchair analysis could be as telling as dispatches from the ground.Higgins documented the Syrian regime’s use of cluster bombs. He discovered that government soldiers were tossing DIY barrel bombs out of helicopters, and that rebels were fighting back around Aleppo with Chinese-made shoulder-launched missiles. His reputation spread. He launched a new investigative website: Bellingcat.The idea was to consolidate pioneering online research techniques and to connect with a wider pool of international volunteers. In July 2014, three days after Bellingcat went live, a Malaysia Airlines passenger plane was blown out of the sky over Ukraine. Some 298 people – nearly 200 of them Dutch – died. The incident grew into Bellingcat’s first major investigation.Higgins’s team discovered that the missile launcher had come from Russia’s 53rd anti-aircraft missile brigade, based in the city of Kursk. Video footage showed the launcher trundling across Russia as part of a military convoy. The system was filmed again by locals inside eastern Ukraine after MH17 was brought down, heading back to Russia with one of its missiles missing.Bellingcat got bigger. One key figure was Christo Grozev, a fluent Russian-speaker and a Bulgarian from an anti-communist family. Grozev grew up in Plovdiv, Bulgaria’s second city; his father was fired from his job as a teacher for growing a hippie-style beard. Bellingcat joined forces with the Insider, an independent Russian news website run by Roman Dobrokhotov.By summer 2018, the British police were confident they had identified the two Russian suspects who had tried to murder Sergei Skripal a few weeks earlier, in March. Skripal, a former officer with Russia’s GRU military spy agency, was poisoned in Salisbury, together with his daughter Yulia. The assassins’ names had not been made public. The hope was that they might travel to western countries where they could be arrested.There were discussions inside the British government about what to do. One course was to demand their extradition – knowing Vladimir Putin would refuse, as he had with the killers of Alexander Litvinenko 11 years earlier. Another was to recognise that there was zero prospect of a criminal trial, and to publish concrete intelligence.That September, prime minister Theresa May went with option two. She told the House of Commons that the two Russian assassins were Ruslan Boshirov and Alexander Petrov – adding that the police believed these names to be aliases. CCTV images from their trips to Salisbury were revealed. Also shown was the apparent murder weapon – a counterfeit perfume bottle containing the nerve agent novichok.The new details were a boon for Bellingcat. During the next few weeks, its volunteers scurried all over the evidence. They would go on to inflict a series of humiliations on Russia’s GRU military intelligence spy agency that may have contributed to the fall of its chief, Igor Korobov.In the 20th century, Soviet assassins were able to travel around Europe using fake passports. Their movements were seldom discovered. They may have been better, more professional spies – or lesser ones. It was an age before transparency.The modern GRU was still using the old Soviet playbook when it came to covert operations such as the murder of enemies outside the country. These analogue plots now took place in a digital environment. GRU officers earned their spurs in the Soviet “near abroad” – in Tajikistan, Moldova or Ukraine, where there were few cameras to worry about, and not much of a CIA or other American presence.Western Europe was different. Britain, in particular, was a counter-intelligence challenge. The UK had CCTV on every public corner – in railway stations, hotel lobbies and airports. Any passengers arriving on a flight from Moscow would be logged and filmed. A port-of-entry database was available to western security agencies.Meanwhile, Russian markets sold CDs of mass official information: home addresses, car registrations, telephone directories and other bulk indexes. For £80 or so you could buy traffic police records. With the right contacts, and a modest cash payment, it was even possible to gain access to the national passport database.Paradoxically, this low-level corruption made Russia one of the most open societies in the world. Corruption was the friend of investigative journalism, and the enemy of government–military secrets.After the Metropolitan police published photos of Boshirov and Petrov, Bellingcat took up the hunt. It sought to unmask their real identities. The first step was to image search their photos via online search engines. This yielded nothing. They looked for telephone numbers associated with the two names. Nothing again.And so the online investigators tried a deductive approach. They spoke to sources in Russia and asked where a GRU officer operating in western Europe was likely to have been trained. One answer was Siberia, and in particular the Far Eastern Military Command Academy in Khabarovsk, just across the Amur River from China. The men appeared to be in their late 30s or early 40s. This gave an approximate date of birth.Yearbooks from the academy yielded no results, but a photo of a group of graduates taken in Chechnya looked promising. One of the soldiers – woolly hat, uniform, standing in front of anonymous, snow-covered hills – looked like Boshirov. The 2018 article said that academy students had gone on to become “heroes of Russia”, Moscow’s highest military award. Was it possible that Boshirov was among them?The academy’s website included a photo of its memorial wall. In its centre was a gold statue of the Soviet marshal Konstantin Rokossovsky, one of several top commanders who led the Red Army to victory in the second world war. There was also a list of names, engraved in gold letters. Ten were “heroes of Russia”. Most had earned their accolade fighting against the Nazis, or in Afghanistan. But two of the names were more recent. An online list said only that the pair had received the honour “by decree of the Russian president”.One was too old, but the other looked about right. His name was Anatoliy Chepiga. Bellingcat searched for further traces and soon the evidence piled up. At the age of 18, Chepiga had enrolled in the military academy, 25 miles from his home village near the Russia-China border. He graduated in 2001, and his brigade served three times in Chechnya. At some point between 2003 and 2010, he moved to Moscow and was trained at the GRU’s main academy, known as the Conservatory. In 2014, his brigade was deployed to Ukraine. It was there he earned his “hero of Russia” award – though what he did there was unknown. After that, Chepiga travelled frequently to western Europe and the UK.The passport photo showed a younger version of the assassin wanted by the British authorities. Chepiga was Boshirov, and Boshirov was Chepiga.Chepiga was married with a child. The first Skripal poisoner, then, was a father, a husband, a soldier and a would-be murderer. And a veteran of conflicts in Russia’s restive southern and western borderlands. But what about the second?Identifying Petrov would prove a little more difficult.Bellingcat revealed the identity of poisoner No 1 in a message on its website. Having unmasked one assassin, it seemed likely that Bellingcat would succeed in identifying Petrov, too. Sure enough, in late September I received an invitation to a press conference. It was to be held in an illustrious location: the Houses of Parliament, in an upstairs committee room, number nine. Its subject was Petrov’s real identity.By the time I arrived, the room was full. I spotted a reporter from the New York Times, Ellen Barry, together with leading representatives from the British and US media. It was hard to escape the conclusion that power in journalism was shifting. It was moving away from established print titles and towards open-source innovators. The new hero of journalism was no longer a grizzled investigator burning shoe leather, à la All the President’s Men, but a pasty-looking kid in front of a MacBook Air.Higgins and Grozev were there, as well as a Conservative MP, Bob Seely. I found a spot on a bench and sat down. The mood was expectant. Seely set the scene. He described Bellingcat as a “truly remarkable group of digital detectives”. Their success was due to an explosion of digital technology and a rise in digital activism, he said.Grozev explained how Bellingcat had identified that Petrov’s real name was Alexander Mishkin. The search involved methods new and old. It found Mishkin in a car insurance database, as the owner of a Volvo XC90. The car was registered to the GRU’s Moscow headquarters at Khoroshevskoye Shosse. Next, they used Russian social media to get in touch with Mishkin’s student contemporaries. Did any of them remember him from their St Petersburg days?Most didn’t answer. But two did. One said Mishkin had been in a different class – and that Russia’s security services had been in touch two weeks previously and instructed graduates not to divulge any information about Mishkin under any circumstances.Lastly, the Insider dispatched a reporter to Mishkin’s home village. At least seven residents identified Mishkin from the photo produced by the British police. Mishkin’s grandmother – now in her 90s – wasn’t home. Her neighbours, however, said it was well known that Mishkin had received a “hero of Russia” award in connection with Ukraine.Mishkin had an unusual profession for a travelling assassin: he was a doctor. The GRU had recruited him between 2007 and 2010 and given him his cover name. There was one last remarkable detail. Mishkin’s granny had a photo of her grandson receiving the award, residents said, and used to show it to them proudly while never letting it out of her grasp. The person congratulating Mishkin and shaking his hand was Vladimir Putin.Chepiga and Mishkin’s world began to unravel even before Bellingcat outed them in parliament. Their photos – as Petrov and Boshirov – had been sprayed all over the place. This presented a dilemma for the GRU. One option was to hide the pair away for ever. Another was to instruct them to give a media interview.Someone inside the Russian state decided to try this model. It may have been Putin, who used a conference in Vladivostok to urge them to come forward. Chepiga and Mishkin agreed (or, more probably, were told) to speak to RT’s editor-in-chief Margarita Simonyan. Simonyan was a trusted person and Russian media star – a leading apparatchik who sat on top of a global propaganda empire. Putin had given her an award for “objectivity” for RT’s coverage of Crimea. What could possibly go wrong?As it turned out, everything. Chepiga and Mishkin’s joint interview on RT was a disaster. It was an unintentionally comic performance that made them and the GRU a laughing stock, not only among English-speaking countries, but across Russia, too. They were professional spies, and so lacked media experience.They appeared nervous, shifty, under pressure, timorous, idiotic and craven. Unlike Putin – a grand master when it came to deceit – they were lousy liars. The pair insisted that they were not GRU officers, and that their real names were indeed Petrov and Boshirov. As for the curious events of Salisbury – well, these might be explained:Simonyan: What were you doing there?Petrov: Our friends have been suggesting for quite a long time that we visited this wonderful city.Simonyan: Salisbury? A wonderful city?Petrov: Yes.Simonyan: What makes it so wonderful?Boshirov: It’s a tourist city. They have a famous cathedral there, Salisbury Cathedral. It’s famous throughout Europe and, in fact, throughout the world, I think. It’s famous for its 123-metre spire, it’s famous for its clock. It’s one of the oldest working clocks in the world.Chepiga/Boshirov’s knowledge of Salisbury seems to have been gleaned from a cursory reading of Russian Wikipedia. The cathedral spire is impressive – built in the 13th and 14th centuries, the tallest in Britain, octagonal, with flying buttresses and scissor arches, and praised by Sir Christopher Wren and Malcolm Muggeridge as a marvel. Still, it seemed unlikely this spire had drawn the two spies all the way from Moscow. How also to explain the fact that the Russians visited Salisbury twice?Chepiga/Boshirov’s answer: there was heavy snowfall the weekend they arrived, which played havoc with transport connections and made them “wet”. So drenched, actually, that the pair said they were forced to abandon their sightseeing on day one, Saturday, and take refuge in the train station coffee shop. And to buy new dry shoes on London’s Oxford Street.The pair said they came back the next day and admired the “beautiful English Gothic buildings”. Again they were compelled to return to London from Salisbury because of “heavy sleet”. Maybe they passed the Skripals’ house, maybe they didn’t, Chepiga/Boshirov said. He added: “I’d never heard of them before this nightmare started.”As the interview goes forward, two things are evident. First, that Simonyan finds it hard not to snigger at the spies’ all-round uselessness and discomfort, especially when she asks why two grown men would share a room together. And second, that the GRU soldiers express zero sympathy for their victim. They are concerned for themselves:Petrov: If they ever find the ones who did it, it’d be nice if they at least apologised to us.Simonyan: Who? The poisoners?Boshirov: No, the British … you have no idea what it’s done to our lives.Petrov: Can’t even go and fill up your car in peace.The dominant note is self-pity. They say they are frightened, uncertain what may happen tomorrow, and generally wretched, ever since their photos appeared in the media.Petrov: One just wants to hide and sit it all out.Boshirov: So that they get off our backs … we simply wish to be left alone.Petrov: We’re sick and tired of all this.Boshirov: Exhausted.And with that, the heroes of Russia vanish. They are not seen again.Moscow officials did their best to fight back against these embarrassing revelations. They used familiar tactics – disdain, innuendo and ludicrous counter-claims. Beginning in October 2018, they purged Petrov, Boshirov and other officers from their internal systems.The Russian envoy in London, Alexander Yakovenko, accused Britain’s spy agencies of poisoning the Skripals and then kidnapping them. He summoned the media to his Kensington embassy and expounded his theory in lengthy press conferences. The ambassador described Bellingcat as a branch of the “deep establishment” – a phrase that echoed Donald Trump’s attacks on the FBI. (This claim was based on a “feeling,” Yakovenko said. Russia’s strategy was to paint Bellingcat as stooges and spies working for MI6. This was an old Soviet trope, deployed by the modern Kremlin against opposition critics at home. The geeks of Bellingcat weren’t secret operatives. Their methods were open. They were collaborative. And quick.The attacks ignored a more interesting truth: that spying was no longer the monopoly of nation states. “Now it belongs to anyone who has the brains, the spunk and the technological ability,” Jonathan Eyal of the Royal United Services Institute, a security and defence thinktank, told the New York Times, adding, “We are witnessing a blurring of distinctions.”It was becoming evident that, in the Skripal affair, Moscow had miscalculated. Despite Brexit, the UK still had allies. More than 20 western countries expelled Russian diplomats in solidarity. About 150 embassy-based spies, mostly GRU officers, were forced to pack their bags. This was a serious blow to Russia’s overseas espionage network. The GRU’s ability to collect intelligence and recruit agents was set back.Ironically, the biggest clearout of Russian spies took place in the US. The Trump administration removed 60 Russian officials, including a dozen based at the UN in New York. It shut the consulate in Seattle, ending the Russian Federation’s diplomatic representation on the US west coast. Was this a sign that Trump – someone who had shown no great enthusiasm for confronting Moscow was finally getting tough?It would seem not. According to the New York Times, Trump reacted sceptically to Britain’s request for punitive Russian expulsions. He viewed Skripal’s poisoning as “distasteful but within the bounds of espionage” and “part of legitimate spy games”. “Some officials said they thought that Mr Trump, who has frequently criticised ‘rats’ and other turncoats, had some sympathy for the Russian government’s going after someone viewed as a traitor,” the paper reported.The GRU’s 2016 operation to interfere in the US election was a triumph. A few years later, however, the agency found itself in deep crisis. There were expulsions, indictments and staggering foreign mishaps. At home and abroad, Putin projected a strongman persona. Now he looked a little foolish. What had gone awry?According to the defector Viktor Suvorov, the decline in GRU standards was part of something larger. Suvorov – real name Vladimir Rezun – is a former GRU officer who fled to the UK from Geneva in 1978.I met Suvorov in London. It was December 2018, exactly a century after Lenin set up Moscow’s first military intelligence service, following a proposal from Trotsky. The GRU was in poor shape, he said. Sure, it still sent kill squads to Europe and engaged in hybrid warfare such as cyber-hacking. But it had failed to adapt to a 21st-century universe of total information.Suvorov likened his old organisation’s failings to a nasty, cancer-like illness. It was eating up Russia’s entire body politic. This disease had affected spying, technology and rocket production, he told me. It explained the abysmal roads, the dying villages. The country was literally disintegrating. Suvorov used the word “raspad”: collapse or breakdown. The situation was akin to the Titanic, he said with the rich looking to flee in a lifeboat.The glory days of the GRU were in the 30s and 40s, when its agents stole the US’s atomic secrets, Suvorov said. After the USSR’s demise, the organisation fared better than the rest of the country. In time, though, the service was destroyed. When Putin’s foreign policy turned aggressive and he needed covert-agent recruits, the GRU was rebuilt. But the quality was gone.In Suvorov’s day, GRU officers were Moscow slicks with university degrees, unaccented foreign languages, and Soviet-posh manners. The most famous was Yevgeny Ivanov, a naval attache in London who, in 1961, had an affair with Christine Keeler, forcing the British war secretary, John Profumo (who had also slept with Keeler), to resign. Ivanov was handsome, clever, witty, hospitable and charming. By contrast, Suvorov claimed that Ivanov’s modern-day successors were poorly educated and provincial.Suvorov said his former service had sunk into “idiotism”. Its generals were incompetent and greedy. As for Salisbury, this was a “chain of stupidity”, featuring not-very-professional assassins caught repeatedly on CCTV. “In my time this would not have been possible! Such idiots!” he told me.Putin must have personally approved the novichok plot, Suvorov suggested, reasoning that, “Nobody would take responsibility without him.” Suvorov said the Russian embassy in London may have given logistical support, but wouldn’t have known the details. These probably restricted to 15 or 20 people, including a technical expert and a handful of top Kremlin officials. The two assassins belonged to a small group of “dirty” specialists. They would have killed before.After Suvorov left the USSR, both the Russian state and the GRU sentenced him to death in absentia. The GRU would never forgive a traitor, even if a civilian government did, he said. The Salisbury attack was carried out – in his view – to deter GRU colleagues who might be contemplating defecting to America. “The GRU is saying to its own: ‘Boys, look at that!’” he said.Was he sure the GRU poisoned Skripal? “Of course,” he replied.Suvorov joined the GRU in 1970. Back then it was a bitter rival to the KGB. The KGB’s headquarters – the Lubyanka – was in the centre of Moscow and highly visible, reflecting the KGB’s mission to protect the regime from homegrown enemies. The GRU was lower-profile and “somewhere in the dark”, Suvorov said, which made the latest revelations all the more painful.As the Russian investigative journalist Sergei Kanev put it to me: “Everything is open. It’s possible to follow everything. Where you go, whom you meet, where you work.” Kanev attributed the GRU’s setbacks to a variety of factors, including drunkenness, unprofessionalism and bardak – the Russian word for chaos. “The world is changing. They are doing everything like in Soviet times,” he said.Who was to blame for this? Other than Putin, the most obvious person was Igor Korobov, the GRU’s top commander. That autumn, Korobov’s standing inside Russia’s elite fell sharply. According to Kanev, the Ministry of Defence was awash with rumours that the GRU was due for a clearout, with generals likely to be asked to leave. There was talk of “deep incompetence”, “boundless carelessness” and “morons”.Kanev’s sources said Korobov was summoned to a personal meeting with Putin in mid-September. The colonel general set off from his apartment in an elite complex used for top-ranking officers on Starovolynskaya Street, next to Moscow’s Victory Park. We don’t know if the discussion with Putin was friendly, or a dressing down. On his way home, Korobov suddenly felt unwell. The story of the general’s illness swirled around the ministry, Kanev wrote.True account or not, Putin failed to mention Korobov during a speech at Moscow’s military theatre to mark the GRU’s 100th anniversary. Instead he spoke of comrades who had died in battle. “As supreme commander in chief, I certainly know your, without exaggeration, unique capabilities, including in special operations,” Putin said. Korobov wasn’t among those invited to the gala ceremony. Seemingly, Korobov’s errors had caused Putin to lose face. Later that November, Russia’s Ministry of Defence made a sad announcement: Korobov had passed away. He was 62. His death was due to a “long and serious illness”. Was he dead because he messed up? “Of course, it’s pure speculation,” Suvorov told me. “But everyone inside the GRU will understand 125% he was murdered.” He added: “Even if it was a natural death, people will say: ‘Come on!’ Nobody will believe. They know the nature of the organisation.” • Luke Harding’s Shadow State: Murder, Mayhem and Russia’s Remaking of the West is published on 2 July by Guardian Faber, and available at guardianbookshop.com• Luke Harding will be in conversation with Carole Cadwalladr on Wednesday 22 July, tickets available from theguardian.com• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, and sign up to the long read weekly email hereThis article was featured in One Great Story, New York’s reading recommendation newsletter. Sign up here to get it nightly.In Japanese, “Kaizen” roughly translates to “change” (Kai), and “to become good” (Zen), or, more simply put, “change for the better.” It’s a crisp sunny day on Myrtle Avenue in Irvington, New Jersey. Summer is slowly winding down, and school starts in a few weeks. Like most summer days on the block, folks chill on their porches, enjoying the sun and the latest neighborhood gossip. The birds chirp harmoniously like Bone Thugs. All seems right with the world. Then, a loud gunshot. Another shot. Another. Screams ring out across the neighborhood. People run for their lives, panicking. A man with dreadlocks in his late 30s, dressed in body armor and carrying a high-powered rifle, casually strolls down the block. Moments earlier, he fatally shoots a father of two in the neck, and he intends to kill more. The man aims his rifle at a neighbor of almost 30 years, calmly pulling the trigger. She narrowly evades death. He walks a couple more feet before reaching our childhood home — a home his grandfather owned. He walks through a side corridor connected to the back of the house and patiently reloads his rifle. Sirens blare as cops close in.After today, the man will be called a murderer, a mass shooter, and a domestic terrorist. However, back when we met him in the 1980s, he was just Kaizen Crossen. We called him “cousin,” but he was more like a big brother to us.We first met Kaizen when we all lived in a notorious housing project in Newark named the Garden Spires — two high-rise brick buildings built in the 1960s. Oddly enough, there were no gardens in the ghetto. Just concrete, rats, and shitty elevators. It was erected two years before the Newark Rebellion, one of many race rebellions throughout the U.S. in 1967, during President Lyndon B. Johnson’s War on Poverty. LBJ was hoping to combat indigence by providing affordable housing to the working poor.At first, things looked promising. Our grandmother, Ann Crowder, and her abusive ex-husband, Willie, moved to Newark from High Point, North Carolina, toward the end of the second great migration in 1970, when more than 5 million black people from the South moved north and west. Initially, they lived on South 14th Street in the notorious Central Ward, but in the early ’80s, they moved to the Spires. Willie, who eventually went to prison for murdering his girlfriend at church, worked as a maintenance man for the housing project. By the time we were born in 1985, crack had decimated the city, and the Spires transformed into a hotbed for criminality. Dealers sold drugs wholesale on some floors. In his book United, Senator Cory Booker, the former mayor of Newark, wrote that the Spires “functioned as a drive-through: People didn’t even have to get out of their cars to buy drugs. The dealers catered to them with a speed and efficiency that would have made McDonald’s jealous.” Eventually, things got so bad that Booker staged his now-infamous ten-day hunger strike to raise awareness and win political points against longtime mayor Sharpe James, whom he battled in an epic street fight for the mayorship of Newark.In 1999, I did a hunger strike @ Garden Spires. The then mayor promised but never built a park 4 residents. We just delivered: Park now openUnfortunately, some members of our family contributed to the decline of the Spires and Newark. For instance, our dad helped facilitate the drug trade by acting as an enforcer for a prominent gang in the city. From 1985 until 1991, he and his crew fought for territory in the Spires, while the U.S. government waged a vicious war on drugs. Many people died during this war. Eventually, our dad got arrested for a litany of gang-related crimes, leaving us to fend for ourselves in the concrete jungle.It was in this precarious environment that we bonded with Kaizen, a fellow bastard of Newark. Kaizen’s mom was addicted to drugs, and his father bailed when he was a baby. Our mom dated his uncle for a moment, which brought us into close contact with his family. He would babysit us when our mom had to work her second job at a liquor store. Strangely, Kaizen wasn’t the only eventual murderer to babysit us. We had another guy by the name of Khalil who ended up killing someone after a dispute at a Newark bar. Nevertheless, they were exceptional babysitters. Khalil would rip and run with our Uncle Keith, a legendary figure in the streets of Newark with an impeccable sense of style and penchant for women and the nightlife. Uncle Keith got arrested after a shootout with cops in Virginia. We attended his marriage to our Aunt Cathy in prison. Despite the location, it was a beautiful wedding. They subsequently divorced. But, we digress.Our fortunes changed in 1992 because Bill Clinton got elected. Just kidding, that dude was terrible for poor black communities. His policies locked up more brothers than Kawhi Leonard in the playoffs. Our fortunes changed because we moved from the Spires into a three-family home on the 300 block of Myrtle Avenue in Irvington, New Jersey, a township right next to Newark. We were able to move because our mom got a new job at the VA Hospital. It was a safer neighborhood than the Spires, and only occasionally called “Murder Ave” by the locals. Our portion of the street was of particular merit as most of the families owned their homes, dating back to the ‘60s. Kaizen’s great-grandfather, a man we all affectionately called Granddaddy, owned the house where we lived. He was a WWII vet and an all-around swell guy who loved watching old-school wrestling. We moved into a one-room attic apartment on the third floor with our mom. At the same time, Kaizen, his baby brother, grandmother (Grandma Alice, who is the daughter of Granddaddy — the nomenclature in our family is a bit confusing), and first cousin moved into the second-floor apartment. After the move, we spent even more time with Kaizen and the Crossen family. We’d throw BBQs and play pick-up basketball and a game called “man-hunt.” Kaizen was an adept man-hunt player who knew how to locate discreet hiding spots, making it impossible to find him at night.For a time, Kaizen was one of the few male figures in our lives to help us navigate the murky waters of being fatherless boys in Newark. All of the young boys in our neighborhood looked up to him. He was extremely charismatic, intelligent, and the life of any party. He was also a gifted joke-teller with an uncanny ability to mimic others. As the oldest among us, he was the leader of the block. And he led with zero fear. One summer, our bike got stolen by a neighborhood bully. We cried and ran to Kaizen, who didn’t hesitate to go searching for the bike. After a couple of hours, he triumphantly returned with the bike and made sure to beat the bully. No one ever stole our bikes again. For Kaizen, if you messed with one of us, you messed with him. And he was willing to defend us, since none of our dads were around.However, in Irvington and Newark’s dangerous streets, there’s only so much you can do with your hands. Kaizen eventually decided to carry a gun for protection, and we can vividly remember the first time he showed it to us. It was 1995, and he had just purchased gold fronts for his teeth. You see, he was obsessed with the Wu-Tang Clan, particularly Ghostface Killah and Raekwon, who wore gold fronts. While Kaizen obsessed over the Wu, we developed an everlasting adoration for the more subdued, gangsta weed-loving Bone Thugs-N-Harmony, which caused some friendly friction between us. For an entire day, we debated which was the better group: Wu-Tang or Bone Thugs? We advocated for Bone, proclaiming that the odds of finding five guys who sang and rapped in harmony were much lower than finding nine guys with incredibly distinct rapping styles. Moreover, we argued that Bone was more successful (they’d just won a Grammy) and quietly more revolutionary in terms of their rap style. (This was before Bone Thugs cemented their legacy as the only group in history to make songs with 2Pac and Biggie Smalls.) Kaizen would not budge. He argued that Wu was more experimental and iconic, fusing kung fu, the Five-Percenter philosophy, and mafioso themes. We went back and forth, asking everyone on the block who they thought was better. Most of the women and children preferred Bone Thugs, while most of the young guys preferred Wu-Tang. We argued until the middle of the night, and then he playfully showed us his small, stainless steel 9mm gun, abruptly ending the debate. In general, logic and evidence should win debates, but in the hood, guns trump both.From fourth to sixth grade, we moved between Irvington and Newark. After some publications voted Newark the most dangerous city in the country, our mom decided to get us out. In a reversal of the second great migration, we moved from Newark back to High Point, North Carolina. During our time there, our mom and our stepfather fought verbally and physically (they divorced when we were 16). Despite the fighting and our stepdad’s addictions to Bobby Brown and various substances, things were relatively stable for a while. We finally had a two-parent household, and we were able to go to decent public schools, where we excelled academically. Unfortunately, Kaizen did not have a similar opportunity. He stayed in Irvington and Newark, finished high school, and gradually became involved in criminal activity. In 1998, he was arrested for selling weed in a school zone. The court sentenced him to three years in prison, which commenced his tumultuous relationship with the criminal justice system. While Kaizen struggled with the law, we continued to succeed in school. When Kaizen was released and returned to his old life in Newark, we were preparing to attend the College of New Jersey.At TCNJ, we studied philosophy. As we became more enmeshed with Western philosophy, we drifted away from religion and spirituality and toward atheistic materialism, bordering on nihilism. We also started listening to too much Radiohead. Our academic pursuits brought us into contact with such philosophers as Søren Kierkegaard, Thomas Hobbes, Immanuel Kant, Friedrich Nietzsche, Satre, Camus, and a few other sad dead white guys. Tragedy back home would push us closer to nihilism when one of our favorite uncles — Al, a low-level drug dealer who taught us how to drive and cut our hair, but who also suffered from PTSD, depression, and substance-abuse issues — committed suicide. Uncle Al jumped to his death from a high-rise building in Newark during our sophomore year. His death fundamentally altered our perception, making us more morose and sullen. Existentialism provided a comprehensive system to understand better the alienation, isolation, and despair experienced by impoverished young black men in a largely affluent white world. Religion was inadequate. Philosophy enabled us to assess our material conditions logically. But this intellectual understanding did not address our emotional distress. You cannot rationalize away pain and trauma.It would appear that we and Kaizen were worlds apart as we sat on the manicured lawns at our college debating Kantian metaphysics with privileged students from all walks of life, while Kaizen braved the harsh winters of Newark in search of money for his growing family. On the inside, however, we all suffered from acute post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of growing up in a war-torn inner city. We were both exposed to violence, which had an insidious impact on our psychological health. According to the National Institutes of Health, “inner-city students that experience violence are more likely to be depressed, to contemplate suicide, and to abuse substances.” Our issues with depression, suicide, and substance abuse materialized during our time in law school, at Duke and NYU; Kaizen’s did on the streets of Newark.People don’t like to talk about mental health. Back in Newark, there was a stigma against folks who openly acknowledged struggling with it. Specifically, they would be stigmatized as crazy motherfuckers. Rather than seeing the issue as a matter of degrees, the community drew a rigid dichotomy between “normal” and “insane.” No one wanted to be deemed mad. So instead of talking about our emotional distress, we adopted strategies to cope. People have different ways of rationalizing disturbing thoughts. In college, we turned to philosophy and sports. Kaizen preferred violence, drugs, and alcohol. None of us saw a psychotherapist. We couldn’t afford it.This isn’t just an issue in the hood. It’s pervasive throughout society. At Duke and NYU law school, we saw firsthand how the elites treated their mental health issues. Our classmates heeded a strict code of silence to avoid being perceived as weak in such a competitive environment. Nevertheless, a significant number of them suffered from severe mental health issues and abused substances. A few of our classmates even committed suicide. In fact, we know more people who committed suicide from law school than from the inner city.During that time, we turned to drugs and alcohol to deal with our mental health issues and the stress of law school. It was jarring to study the insidious nature of our criminal justice system with white law students, while some committed the same crimes that would land black people in jail. We couldn’t help but consider the irony of it all as we consumed drugs: What if the law was designed in such a way to criminalize black behavior while simultaneously decriminalizing white behavior? The 100-to-1 cocaine-to-crack ratio, which places tougher penalties on crack usage than cocaine, seems way more plausible if written by a white lawmaker addicted to coke, who implicitly believes in white superiority. We started recognizing the hypocritical, often absurd, duality of our legal system. Whites create, interpret, and enforce the law. Those who violate the law are deemed criminals — fair enough. Whites and blacks use drugs at similar rates. Yet somehow blacks are arrested at disproportionately higher rates for the use and distribution of drugs. How is that possible? It’s only possible if black criminality is embedded in the premise of our robust legal system. If “blackness” is the crime, then mass incarceration, generational poverty, segregation, and police brutality necessarily follow.In 2008, as we started to question the validity of the law (especially our drug laws), Kaizen was arrested for drug- and gun-related charges. He was a father looking to make money during the recession when jobs were scarce, especially for convicted felons struggling with addiction and mental health disorders. So he sold weed, which wasn’t yet a perfectly legal, billion-dollar industry. Meanwhile, as our depression and anxiety worsened, one of us attempted suicide for the first time (the other would try it at a later time for balance). We dropped out of law school, developed stoner comedic personas to justify our growing substance-abuse problem, and pursued entertainment careers. Instead of therapy, we sought fame and fortune to mask our pain. Initially, the returns were stellar: We got into film, TV, and stand-up; we performed on the Tonight Show multiple times; we recorded an hour stand-up special for Netflix, aptly titled On Drugs; and we made a substantial amount of money. But our PTSD remained untreated. So, we continued to self-medicate with drugs and alcohol. We were spiraling out of control, seeking to destroy ourselves.After a particularly bad night with drugs and alcohol, we decided to try sobriety. We went to therapy for the first time at the age of 31 and our therapist (yes, we share a therapist — it’s cheaper, and we don’t want to pay to tell the same sad story twice) diagnosed us with PTSD and depression. We took the Adverse Childhood Experience (ACE) quiz, which examines abuse, neglect, and other hallmarks of a rough childhood. Our ACE score was 8 out of 10. A number closer to 10 puts you at greater risk for issues like depression, suicide, PTSD, and drug abuse, meaning this might be the only quiz in history for which a high score makes you immediately want to kill yourself.Kaizen never saw a therapist, nor did he take the ACE quiz or have an outlet like stand-up comedy to talk openly about his trauma. His mental ailments remained untreated, which is likely why he continued to abuse substances and openly started to discuss dying in a blaze of glory. There are many ways to commit suicide. One way is “suicide by cop,” in which a person deliberately behaves in a threatening manner with the intent of provoking a lethal response from police. Kaizen would talk about going out like Scarface. Most in the family thought he was probably interpreting rap lyrics too literally. Despite several run-ins with the law, no one thought Kaizen capable of committing murder, especially the killing of a next-door neighbor on our block with whom he was friends. He was an almost-40-year-old father of two beautiful girls who loved his family and valued his friendships, but depression is a real sickness that can destroy any person. After the death of his mother in August 2018, we believe Kaizen, our cousin and brother, lost his will to live and sought to end his life when he walked down the block and opened fire in August 2019.The final time we saw Kaizen was on May 3, 2019, a few months before his death. We were performing a stand-up comedy show in Newark in front of our family. We hadn’t been back in a few years. We did a 30-minute set, touching on issues such as drug abuse, ending gentrification, and suicide. We quoted Camus, who once said: “There is only one really serious philosophical problem and that is suicide. Deciding whether or not life is worth living is to answer the fundamental question in philosophy. All other questions follow from that.” In our set, we asked ourselves if life was worth living, concluding that because of our love of Missy Elliott, indeed it was.After the show, we hung out with our father, Uncle Keith, Kaizen, and our friend from out of town. Our father, who turned his life around entirely, training kids in the art of boxing, had to leave early. We chilled with Uncle Keith, our homegirl, and Kaizen for a few more hours. And then things got weird. Kaizen asked us to go someplace else to have a foursome with our friend. We weren’t sure if he was joking or not, but we declined. Eventually, Uncle Keith asked him to chill the fuck out, and it felt like they were about to have a duel since we assumed they were both carrying guns. Thankfully there was no shootout. But our uncle did tell us a story about his shootout with the cops many decades ago — ironic considering Kaizen’s final moments with the police. At around midnight, we hugged our cousin, telling him we loved him and we’d see him soon. Then he walked away into the darkness. It would be the last time we ever saw him alive.On August 8, Kaizen walked down the block on Myrtle Avenue, as we all had done countless times as kids, ostensibly to ask a friend for a favor. His car was out of service, and he needed a ride to the shelter to get food. Somewhere along his walk, Kaizen got into an altercation with two neighbors, which pushed him over the edge. He retreated to our childhood home, where we had debated Bone and Wu on the porch years earlier, to retrieve a gun. Not the stainless-steel 9mm from two decades ago, but a military-grade rifle filled with ammo. He put on a bulletproof vest and walked back down the street to kill the two guys. Jason Caudle, a friend and neighbor of Kaizen’s, attempted to quell the beef only to get a bullet in the neck, later dying at University Hospital in Newark. Kaizen subsequently shot at everyone in sight, including neighbors he’d known for three decades. A cop showed up, and he shot the officer in the legs. For a couple of minutes, in the backyard of our childhood home where we played basketball together, Kaizen exchanged close to 100 rounds with cops from the Irvington Police Department. He taunted the police every step of the way, daring them to shoot him. And they obliged. They shot Kaizen multiple times as he tried to open the side door to go home for one last time. For a moment, everything went still as he bled out, inching closer to death. The bullets stopped as the cops secured the perimeter around the house. What were his final thoughts when he died? Maybe he thought about his baby brother? Or his mom? Or his daughters? We’ll never know.It’s easy to close the book on Kaizen by concluding he’s a low-life criminal or a thug who deserved to die. Yet our understanding of history, law, philosophy, and psychology makes it impossible to conclude his story in such a simplistic manner. Kaizen committed a heinous crime, but his actions don’t exist in a vacuum. Due to onerous, racist drug laws and restrictive racial covenants, Kaizen lived in a harsh ghetto without any wealth or employment prospects. He sold weed to make ends meet. Like many others, he did drugs to cope with the trauma of growing up in a violent inner city. Oftentimes, the majority fails to contextualize the actions of the oppressed, focusing on the effects instead of the causes. They fail to understand the despair, anguish, and hopelessness felt as a result of living in abject poverty while under heavy policing. They create a false dichotomy where you’re either a perpetrator or a victim.George Floyd’s murder is a brutal reminder that the entire legal edifice — from slavery to mass incarceration — was designed to break down black people meticulously. This isn’t accidental. This is a country made up of (imaginary) laws to aggressively protect corporations and property-owning white men at the expense of black minds and bodies. This is the underlying premise of America. Until we reject this premise, dismantle the current system, and build anew, changing for the better, our country will continue to treat black people with enmity, while white folks are allowed to violate laws, loot our spirits, and break our minds and bodies with impunity.To continue, please click the box below to let us know you're not a robot.Please make sure your browser supports JavaScript and cookies and that you are not blocking them from loading. For more information you can review our Terms of Service and Cookie Policy.For inquiries related to this message please contact our support team and provide the reference ID below.When it came time to relocate from near D.C. to the New York tristate area, Fareed Hayat thought, I’m certainly going to Brooklyn. It was the summer of 2017. He and his wife, Norrinda Brown Hayat, had both gotten new jobs — he would be teaching criminal law at CUNY, and she had taken a position as the director of the Civil Justice Clinic at Rutgers — and Fareed had dreams of brownstones fueled by a viewing of Spike Lee’s She’s Gotta Have It reboot on Netflix. They considered whether the city could be a suitable substitute for their suburban existence in Maryland, but while looking at homes with their two young sons, the eldest, Kingston, kept asking questions like “Where is the other floor to the house?” and “Are all of the houses just on top of each other?” “He was so extra,” Fareed said.A few of Norrinda’s new colleagues lived in Montclair, New Jersey, and suggested she look there. Here’s the brochure copy: Only 40 minutes from New York by train. Not suburban, but “urban suburban.” An art museum there recently hosted a Kara Walker exhibit. Stephen Colbert is on the board of the annual film festival and still lives in town. Oh, and did you hear the rumor about the swinger parties? Parts of it are very affluent — Upper Montclair has been ranked as the wealthiest community in New Jersey. It leans heavily Democratic and has great restaurants, great public schools, a young Black mayor, and a really cute pie shop. And the kicker: Montclair is 24 percent Black.Well, technically, the latest Census estimate has it at 22.3 percent Black, but ask a real-estate agent, a town resident, and a politician what’s unique about Montclair and eventually they’ll all trot out that 24 percent figure. For Montclair, diversity is a matter of local pride. New Yorkers could move there and find they wouldn’t have to sacrifice the reasons they had chosen to live in a city in the first place. In 2019, the New York Post wrote, “Montclair is the only suburb true New Yorkers will even consider.” Brooklynites move there with such regularity it has been called “Park Slope with backyards,” along with other epithets that are equally insufferable. To set a Zillow alert to Montclair (versus, say, Glen Ridge, a nearby suburb with comparable median property values but a significantly more homogeneous, white population) is to actively choose diversity and progressiveness in addition to that manicured lawn and the driveway with space for two cars. It is choosing to adopt what some residents half-jokingly call the “Kumbaya” Montclair mentality.Fareed and Norrinda, who are now both 43, settled into a six-bedroom house in Upper Montclair. Norrinda recalled, “One of my colleagues, their high-school daughter was like, ‘You know, you really live in the whitest part of town,’ because young people just say whatever’s on their mind. I’m just like, ‘Look. It’s very competitive to land a house. You just have to go where you land,’ ” which for them was Norman Road, where, one day in late summer, I met Fareed as he was unloading groceries from the trunk of his Tesla. After he delivered a fresh bouquet of sunflowers to his wife inside, we set off on a walking tour of their part of town. He pointed out a great mid-century-modern furniture store, Modclair, and a coffee shop, where we got chocolate croissants. We darted past masked patrons waiting in socially distant lines at farmers’-market booths before settling down in a sprawling park.When they had first moved in, Fareed researched paint colors on Pinterest and decided he wanted his house to be black. He wanted something stylish, not “cookie cutter” — and he liked the idea of “the only Black family on the block in a black house,” he explained. (Norrinda objected. They settled on more of a charcoal with black trim.) But their private joke on suburban Black exceptionalism didn’t quite hold up on Norman Road. They weren’t the only family of color on the block. There were several interracial families. Corner to corner, there was diversity of age, race, and sexuality, unified by self-selection. “The diversity was the biggest thing,” Fareed said. “You know, 24 percent African American population here in Montclair.” They sent their sons to a public Montessori school that has a Black principal, and both boys have four or five Black teachers. It’s been over two years of block parties, PTA meetings, dinners, and birthday gatherings, of making friends and stitching themselves into the community. Norrinda was made president of the PTA for this school year.As we walked, I noticed that everyone, white, Black, whatever, gave us a nod as we passed. Of course, no town is perfect; there were some things, some experiences, some people, that had bothered them, explained Fareed. But then he told me a story meant to illustrate just how much being a Black family in Upper Montclair wasn’t a thing. One day, he was out fixing some uneven concrete on the sidewalk in front of his house. A white woman, a neighbor, stopped to ask about the work he was doing. At the end of their conversation, she said, “You remind me so much of my ex-husband.” Fareed assumed the husband was Black, but no — her husband was white. A Black man had reminded a white woman of her white ex-husband. Imagine that! Well, in Montclair, you could.Recently, though, after the incident in June when a video Fareed had posted of an altercation with a white neighbor went viral, he was thinking about the time he spent in the Caribbean. It’s where he did his study-abroad program when he was a college student at UCLA studying history. He remembered the joy he felt at being surrounded by Black people. The cops there didn’t have guns. He rarely felt like the other. He didn’t feel out of place.It’s not that he felt that out of place in Montclair. He knew what it meant to feel really, truly out of place in his neighborhood, he said. He’d been out of place when he first moved from L.A. to Silver Spring to go to law school at Howard University. Before deciding to pursue law, he had done well investing in properties in L.A., enough that he could buy a home with a pool for himself and his brothers and nephews. Yet he felt under suspicion from the moment he parked his Range Rover in the driveway. “It was always a question of legitimacy,” he said. But here in Montclair, their moving truck was met by cupcakes dropped off by a white man, who chatted him up about the schools. “You know, this space is a creation,” Fareed said. “White people come to this space to be around a diverse space. So I recognize that, and I don’t feel out of place in that way.”He knows you have to be able to fulfill certain economic requirements to pay off a mortgage and the insanely high property taxes in these areas of Montclair. If you can do that, it makes you a certain kind of acceptable, which isn’t to say the cupcakes-bearing white neighbor wouldn’t have been as welcoming if the Hayats weren’t two accomplished lawyers. “There’s been a lot of intentionality about creating a space that’s welcoming to a person like myself economically and education-wise,” Fareed said.But since that altercation with a white neighbor, he has been on a half-serious campaign to convince his wife that — since school was remote anyhow, and their jobs were remote anyhow — didn’t it sound nice to just rent a two-bedroom apartment in Barbados or St. Lucia or South Africa? To ride out the pandemic in a place where he didn’t feel like his Blackness was the center of the conversation, where he didn’t have that consciousness every single moment? Where he wasn’t just part of the 24 percent.The incident on Marion Road, as people call it now, even though it occurred on Norman Road, happened in late June during that pileup of stressors: COVID and the peak of the nationwide Black Lives Matter protests in response to the police killings of George Floyd and Breonna Taylor. Like many in a financial position to do so, the Hayats, realizing they would be home all summer, had decided to make a few upgrades to their yard and started work on a stone patio out back. It was a weekday. Their two boys had just gotten home from forest camp and were inside having lunch, while their parents remote-worked in different parts of the house. The landscaper and her crew were outside planting a garden and installing the new patio.Susan Schulz, a neighbor who lived one street over on Marion, approached the landscaper. Schulz’s and the Hayats’ properties are separated by a wooden fence, ’90s-sitcom style. They could have popped their heads over it to share a quick conversation, had they been friendly enough to do so. Schulz noticed work being done in the neighboring yard and went to investigate. She approached the landscaper with such deliberateness that the landscaper assumed she was going to ask for a business card. Instead, Schulz began to inquire about the work being done: What was being built? Did the Hayats have a permit? Was this a patio? Can this be done without approval from the city?Norrinda was standing on the porch on a call and heard Schulz outside. It was the second time she had come by that day. Norrinda sighed, paused her work, and leaned out to tell Schulz she would speak to her when she was off the phone. Schulz left and came back again with the same question: Did they have a permit for this work? She left and came back three times in under an hour, according to several people on-site that day. “Let me go because my neighbor’s trying to talk to me, and she’s a firecracker,” Norrinda said to her colleague.She went to talk to Schulz and dispatched Fareed to tell the landscaper it was okay to keep working. When Fareed got outside, Schulz was interrogating his wife.“At this point, Norrinda is becoming more offended,” Fareed recalled. The questions from Schulz — did you get a permit? Will you stop working until you have one? — were becoming more aggressive. It’s legal in Montclair to build an unraised patio in your own backyard without a permit. Still, they went back and forth, back and forth, about a permit that nobody needed. Schulz also accused the Hayat children of throwing balls into her yard. Eventually, Fareed had had enough.“At a certain point, I’m not being friendly over here,” he recalled. To Schulz, he raised his voice: “You know what, you should just leave.”But Schulz refused. “I’m not going anywhere,” she said, according to Fareed. He repeated his request. Again she refused.It was then that a handful of neighbors started to come out of their houses to see what was going on. One white neighbor, who was passing by on her daily walk, heard Fareed saying, “I’m asking you to please leave our property.” “He was really polite, but there was an urging,” she said. “That’s when I felt like something might be really wrong.” She decided to stick around with the others. The landscaper put down her work and joined them.The already heated talk began to escalate into an actual shouting match. Fareed became more adamant that Schulz get off his property, and Schulz began walking backward down the driveway. She lost one of her flip-flops. She noticed the neighbors watching. She stood in the middle of the street as the argument continued. Then Schulz pulled out her phone and called 911, and Norrinda pulled out hers and started recording.“I’m calling the police,” she said.“Okay, we expect that of Amys,” Norrinda can be heard saying, her voice shaking. “Of course you are.”While on the phone, Schulz paced in a circle. She approached a neighbor on the sidewalk, perhaps looking for someone to corroborate her story, perhaps just looking for sympathy. “Did you just see him physically push me?” she yelled.“Oh, he absolutely didn’t push her,” reported the neighbor who had walked by. “I think she was looking to me — honestly, it did feel like a look of incredulity. Can you believe what he’s saying to me? I understand she was upset, but that’s just an insane trope that goes back so many hundreds of years of white women saying that Black men are assaulting them. And it was just really unbelievable she thought she would get away with that with witnesses.”Over the phone, Schulz told the police, “I need an officer … the gentleman who is taller than me pushed me off his property.”Neighbors began to yell things like “Shame on you” and “In this climate, you’re doing this?” while Schulz continued her defense, sometimes to the neighbors, sometimes to Norrinda and Fareed. “He pushed me ten feet … I came over here alone. I should have brought my son … Are you gonna say you didn’t put your hands on me?”“It was like, Yo, this woman really believes what she’s saying,” Fareed recounted. “I feel like, in her mind, she really did start believing that she was assaulted. Maybe she was affronted by being told no. But for her, that affront was synonymous with me physically assaulting her. There was no difference in her mind.”Norrinda began to plead with her husband, “So our kids don’t have to see the police, please just go inside with them.”Schulz walked over to a neighbor across the street. “Look at my arm,” she said, holding up her forearm. She turned to Norrinda. “Can you please stop recording?”“This is for the people so they can see,” Norrinda replied. “Even in Montclair, this is what we are living with.”We rarely see what happens after the STOP button is hit. That day, the cluster of Norman Road neighbors stood waiting, wondering what would happen when the cops actually arrived. Some of them exchanged information just in case — of what? Not sure, but it felt like the right thing to do.“Who was that person?” the neighbors wondered. She didn’t live on their street. “Which house is it? Who came over to yell?” someone asked. Someone pointed to Schulz’s house, where she lives with her partner and kids. Someone else chimed in, “Oh, we know her. She’s the beer-pong mom. She lets her high-schoolers have parties in the backyard past curfew.”Within ten minutes, three cars from the Montclair Police Department showed up. Two stayed. They spoke with Schulz first and the Hayats next, moving to the backyard for a private conversation. Then they left. Later, the deputy chief, Wilhelm Young, released a statement in which he called it a “dispute between neighbors” and revealed that neither party had filed a police report.Many of the neighbors I spoke to in the months following the incident didn’t know Susan Schulz well. There was the beer-pong-mom rumor. Someone reported seeing her at a block party once or at a soccer game years ago. She lived a block over, so people on Norman Road didn’t know her. Her kids were older, so she wasn’t part of the main social fabric of her stretch of the block. Was she a Republican? Didn’t she harass the previous renters, a multi-racial family who eventually moved? It was as if she were the Boo Radley of Upper Montclair. Except it was worse: She was their Karen.Was there anything worse to be called in the summer of 2020 than a Karen? (Well, yes, but if you were white, apparently not.) An internet term for a complaining white woman who is caught weaponizing her racial privilege, a Karen calls the cops on a person of color for something she perceives to be offensive. Sometimes she exaggerates the situation, sometimes she flat-out lies. The stories Karens tell the police, the world, and themselves go unchallenged because the women are white. There has been much debate about whether the term is sexist — there’s no direct male equivalent, and its meaning has been so diluted that it often seems synonymous with “bitch” or “woman who has an opinion I don’t like.” There has also been debate about whether the term is racist against white people and if you can even be racist against white people. But for all the discourse, there is general agreement that you don’t want to be labeled a #Karen. Because while the hashtag makes it lighthearted enough, it’s rooted in white supremacy and the history of Black people getting killed because of it.The heightened racial tension of the summer resulted in an extreme sensitivity for those white people who were only now learning about Karens and weren’t quite sure if they had ever been Karen-y. Ibram X. Kendi’s How to Be an Antiracist and Robin DiAngelo’s White Fragility: Why It’s So Hard for White People to Talk About Racism sold out on Amazon, and local small Black-owned bookshops were overwhelmed with orders for the tomes of anti-racist reading. “How to help Black Lives Matter” and “How to donate to Black Lives Matter” were among the top Google searches of 2020 in the U.S. Black people who knew white people in any capacity at all became anti-Karen tutors, exhausted by the questions and the light-bulb-on revelations of liberal white people considering, perhaps for the first time, the nuances of systemic racism. Suddenly, it was clear, you weren’t immune from having been racist if you voted for Obama or had one Black friend or even more than one Black friend.Only a month before Marion Road, a woman named Amy Cooper, a.k.a. Central Park Karen, had called the police on a Black man named Christian Cooper, who recorded the incident. The video went viral, but, in a rarely seen twist, Amy Cooper was held accountable for her actions. She lost her job at an investment firm, and the animal shelter from which she had adopted her dog briefly took it back. She now faces criminal charges, and New York State legislation was passed in direct response to the incident. Maybe it was because she faced consequences both personally and legally that this Karen made a lot of white people stare into the mirror and wonder if a Karen stared back. It also changed something about the way many Black people saw social media as a tool for racial redress — for the first time in American history, they could ask to speak to the manager too.That night, Fareed watched the video from that afternoon. He watched the wild-haired woman shouting at him, watched the way she went to each of the white neighbors and held up her arm as invisible physical proof that Fareed had allegedly pushed her. And at each attempt, she was rejected: by white people.“I thought the video just captured the moment,” he said. “Not even speaking about our moment, but it fulfilled all of the benchmarks of what we have been talking about in the community in terms of the Karen phenomenon. In terms of calling upon the power of the state to suppress Blackness. What many of the other videos don’t capture or don’t demonstrate is the white rejection of that. I thought it actually coalesced into an amazing teachable moment. It was like a play.”After he watched it, Fareed posted the video to his Facebook page with a lengthy message: “It has happened again,” he began, before launching into a detailed account of the incident, including a careful, passionate explanation of how Schulz had “invoked centuries of brutality in her call to the police and sought to put her black neighbors back in their place.” He ended the post with a declaration: “Her type, the racist, must be rejected and ostracized like she was today by Norrinda and I, but equally important, by our white neighbors here in Montclair and our white and non-white allies worldwide.” He named her Permit Karen.Views began percolating almost immediately. Over on the Secret Montclair Facebook group, the moderator decided to break the “no shaming videos” rule because she felt it necessary that people see what had happened in their own community. Comments overwhelmingly supported the Hayats (“I’m so sorry this happened to this family,” “Shame on you Susan!”). The owners of a local gelato shop banned Schulz from entering and told her to “move to Florida where you belong.” A few fights broke out regarding public shaming, which quickly turned into shaming a woman who had called out shaming. There was a lot of admiration for the white neighbors (“Shout out to the white allies!”), some innocent discussions of “What is a Karen?” and “Why Karen, not Permit Patty?” that devolved into some nastiness, and several gripes from people named Karen who hoped to distance themselves from the “Karen” characteristics. Many comments registered shock at this happening in Montclair, and many registered no shock at this happening in Montclair, because Montclair is in America.The Hayats’ across-the-street neighbor Lisa Korn has lived on the block for six years and in Montclair for 28, relocating here from Chelsea because she really didn’t “want to live in a lily-white all-Christian suburb.” She was on the street the day of the incident and, as Schulz approaches, can be heard yelling, “Don’t you come near me without a mask!”“Norrinda just broke my heart,” Korn said of her conversations with the Hayats in the immediate aftermath. “She said, ‘I just didn’t think in this town — we moved here because of this town. Because we thought it would be safe.’ And I said to her, ‘It is safe, Norrinda. This is not the norm here,’ ” she said emphatically. “ ‘This is not who we are.’ ”Neighbors like Korn weren’t blind to Montclair’s problems. As often as they list the ways they are proud of their town, Montclarions can recite the ways in which, “of course, the town is not perfect.” The wealthier communities are segregated from the non-wealthy ones. There is an achievement gap in schools they speak of often. They have formed countless committees to address things like why there aren’t more students of color in AP classes. Then there was the local NAACP meeting about Montclair policing at which the cops displayed a thin-blue-line flag, a symbol associated with Blue Lives Matter, and everyone was outraged.There are also subtler ways in which the Black experience in Montclair is fundamentally different, ways Black Montclarions experience race and racism their white neighbors probably aren’t aware of, ways that can’t be mass-addressed with town halls or seminars or marches or anti-racist reading lists supplied by the Montclair library. Both Christina Joseph Robinson and her husband are from Black families that have lived in Montclair for decades. It’s a town she feels comfortable in as a Black woman. “But you still have to kind of hunt out where the Black people are,” she said. “You know, historically, in the Fourth Ward there are more Black people than there are in other sections of town. Everywhere else, you might be the only one on your block, you know? I’m sure there’s people that probably have never even been to certain parts of town or that may not know where the good Caribbean-food spot is or the hair-braiding spots. ‘Oh, I never even knew that was there.’ I hear that all the time.”Which is why I was so surprised that Norrinda had expressed such a level of incredulity in that conversation with her neighbor. In addition to being a Black woman, her whole career is dedicated to thinking, writing, and teaching about race in our culture. And yet over email, she told me that, yes, she too had been blindsided by Schulz. “I should not have been, but I was,” she wrote, sounding almost sheepish.Norrinda grew up in a Black middle-class area of Philadelphia that she describes as “really supportive and full and communal and [with] a lot of Black businesses.” She had white friends at school, but her family didn’t know their parents or interact with them on weekends. “They went back to their world, and me to mine.” It’s different for her kids, who “live, go to Cub Scouts with, have parties with, and travel with a diverse group. And they have since preschool.”“I am not opining on which is better,” she added. “I think there is good to be had in both scenarios.” But they chose Montclair because it was a community that would allow her children to have this specific upbringing, maybe even with the underlying hope that they could grow up there without ever having a run-in with a Karen.The day of the Schulz interaction, Norrinda and Fareed’s two boys had been watching from a window. The couple had to explain the situation but avoided going into great detail. They didn’t want a single incident to affect how comfortable and happy their children felt in their community.“More than anything, we tried to downplay it with them,” explained Fareed. “I certainly tried to talk about how this neighbor was misinformed and made a bad decision, not really talking about the larger institutional implications of what motivated her to do that … really just trying to make her out to be just a bad actor as opposed to a part of a system. I wanted them to know they were in a safe space.” Yes, they had talks with their children about race and racism and the history of systemic racism, Fareed said, but this was different. This was the kind of consciousness that could upend the way they saw themselves in their own world.The residents of Montclair applied the same sort of logic to the Hayats in general. They wanted them to know that Schulz was just one bad actor; it wasn’t the whole Montclair system. One Karen didn’t spoil the whole town. “What it was, it was a galvanization,” said Korn. “We galvanized around them because I think we had to.”Perhaps because the video was so reminiscent of the Amy Cooper–Christian Cooper incident, Montclair residents were quick to see it as a rare chance to both talk the talk and walk the walk. Karen doesn’t get to be an invisible figure. You find out where she works, where she lives. You call for her to be fired. You call for her to be run out of town. You call for her to be arrested. As people started to sleuth out and post details of her identity, there was some confusion about which Susan of Marion Road it was, as Lorraine Agostinelli, who lived down the block from Schulz, noticed when she went to watch the video on Facebook that night.“I commented, ‘That’s not the Susan you think it is!’ We have about five Susans on this street!” she said. Eventually, the commenters got it right: her position at the EPA, her address. The next day, after the video had lived on Facebook for less than 24 hours, a handful of high-school students rang the Hayats’ doorbell. “They were the most respectful, you know, ‘Mr. Hayat,’ and they were socially distant,” Fareed said with a laugh. “They said, ‘We’re just letting you know we’re organizing a protest, and we’re going to tell her she must go.’ ”That afternoon, some 60 residents, mostly denim-shorts-clad teens from Montclair High, started marching up and down Marion Road chanting “Hey, hey! Ho, ho! Your racist self has got to go!” They hoisted signs that read BLACK LIVES MATTER and WHITE ENTITLEMENT IS VIOLENCE. They marched back and forth for about five or ten minutes, according to Diego Goldfrank, 17, who had helped his three friends get the word out about the march. People came out to watch and film. “It was very moving,” recalled one neighbor. “But it’s not a very long block.”A portion of the group wound up in front of Schulz’s house, where they wrote BLACK LIVES MATTER and #NOTHERE in chalk on the asphalt for another 15 or 20 minutes. The cops came just as it was already dying down. Goldfrank said police told them someone had reported that people had thrown a brick at her house. (They did not, said Goldfrank.) It was peaceful and small and, of course, captured by iPhones and reporters and even by Schulz, who stood on the sidewalk recording the protesters with her phone.The story became local news, then national news when TMZ covered it. The Hayats felt compelled to make a statement from their driveway to a group of reporters. Standing in front of their charcoal-gray house, they formed a perfect portrait: two hip, well-dressed young Black professionals and parents — not that it should matter, but of course it did.As attention grew, a cop car was posted outside the Hayats’ house and another outside Schulz’s to monitor the situation. BLACK LIVES MATTER signs propagated on neighborhood lawns. Even some of the white neighbors picked up in the video became local celebrities, recognized by passersby who wanted them to recount what had happened.Norrinda maintains it was never her intention for her video to go viral. It wasn’t even her intention to share it at all. “I took that video because my family was at risk. I don’t desire visibility in that way at all. I study race; I don’t want to be the subject of my own studies. And I find that to be a conflict professionally for me,” she explained.But there was a certain kind of visibility Norrinda was seeking — not national attention but the relief of Now you can all finally see what we’ve been dealing with. There’s a beat in the video when Norrinda can be heard saying in a wavering, frustrated voice, “She’s been waiting two years to do this to us.” The video was proof of this moment, yes, but also proof of many moments that people never saw, moments the Hayats weren’t even sure they had seen themselves.The run-ins had started as soon as they moved in. When the Hayats were painting the house their carefully selected not-quite-black color, Schulz made comments about their choice, said Fareed. “Why would you paint a rental house?” she asked. And, you know, it was possible she had assumed they were renting because the house was a rental for a number of years before they bought it. But why even ask the question? There was a small thought in Fareed’s mind that perhaps she wouldn’t have asked a question with such an obvious answer — we painted it because we own it — of a white family.Some months later, once they had settled in, Fareed wanted to re-create the tree house his children had had in their yard in Maryland. He hired someone to disassemble the tree house, plank by plank, and drive it up to Montclair so he could rebuild it, plank by plank, in the big tree in their new yard. While he was building it, Fareed recounted, Schulz asked questions like “Isn’t that dangerous for children?” And she told them the tree house actually hung over into her property. Fareed went so far as to move the tree house again to make sure it was clearly in his yard. And when he put up lights outside to decorate for Norrinda’s 42nd-birthday party, Schulz inquired if the lights would stay up. He wasn’t sure why it was her concern. These were the only kinds of conversations they ever had.There’s no way to really prove the interactions were racially motivated. But there was something in the tone that the Hayats recognized, something that was uncomfortable to explain to outsiders, uncomfortable even for them to fully admit to themselves. The interactions were reminiscent of ones Fareed has had his whole life, from those neighbors in Maryland who arched their eyebrows at his homeownership, all the way back to the time he was thrown in jail for a night because a cop falsely reported that Fareed had assaulted him. (That was the incident that made him want to go to law school.) There was a sense of entitlement in the way Schulz asked the questions. A sense that, if she asked, they had to answer. And they had answered, every time, for the sake of keeping the peace. They would let it slide and then they would let it slide again, but now it was June 2020. The world was crazier. The woman was crazier. People were paying attention. It was no longer possible — or necessary — to let it slide.For a while, it was the gossip on Facebook groups, neighborhood email chains, and the local streets. It helped that there wasn’t much else to do over the summer besides walk dogs and talk to the neighbors you saw on these walks. The family became the center of mostly positive, but sort of uncomfortable, attention. The doorbell would ring, and someone — maybe from the neighborhood, maybe from the surrounding town — would drop off a basket of cookies or a bottle of wine as if offering their condolences. They were sent heartfelt apologies and declarations of support written on greeting cards and personal stationery decorated with ornate blue-and-white flowers or carefully typed up and printed on computer paper like a school report. “We promised a Black friend we would speak up,” began one letter. A woman in Portland, Oregon, wrote to say she was appalled and offered to send a letter to Schulz, too. (She enclosed a copy of what she intended to say.) The owner of one of the more popular restaurants in town offered them a discount whenever they wanted to come in and said Schulz was no longer welcome.At the monthly town-council meeting, reduced to a Zoom because of COVID, at least four residents — talking over users who had forgotten to mute themselves and the constant be-bop-boop-boop of people joining the call — spoke of how disturbed they were by the incident, how ugly it all was, and how disappointed they were; most important, they insisted that something be done. Couldn’t an ordinance be passed making false 911 calls illegal? Couldn’t they find a way to punish Karen/Susan?Town representatives explained multiple times that a New Jersey state law already criminalized false 911 calls, but it didn’t address racial bias the way the New York State law did. A few days later, Dr. Renee Baskerville, a former Montclair councilwoman from the Fourth Ward, wrote an impassioned op-ed for a local website, Baristanet, again encouraging the town to take legal action in the Marion Road matter. Town leaders should look to New York, she wrote, where Amy Cooper had been successfully charged. They should explore legal action against Schulz, perhaps involving the Department of Justice if necessary.Through all of this, Susan Schulz didn’t speak. She didn’t respond to multiple requests to speak for this story. Her friends and people in her circle all declined to speak too. One neighbor refused because she saw the situation only as a property dispute, but mostly she just wanted it to go away. Another friend, who is close to Schulz, wanted to make sure I read comments on Patch.com that supported Schulz and blamed the Hayats. (One was written by a Black woman named Karen who was mostly mad that “Karen” was being used as a slur; another, written by a “Lisa K” — not Lisa Korn — called the Hayats rude and unfriendly and said there are no white supremacists in the neighborhood.)Agostinelli, who lives on the same block as Schulz, provided the most information anyone seemed to have on her. “I’ve had pleasant conversations with them. They’re not offensive people,” she said of Schulz and her partner, Theresa. “I think there’s a lot of soul-searching that’s going on in that house, I’m assuming.”One night around 9:30 p.m., shortly after the encounter, the Hayats’ doorbell rang. It was a friend of Schulz’s delivering an apology letter on her behalf. “She said she now understands how calling the police could have become a much bigger deal,” Fareed recalled. “That’s the best she could give. That she shouldn’t have done it because she understands how it could become a bigger deal. She never acknowledged anything else beyond that. She did indicate that she wanted to move forward peaceably and that we wouldn’t have any additional problems. She’s stood by that.”Schulz didn’t come to the block parties and didn’t join the socially distant neighborhood toast the night Joe Biden won, when everyone came out into their yards and hoisted glasses of booze together because finally the country was going to change. Some of the rumors that had circulated about Schulz turned out to be overblown or at least more ambiguous than had been suggested. The multiracial family who lived in the house years ago, the ones she had supposedly harassed, recalled a single interaction in the time they lived there. They had never spoken to her, but one day the husband was trimming a tree in the yard and stacked the branches at the border of the property. Schulz rang their bell and requested that they remove the logs because they were touching her fence. There was no greeting, they recalled, and it felt unusual and not friendly. And that was it.But the less she spoke, the more she became a synecdoche for all of racism. She was Permit Karen. In that letter the woman from Portland wanted to send to Schulz, she wrote, among some other insults and admonishments, “I don’t know what happened to you to make you this way.”There was something I recognized in those letters the Hayats received. That same summer, every white person I knew offered to march alongside me at rallies. I got texts from “Maybe: Susanna,” a person I didn’t really remember, dredging up a racial transgression I definitely didn’t remember. Borrowing the newly learned language of anti-racism, she apologized for any micro-aggression she had committed and apologized for making it my responsibility to explain HBCUs to her. I wrote back and told her “no sweat.” (It later turned out she had confused me with another Black colleague.) She was one of many who reached out to ask how they could be a good ally and wondered if there were times they hadn’t been. My phone was constantly buzzing with texts from white friends apologizing, checking on my well-being, offering me Venmo reparations and sympathy and empathy. I was appreciative but wary. They said they wanted to know about my experiences, but mostly they wanted to feel they had acknowledged that I’d had experiences with racism that they might have ignored, without exposure to all the grisly details.In talking to Fareed, I often felt he was holding two opposing thoughts in his mind: relief that he lives in this intentional community that discusses race, that embraces the 24 percent, and loneliness at being at the center of a conversation in which everyone sees you and no one does. There can be an oppressiveness to sympathy, a way in which a newly galvanized community doesn’t let in room for doubt — for wondering whether the community would have been quite so galvanized if it hadn’t been the peak of a summer of racial-justice protests, if you still had locs or a shitty car in your driveway, or didn’t have a law degree, or your wife wasn’t the president of the PTA. When everyone is working so hard, when everyone is so vocally on your side, so apologetic for your experience, it’s easier to accept “Kumbaya” Montclair than to wrestle with those questions and ask other people to wrestle with them too.In August, New Jersey governor Phil Murphy signed a bill criminalizing false police reports that are used as a form of racism or bias intimidation. Around that time, the Montclair Police Department approached the Hayat family and asked them to give a statement. The Essex County prosecutor was considering bringing criminal charges against Schulz.Nobody really discusses the incident on Marion Road anymore, and people seem to be relieved to move on. “People remember that house on Marquette as the ‘Russian-spy place’ because the family that inspired The Americans lived there,” Agostinelli told me on the phone one day when I asked her if this has changed the neighborhood. “But I don’t know if people are going to remember Marion Road as ‘Oh, that’s where the Karen was.’ We had three houses that just flipped on our street.” By August, a Facebook commenter was asking, “Whatever happened to this?” By September 22, the moderator begged on a post, “Can we stop with the dumb Karen comments?” By October, when the Hayats took me to the backyard and showed me the patio, some BLM signs had been removed in favor of Halloween decorations.Yes, the patio. It was small and manicured, a ten-by-ten-foot rectangle in their sizable yard, just big enough to hold a few nice chairs around a coffee table and firepit. They had recently put in three tall shrubs that blocked the view of Schulz’s yard.“It’s the smallest patio anyone’s ever seen,” said Norrinda when we sat down. “I really wish it was bigger, at this point, because everybody in the world wanted to see it. People would be like, ‘We’re going to come hang out on your patio … Oh.’ It’s too much. They’re like, ‘Oh, it’s cute.’ ”Ah, yes, I joked, the patio that started all the conversation.“It shouldn’t have started any conversation,” Norrinda replied. The Hayats spent most of the summer hoping the conversation would die out, if she was being honest. In the end, they didn’t write back to the people vowing to curse Schulz on their behalf; they didn’t take that discount at the restaurant. They chose not to cooperate with the prosecutor. “Personally, I think if [Schulz] had been prosecuted and found guilty in any way, even just paid a $500 fine, I think this would have gone away for her a lot faster,” suggested a Montclair resident who had tracked the situation.“I find it embarrassing, the entire ordeal,” Norrinda emailed me one night. “Didn’t Toni Morrison say, ‘The function, the very serious function of racism is distraction. It keeps you from doing your work. It keeps you explaining, over and over again, your reason for being.’ I should be grading papers right now, but I am writing you.” That was the rub. “What is Susan doing right now? Not this. Not explaining herself six months later. We didn’t press charges because then we become the wrongdoer. We don’t believe in the criminal legal system. We believe in restorative practice. I would be happy if she moved. It would not make me happy if she was in jail.”Fareed posed a question in one of our talks: “White supremacy that’s alive and well and a part of all of us,” he said, “and the question is, How much of it are we going to reject? And how much are we willing to sacrifice ourselves in order to continue to move forward?” He asked it from an intellectual distance, as if he were delivering closing arguments or posing a question to his class. But at close range, the question simply is, Would my neighbors step up to defend me again? And will they continue to want to have this conversation about race now that the immediate drama is over?It’s a partial yes. Norrinda recently passed the baton as chair of the anti-racism group that is part of the PTA. Now it’s run by a white person. The last time I spoke to Fareed on the phone, on a weeknight in December, he was multitasking, trying to rally his son into a just-drawn bath while facilitating an online conversation for his anti-racist film group. That night, the group was watching America to Me, a documentary about institutional racism in a town similar to Montclair. “A majority in the group are white women,” he told me. “People are participating more and are attempting to do something about it.”As for Schulz, Norrinda thought she once saw her in the grocery store. Fareed told their boys they needed to be careful with the balls in the yard. He doesn’t want things to escalate. They finally have peace. Everyone wants it to stay that way.But sometimes, well, often, when he’s standing in his house, looking out over the fence, he sees Schulz in her yard, or even just the empty yard, and it hits him. Just for an instant. Maybe it was silly or naïve or too optimistic, but there was an expectation that in Montclair he could be aware of the reality of being Black in America without having to confront it or acknowledge it in his daily life. But now, “we do actively acknowledge it,” he said. “It’s just a reminder of that reality.”*This article appears in the December 21, 2020, issue of New York Magazine. Subscribe Now!Our top story picks in COVID-19 reporting this year.All through December, we’re featuring Longreads’ Best of 2020. This year, our editors featured many COVID-19 stories from across the web, and below, we’ve narrowed down 11 picks that really resonated with us. This roundup is focused on reported features; we initially included a few pandemic essays in this category, but those will instead appear in the upcoming Best of Essays list. If you like these, you can sign up to receive our weekly email every Friday.* * *The Atlantic‘s coverage of COVID-19 was exceptional this year, and Yong’s deep, thoughtful September feature lays it all out. How did the U.S. get here? Everything that went wrong was predictable and preventable, and despite all of its resources and scientific expertise, America’s leaders failed monumentally to control the virus at every turn.The coronavirus found, exploited, and widened every inequity that the U.S. had to offer. Elderly people, already pushed to the fringes of society, were treated as acceptable losses. Women were more likely to lose jobs than men, and also shouldered extra burdens of child care and domestic work, while facing rising rates of domestic violence. In half of the states, people with dementia and intellectual disabilities faced policies that threatened to deny them access to lifesaving ventilators. Thousands of people endured months of COVID‑19 symptoms that resembled those of chronic postviral illnesses, only to be told that their devastating symptoms were in their head. Latinos were three times as likely to be infected as white people. Asian Americans faced racist abuse. Far from being a “great equalizer,” the pandemic fell unevenly upon the U.S., taking advantage of injustices that had been brewing throughout the nation’s history.Another devastating read, “The Pariah Ship” by Michael Smith, Drake Bennett, and K. Oanh Haat, recounts the nightmare journey of Holland America’s MS Zaandam.The pandemic has exposed the flaws of tourism, and cruise ships are a symbol of the disastrous effects that COVID-19 has had on the travel industry as a whole. Princess Cruises’ Diamond Princess, which departed on January 20 this year from Japan’s Port of Yokohama, was the first ship to suffer a major outbreak. Clark’s account of the voyage and subsequent quarantine of the ship’s 3,711 passengers and crew is riveting yet terrifying. He weaves stories of numerous people on board, from the more-privileged (a pair of traveling couples called the “Four Amigos”) to the overworked and underprotected (like security crewmember Sonali Thakkar). His reporting of the U.S. government’s response is superb, especially from the perspective of Dr. James Lawler, the infectious-disease expert called in to lead the evacuation of American passengers back to the U.S. We also get a glimpse of what the experience is like for the ship’s captain, Gennaro Arma, who was eventually the last person to disembark.The Amigos, reduced now to three, along with the 325 other American evacuees, were still waiting on the buses. They had spent three hours idling on the pier and then, once they drove to the airport, sat on the tarmac for two more hours. Now, as the delay extended into a sixth hour, the passengers were nearing revolt. They were exhausted. And more problematically for the largely elderly passengers: The buses had no bathrooms.Meanwhile, in Washington, D.C., where it was still Sunday afternoon, the fate of the waylaid evacuees was being decided. Around the time the passengers were exiting the Diamond Princess, Japanese officials had blindsided their American counterparts with the news that some of the passengers boarding the buses had actually tested positive several days before. Soon many of the highest-level members of the Trump administration’s coronavirus response team, including Dr. Anthony Fauci, were arguing about what to do. Representatives from the CDC continued to fear spreading the virus. William Walters, the deputy chief medical officer for the State Department, wanted to bring everyone home anyway. Those urging the evacuation noted that the planes had been prepared with isolation units to contain the sick.As the debate raged, the evacuees were demanding to be let off the buses, quarantine be damned, to find a bathroom. Carl was breathing so hard his masked breath fogged his glasses as he strained to control his bladder. Some seniors were crying. Finally, a few were allowed to relieve themselves in bottles beside the bus or were brought to a nearby terminal.This narrative of James Cai, a medical professional and New Jersey’s first COVID-19 patient, is moving and brilliantly reported. We’re introduced to Cai as he experiences symptoms in early March, when doctors on the East Coast still viewed the virus “as an ominous but distant threat.” We’re there alongside him when he realizes, from a tweet he reads on TV about a man at a hospital, that he may be New Jersey’s first COVID-19 patient (“Please, God, don’t let that be me, he thought”). With advice and help from Chinese and Chinese-American doctors, and the use of tools like WeChat and Twitter to share knowledge and call attention to his case, Cai is able to receive the right care. It’s a gripping and touching read with a positive ending, though reveals just how much it takes for a person, even one with a lot of support and resources, to advocate for themselves.Cai hoped the remdesivir might help. The hospital had made its own request. But he knew that getting approval for compassionate use — which required the manufacturer’s approval as well as F.D.A. approval — could take time, and he was worried that it would be too late. That day, Huang reached out to every Gilead representative he knew and called on all his doctor friends to do the same. His former supervising physician at Mount Sinai, Paul Lee, had already written an unsuccessful email to an associate director at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases on Cai’s behalf to try to get him access to the drug. Huang posted on a large WeChat group for Chinese and Chinese-American cardiologists: “My name is Yili, great to meet everyone, unfortunately on this occasion,” he introduced himself. “I usually don’t post, but my good friend, only 32, health care provider, became this first case in New Jersey. Please help me with some inputs.” With Cai’s permission, he included a photo of Cai’s CT scan. He also forwarded the scans to another friend, Felix Yang, a cardiac electrophysiologist.Engelhart’s investigation into the outbreak at Life Care Center of Kirkland, the nursing home just east of Seattle that became known as the early epicenter of the coronavirus in the U.S., is an essential, emotionally painful read. Forty-six people that lived in or were linked to the facility died, and, at one point during the outbreak, there were 129 cases, including 81 residents and nearly 50 staff and visitors. Engelhart asks: Could these people have been saved? “The debate now,” she writes, “is whether all that death can be explained by biology and demographics — or whether, in spite of biology and demographics, more nursing-home residents could have been spared.” Her reporting, focused on the trajectories of two patients and roommates, Helen and Twilla, is incredibly in-depth, as is her examination of the larger problems in America’s nursing homes, the government’s response to COVID-19 at all levels, and the temporary solution of “sequester[ing] away the old people” and hoping for the best. The illustrated animations by Matt Bollinger and portraits by Jovelle Tamayo add another layer of storytelling.Montgomery had been shocked to learn that Life Care, of all places, had the virus. The facility was one of the best she had worked with, and she thought its infection-prevention nurse was as good as they come. But when she arrived at the nursing home, she was startled to see that not everyone was wearing a mask. Some nursing aides didn’t even know how to use PPE properly.Between March 3 and March 5, at the height of the Life Care outbreak, there were no doctors in the nursing home to evaluate and treat the dozens of residents who needed to be assessed — and officials at the county, state, and federal level knew it.In the first six weeks of the outbreak in New York City, 33 people died of COVID-19 every hour, and workers in hospital morgues and funeral homes struggled to keep up with bodies, lacking storage space, supplies, and equipment. For Sherman’s, a funeral home in Brooklyn, a “busy week” in the before times meant handling about 12 funerals, but in the first week of April, they handled and transported more than 120 bodies. Blitzer’s piece is grim and harrowing — hard to read at times, but an important look at the often forgotten work of last responders.Kasler and his co-workers were also concerned about supplies. They were running low on personal protective equipment—masks, gowns, and gloves. Each house call or hospital visit now required at least three pairs of gloves and two gowns. Zambito and the others needed to shed each item as it came into contact with a contaminated body. A standard pickup, she told me, required one set of P.P.E. to retrieve the body, followed by another set to put the body in the van, and yet another to take the body out of the van and bring it into the mortuary. Sherman had begun contacting funeral homes in other states to see if he could buy supplies from them. He was looking for disinfectant sprays and Clorox wipes. A cousin of his, in California, had ordered some of the items wholesale and arranged for them to be shipped to Sherman in New York. There was also a shortage of caskets. “They can’t make them quick enough,” Sherman told me.I was moved by many beautifully written human-interest stories at the Washington Post, including Greg Jaffe’s portrait of families living in motels outside of Disney World in Florida and other heart-breaking accounts in the “Voices from the Pandemic” series.About eight years ago, the Ismael siblings — Nash, 20; Nadeen, 18; and Nanssy, 13 — fled Iraq with their parents, eventually settling in Michigan, which has a large Chaldean community. John Woodrow Cox shares their story as they struggle with the loss of their mother, Nada Naisan, and their father, Nameer Ayram, who died 20 days apart from COVID-19. The loss and sorrow that Cox captures in these conversations and scenes are palpable, while Salwan Georges’ dim-lit photographs of both intimate and ordinary moments in these young people’s lives are haunting. (Another story from Cox, about a couple who lost their daughter in the Sandy Hook shooting, is also a poignant read.)At last, the stone arch over the entrance to White Chapel Memorial Park Cemetery came into view. The girls arrived first, stepping out of a car into a clear-sky morning, just shy of 70 degrees. They walked onto the grass of a long, narrow section of memorial plaques, searching for No. 222 among the oval-shaped metal markers pressed into the ground.“I’m not sure which one,” Nanssy told her sister.“Maybe that one over there,” Nadeen replied, looking toward a distant section of unearthed dirt.“Here it is,” Nanssy said, pointing.And there before them was not one grave, but two.Paul Alexander contracted polio when he was 6 years old and, while he recovered from the initial infection all those years ago, he became paralyzed from the neck down. Now, in his mid-70s, he is one of only two people in the U.S. that still uses an iron lung. McRobbie traces his extraordinary life, from the 18 torturous months he spent in the polio ward — rows and rows of metal canisters, each encasing a child’s limp body — to growing up and working toward an independent life: going to college, getting a law degree, falling in love, self-publishing a memoir. Today, Alexander considers the parallels between the polio and the COVID-19 pandemics, and while he’s scared and knows he’s very vulnerable, he tries to stay positive.The next 18 months were torture. Although he couldn’t talk because of the tracheotomy, he could hear the cries of other children in pain. He lay for hours in his own waste because he couldn’t tell the staff he needed to be cleaned. He nearly drowned in his own mucus. His parents visited almost every day, but his existence was unrelentingly boring. He and the other children tried to communicate, making faces at each other, but, Paul said: “Every time I’d make a friend, they’d die.”Though this virus, if he gets it, will likely kill him, life hasn’t changed dramatically for Paul since the start of the pandemic. He hasn’t been able to venture outside of his lung for more than five minutes in years. As one of his friends told me: “It’s not a strain for him, it’s his life. This is Mr Shelter-in-Place.” I asked Paul if he is worried about Covid-19. “Sure, sure,” he said. Then he added: “Well – I don’t sit around and worry about it. I’m dying a lot. It doesn’t make any difference.”Tufekci’s piece is science writing at its best, tackling and explaining dense and technical concepts to a general audience. How does COVID-19 spread? What is R0? What is k? What elements are present for super-spreading events to occur? It’s a fascinating look into overdispersion and clusters.To return to the mysteries of this pandemic, what did happen early on to cause such drastically different trajectories in otherwise similar places? Why haven’t our usual analytic tools—case studies, multi-country comparisons—given us better answers? It’s not intellectually satisfying, but because of the overdispersion and its stochasticity, there may not be an explanation beyond that the worst-hit regions, at least initially, simply had a few unlucky early super-spreading events. It wasn’t just pure luck: Dense populations, older citizens, and congregate living, for example, made cities around the world more susceptible to outbreaks compared with rural, less dense places and those with younger populations, less mass transit, or healthier citizenry. But why Daegu in February and not Seoul, despite the two cities being in the same country, under the same government, people, weather, and more? As frustrating at it may be, sometimes, the answer is merely where Patient 31 and the megachurch she attended happened to be.As of December 8, at least 1,231 meatpacking and food-processing plants have confirmed cases of COVID-19, including over 75,000 meatpacking workers. At least 340 have died. But federal and state regulatory agencies like Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) have not done much to hold meatpackers, like the One World Beef slaughterhouse in Brawley, California, accountable. This investigation at The Counter exposes the lack of COVID-19-specific safety regulations in these facilities, the culture of fear in these workplaces, and, ultimately, the industry’s focus on profit over people, even during a pandemic.Providing personal protective equipment and administering temperature screens were important steps taken by One World Beef. But the experts we spoke to for this story detailed numerous other steps that meatpacking facilities can take to make their operations immediately more safe for workers. These include slowing down the trim line, spacing workers out sufficiently, improving ventilation, telling workers when they might have been exposed to the virus, not incentivizing coming to work every single day, and providing routine testing for all workers, especially new hires. One World Beef, according to the workers we interviewed, did not take any of these critical steps and, in some cases, did the opposite.The company’s approach to testing turned out to be especially problematic.“We tested between 300 and 400 people from the facility on that first day,” said Dr. Brian Tyson, the owner of All Valley Urgent Care.Though this was an encouraging step, many employees were confused by the test that was administered. Rather than the widely publicized nasal swab test, employees received a finger pinprick combined with pulmonary X-rays. The employee confusion was justified: As it turned out, the testing method did not measure if employees were actively infected.“Twenty-five micrograms of fluid, the first and fastest hope for stopping a pandemic that had been officially declared just five days before, diffused into the muscle of his right arm.” This arm belonged to Neal Browning, an engineer in Seattle who was one of the first people in the U.S. to receive a dose of Moderna’s COVID-19 vaccine candidate. Jarvis’ deep-dive into the race for a vaccine and the history of vaccine creation and development is engaging and, at times, unexpectedly entertaining (our innate immune system is compared a number of times to a tantrum-throwing Rambo baby).Even with the head start, beginning the trials so quickly required a sprint. The news about the virus’s spread, and its effects on those it infected, kept getting scarier. It was soon clear that more was riding on the vaccine than anyone had initially realized. Within two weeks, scientists at Moderna, without being asked, were staying late, working weekends. Corbett’s team started growing spike proteins and stocking freezers with vials. They immunized mice with the vaccine, then tested their blood for antibodies. A clinical batch was ready by February 7, tested and shipped by February 24, and green-lit for human testing by March 4. (It was a coincidence that the human trials began in what had, by March, become the first hot spot in the US; Kaiser Permanente Washington Health Research Institute had been selected to conduct them in late January.) There was never a singular moment, says Hoge, when he realized the researchers had begun an 18-month marathon. Instead, “it felt like every day, can you run faster, can you run faster, can you run faster?”“We’ve never experienced a mass disaster in universal isolation before,” writes Fairbanks. “There is no precedent for it.” This thoughtful piece explores how people compare the pandemic to war (the virus as enemy, health care workers as foot soldiers) as a way to understand or cope with it. Fairbanks talks with four men about their wartime experiences during the Rwandan genocide and civil wars in Somalia, Syria, and Sierra Leone and explains that the reach for metaphors by those who have not experienced war, and the show of bravado and strength, especially from our world’s leaders, sets us up for even greater suffering. One man Fairbanks spoke with, Nuruddin Farah from Somalia, said our use of the war analogy reveals a “‘poverty of the imagination’ about the varieties of pain,” ultimately hindering us from learning new lessons. Fairbanks offers a very wide view, yet makes you contemplate your own personal and individual response to this pandemic.One of the points of reaching for this analogy is to deflect attention from epic missteps. We should not be experiencing widespread shortages of critical supplies or a total lack of coherent strategy from the U.S. government, as if coronavirus were an ambush, a “Pearl Harbor,” which it wasn’t. “Hindsight is a luxury none of us have in the heat of battle,” New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio said Wednesday, to excuse his administration’s multiple failures to heed expert warnings and shut down schools and businesses. Nuruddin Farah, a writer from Somalia, lamented that “the only reason nurses and doctors are described as ‘warriors’ right now is because some politicians have failed in providing these doctors and nurses with the equipment that they need.”But what about ordinary people who reach for the “war” analogy? I told Nuruddin that some friends of mine also sounded relieved to use it. One friend in Seattle told me that he finally felt he could connect to his grandfather’s experience during World War II. He had always suspected that, by comparison, he had led too frivolous and privileged a life; that he’d never been tested, never been forced to be truly courageous or heroic.* * *Read all the categories in our Best of 2020 year-end collection.
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
ZAKI HAIDARI RUNS MARATHONS in Australia. Forty, fifty kilometres, ‘it’s not an easy process,’ he admits. He doesn't say how it began, this running for hours a day. But he proudly recalls that crossing the finish line in his first race, raising thousands of dollars for children with cancer, ‘was a very rewarding moment’.He also clearly recalls telling his mother, when he first arrived in Australia as a teenager, ‘I don’t have to run from anything anymore.’He can still remember the place he left, his village where a mountain river flows, and playing as a happy child with a happy family who was 'there for me no matter what'. He remembers the killings that made his mother run with her remaining children to Kabul. But the Taliban found them there, too, delivering warnings – on Taliban letterhead – about him, the oldest surviving son.So Zaki started running. Onto his first airplane. Through jungles. Into small, dark rooms, where he was confined, hungry, thirsty and very frightened. As he ran from Afghanistan, he was beaten, threatened, he made friends and walked for days and nights on end. He made it to the sea, where he was tossed until he went into shock in a broken boat, and then, finally, he made it to an Australian outpost called Christmas Island. He was blistered by the sun and wind. Tired.On Christmas Island, there was no price on his head. Instead he was made a number, corresponding to the boat that carried him to Australian shores. And over the next seven years (and counting), he has run the course of Australia’s changing policies for those who fled here by boat, seeking safety. In this, the finish line, if there is one, is always moving further out of sight. 'When I'm out and run for hours, I just think, “Oh, this part of my body hurts, that part of my body hurts – how I can make it more strong?"’ It clears his head. Sometimes in his dreams he runs and people shoot at his legs until he can’t go on. But when he’s awake and running, he can just think of nothing. 'Now, just, that's my thing,' he says of the marathons. Between his full-time work and many volunteer duties, he keeps running. 'You underestimate how much you can do as a human.'‘So, I belong to an ethnic group called Hazara, it’s one of the minority ethnic groups in Afghanistan that has been persecuted for over almost two centuries now because of our ethnicity, our religion, our values and beliefs. We have been denied our basic human rights,’ such as access to education and health care, Zaki says. ‘My grandfather wasn't allowed to go to school because of his ethnicity and because of his religion.’'We are Muslim, but we are Shia,’ he says. ‘In a country like Afghanistan, you could be killed because of the way you practice your Muslim beliefs.'Hazaras were sold as slaves in Kabul markets a century ago, and systematic discrimination endured long since. Law kept Hazaras from serving in the military, government jobs, and higher education, and in the rural areas they were denied public services. Physically distinct, with Asiatic features, the more secular, intellectual Hazara community grew more out of step as Sunni extremism took hold in the late 1990s, when the Taliban declared Jihad on them. Thousands of Hazaras lost their lives in mass killings.Yet when Zaki’s father was a young man, before the Taliban, things were briefly better in Afghanistan for Hazara people. '[My father was] the first person in our entire family who went to school. It was a big deal for the whole family, and everyone was proud of him – and then he managed to get into university. He did medical science, and he became the doctor that people needed, and he opened his medical centre in the town that we were from. He was very well respected in the village. 'He saved hundreds of lives, because [before his clinic opened] there were times the roads were blocked – people didn't get any medical attention, they had to travel to Kabul, but they couldn't go through – so they were dying with very basic sickness.'His dream was to see his kids to go to university, and to see his kids get a degree and give back to the community, the way he was giving.'When Zaki is a child, Afghanistan is a landscape of war. After the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, United States troops moved in and over years waged battle in shifting alliances with Afghan warlords, against the Taliban. Zaki’s village is surrounded by Taliban, but only when he leaves the village for high school does he fully understand that there is something different about being a Hazara boy. Suddenly the teachers won't answer questions he asks. Hazaras are marked down even when they do the same work. 'Everyone is making fun of you because you look different, with the small eyes and a round face,' he says. 'But that wasn’t a big deal for me. I’m, like, whatever, going to the classroom, doing my studies, as my father was asking [me] to do.'And he has his brother at school. 'His name was Ali, and he was…' Zaki’s voice trails off.  'I had an older brother, which….'He stops again. Apologises. Wonders whether to say. He takes a deep breath, closes his eyes, and keeps them closed. 'So, my brother finished high school – and I never saw Dad super-happy like that in his life, where he was very proud. Then, you could see that in him – it was like, “Yes! You made it, and you're going to university.”’But. 'It's a shame to say, but Afghanistan is a country where being a university student makes you a criminal for the Taliban.'The Hazara boys know about Taliban checkpoints. They know to dress inconspicuously on the bus between the village and the city, riding what’s known as ‘Death Road’, where attacks and kidnappings are not uncommon. Never to carry student ID. Zaki’s brother Ali is in his second year, and he knows the drill, maybe too well. Coming home for the summer holidays, he throws on a coat without checking the pockets. 'Losing my brother, it was a huge deal for our family, and for my father – because he didn’t just lose his son but also his dream,' Zaki says. 'Still, he was telling me that he had me. You know, although we were going through a very tough time back then, he was hoping that I would go to university and I would finish it.'The Taliban would have other ideas.Zaki’s father felt impervious to the dangers that had claimed his eldest son. Maybe it was a kind of stubbornness, or pride – the same stuff that helped him overcome so many obstacles on his way to becoming a doctor. 'Afghanistan is a very strange country, where if you're a doctor, if you're an educated man, if you work for government ... you're basically criminal. So if the Taliban find you – which they will, because you if you travel out of Kabul or other cities, they have their own checkpoints …' Zaki’s voice trails off again.It is a year after his brother’s murder. Zaki is in Year 12. A US military ‘surge’ is petering out, emboldening the Taliban, whose abuses became endemic in areas under their control. The family is always reminding Zaki’s father, pleading with him to take extra precautions as he drives his van to the city with lists of needed medicines, written in English, and back with the stock. The van is stopped, searched. 'Normally when they kill people,' Zaki says, 'they kill them overnight, brutally, and then they leave the body on the road the next day. 'For my father, we couldn’t find any sign of him.' The clinic sees patients no more.It doesn’t end there. A doctor with English-labelled medicines must be allied with the enemy, according to the Taliban. That’s reason enough to go after the family, too. Even as they search for their father’s body, the family is accused of working for Americans, too, and a ‘guilty family’ has a higher price to pay.'So, when they took my father away, they were sending letters and sending people, [demanding] for me to go to them,’ Zaki says. Mafia tactics, but more official; the terrorists of the Taliban have their own letterhead. Their message? ‘Like, they have to literally kill someone in the family, so the family is “cleaned up” then. And I was the oldest son.' Time to run. 'My Mum had to move town… she was trying to hide me as much as she could,' Zaki says. 'But it didn’t take that long, even when we moved to Kabul, they found us. They were after me really bad.'Zaki’s mother knew she couldn’t protect him forever at home. She set out every day, searching for a way to keep him safe, alive. 'She’s never been to school. She can’t read and write. But she is smart,' says Zaki. 'She knew that people go overseas and leave Afghanistan, so she was thinking that was the only option for me.' While she would have preferred to get him out in an orderly ‘legal’ way, she ran into a series of obstacles. Passports are hard for Hazaras to obtain, but Zaki’s mother doesn’t stop until she gets him one; one imagines bribes can help. Then she learns that the countries that receive refugees, such as Australia and the United States, generally won’t provide visas to Hazaras even when they have passports, because of the risk that they might claim asylum once they get there. 'She was upset,' Zaki says. Outrunning the Taliban, her time is growing short.'One day she comes home and she was – she was happy but she was really sad. I’d never seen Mum in that situation, where she was happy and she was crying and she was giving me hugs. She was telling me that she found these people smuggling out of Afghanistan. And I was like, “Yeah, that's good.” And Mum, she was like, ‘“No, they are saying that it's very risky. There's a 90 per cent chance that you will die before getting to a safe country.”' Bad odds, until you run them against your chances with the Taliban. There is no ‘queue’ for people seeking asylum. There is a common misconception that if refugees just waited in camps overseas, they would eventually be resettled, but people fleeing harm do not always get to choose where they travel to. There is also no guarantee of resettlement. Fewer than 1 per cent of the world’s refugees are resettled annually. For these reasons, international law states that if a person enters a country without a visa seeking asylum, they should not be treated as illegal or be subjected to any disadvantage.For more information see the Kaldor Centre’s factsheet on resettlement. You may also be interested in this Refugee Council of Australia analysis of global resettlement data from 2004-2018.The night before the journey begins, his mother coaxes him to close his eyes. But Zaki stays awake to watch his young brothers and sisters and his mother, possibly for the last time. 'We didn’t know which country I was going to, I didn’t know who I was meeting. The only thing  shared with my Mum was: “We’re taking your son to a safe country, it costs money, it could cost his life.” That’s it.'He is 16 years old when a man comes and takes him away from his family to the airport.The journey is physically and psychologically harrowing. For every zig-zag of progress, payment of one sort or another is due. 'I don't know what these people could do to me. So I was sitting there and I was thinking, “What am doing here? Where am I going? What will happen next?” I was exhausted. I was scared. I clearly remember, I was really, like, panicking and I was shaking when I was in the airport... even now I still think, anything could go wrong, you know.'He makes it through the flight, through customs, and outside into India, where he is taken to a house and put into a small, dark room. He longs for his mother. He wonders if he’ll die here. 'Then they open the door, and they took me out of the room and I couldn't see, my eyes were like, “The light!” The men were saying, “Okay, we're going to the airport.”’He makes it next to Malaysia. The room is better and there is another Hazara boy there. They long for their mothers. 'These people are coming and taking me, and I have no idea who they were, or why I was going with them, but they were sort of taking me around. Every country, I would deal with different people. They did say the Malaysian police are really, really bad – like, if they catch you, you can’t escape, they will deport you back to Afghanistan. And for me, I knew if I was deported back, that was it for me, you know, I was gone.'He is not gone, though. 'They came like at midnight,’ he says, describing people who crowded them into cars, then forced them to walk through the jungle. ‘That was like a very, very horrible few days. We didn’t have proper food and water, and they were saying, “If you can’t walk, we just leave you here, and these people are really scary, they will just come and take you away and they will just kill you.” So you had to catch up with the group, and you had to walk really fast.'He makes it to Jakarta. He can call his mother briefly. 'We didn't have time to explain everything. Just, “Yeah, hi, I'm here,” so Mum could pay more money to them.' Both mother and son were crying.There had been whispers, but in Jakarta he finds out he will be going to Australia. He knows no English and nothing about Australia, least of all its political furore about the boats, one of which he soon will board. As that boat launches, Zaki is told that within 24 hours he will be in Australia. Instead, he is at sea for five days and nights. Engine broken, food gone, water emptied, sharks circling. Terrified. He longs for his mother. He thinks he’ll die here.For Zaki and other people in Temporary, stories from the sea share so many commonalities. When they are rescued, as Zaki explains, 'It’s kind of like in the movies when you go to prison. They take your picture on a white background... they gave us a [boat ID] number and a small whiteboard and they take a picture ... and then they took us to Christmas Island,' a far-flung dot of Australian territory in the Indian Ocean.In Australia, though, the stories of the people on boats diverge. A new capriciousness begins.It feels like a finish line. Shower. Clean clothes. A bed – men in one compound, families and minors in another. ‘The next day, they gave us a telephone to call home. So, that was the second time I was talking to Mum, and it was super exciting – I told her that I survived, I don’t have to run from anything anymore. It was a very emotional call. I knew that I would survive.’ He would get to go to school, to give back, to fulfil all the dreams he’d inherited.'So I was put with a family for the next day, and then they came and they said, "You have an interview." There were four officials. They came and took me to a room, they interviewed me from 3pm until 7pm. Very scary questions. They weren’t really friendly.’ Refugee Advice and Casework Service (RACS) senior solicitor Isobel McGarrity says identity interviews were often held with unaccompanied minors to determine their age and citizenship. 'They were often conducted by more than one officer and were notoriously interrogative,' she notes.Zaki picks up the story. ‘They said, “You’re not 17 – this is your date of birth, we ask you to sign here confirming that this is you.” I’m like, okay, whatever – I was really scared by then.'The boy, now a number, gets a new age. He’s 18 with the stroke of a pen and doesn’t see much difference, though in time he will realise it makes a huge difference. For now, he goes to the men’s compound. People get roused in the night and transferred to the even more remote Manus Island in Papua New Guinea, or to the small Pacific island nation of Nauru, places where Australia has just recently revived ‘regional processing centres’ (RPCs). It’s late 2012. Zaki waits and wonders what will happen to him.Zaki stays in the men’s compound. The government says the ‘RPCs’ are ‘at capacity’. Or, as Zaki recalls it, 'They were telling us, "It's full now... as soon as we have room, we will send you."'There is room in a detention centre in Tasmania, an island state of Australia. Australia’s onshore immigration detention network is comprised of several detention centres, spread throughout the country. There is also a detention centre on Christmas Island where many members of the legacy caseload spent some time. This was closed in 2018, but was reopened in August 2020.It is common for detainees to be relocated – sometimes with very short notice or by force – to different detention centres within the network. This makes it difficult for detainees to maintain friendships and relationships of support with other people in detention and community volunteers. Relocation can also make it difficult to stay in contact with legal representatives. When detainees have access to a mobile phone this is made easier.For more information, see this Sydney Morning Herald article: The 8000 'forced movements' on Australian flights in two years Tasmanians come to visit and they are friendly. Zaki tries his English.The Immigration Minister has the discretion to permit people to live in the community on bridging visas, rather than in immigration detention, while their asylum claims are being processed. A bridging visa allows you to stay legally in the country and access Medicare, explains RACS lawyer Alison Ryan, but ‘it can be cancelled, people can be put in detention. For asylum seekers, a bridging visa is seen as pretty precarious.’Zaki is sent to Sydney with a bridging visa, $100, and accommodation for two weeks. 'We went to the burger shop and I was looking at the menu and the burger was costing ten dollars – I'm like, I have a hundred dollars to survive for 15 days!' The Hazara boy he met in Malaysia is still with him, and they decide not to eat that night. ‘It was a wise decision,’ Zaki says.'We were rushing to find a place to live, because we were running out of time [at the motel]. And renting! We found out that renting in Sydney is, like, super intense,' particularly for young men without bank statements. 'It was hard for people to trust to rent a place for us.'The weird thing about our visa was, like, we didn't have work rights... we weren't allowed to go to TAFE [vocational school] or college or university to learn English, or even to go to [high] school, which I was dreaming for.' He finally understands why it was deemed so important that he say he was 18 years old. 'In the community, if I was 17, I had the right to go to school, I had the right for someone to protect me – but then if I'm just an adult... good luck, I don't ask for anything.'Once you turn 18, you’re pretty much on your own – everything changes, your housing, your educational opportunities.'For me,' says Zaki, 'it was very painful. I was always getting up early in the morning and I was sitting in front of the house and [watching people] going to school with uniforms and stuff, and I was like, “Look at my life. I have nothing to do but sit and watch them.” I really wanted to go to school. It was the most painful thing ever to witness. Every morning you get up and have nothing in life to do, and these people could go to school... I was hating myself every day.'And even though we really wanted to get a job, we weren't allowed to. So, we were kind of forced to sit home, do nothing, and get Centrelink every fortnight just to survive. And I was really bored. Everyone was bored.'I said to my social worker, “I can't do this anymore.” He could see in my face that I might do something stupid…. I'm like, “I want to get out and do [something], and be with people.” I was isolated in a room, in a house with people who were having the same issues as me. You couldn't discuss anything, because everyone was getting to a breaking point.' Would you volunteer? 'Anything. Just get me out of here.' He begins volunteering two days a week, website uploads, nothing remarkable. It makes all the difference. 'That makes me, like, happy I'm doing something for people.' One thing leads to another. A journalist tells his story, it leads to an offer from an educational organisation. 'I'm, like, oh so happy… So I called Mum.' And this time, the tears they cry are happy ones. Study rights can be attached to bridging visas, provided an asylum seeker abides by a signed code of behaviour. A week after the good news from the college, though, comes the bad news: the English test. He fails. 'I barely could tell people what I wanted and stuff like that.A bridging visa is a short-term visa that the Minister may elect to grant to a non-citizen while their final visa status is being determined. A person on a bridging visa may live in the community. Unlike people in community detention, they are not legally considered to be in detention.There are various kinds of bridging visa, each with different terms and conditions. People in the legacy caseload are typically granted a bridging visa known as the Bridging Visa E, or ‘BVE’.For more information, see the Kaldor Centre’s factsheet on Bridging Visas.Zaki at his graduation.'So they offered me another scholarship, for English classes, and I did an intensive English class for three months then I was able to pass the English test. I was studying like crazy! And I managed to get into college, and I had a choice [of subjects].'I went with IT [information technology], because my older brother was doing computer science and he couldn't finish it. Well, this isn’t just for me, it was for Dad and for my brother as well.' Zaki earns his diploma and, a week before graduation, he is nominated for an award as well – he would be named 2015 NSW International Student of the Year. 'I was so happy, I called Mum and I'm like, “Mum, I'm going to my graduation ceremony. But I am alone. Like, I don't have you or my Dad. You guys were dreaming this – I'm going, I'm wearing the clothes that you were dreaming of, but I don't have you guys here.”'I went to the stage with my clothes and I got my diploma certificate and I got a trophy … the biggest moment for my life. And I could feel, like, my Dad was in the room and my Mum, but not physically – like, I couldn't have them to give me a hug.Zaki keeps getting new bridging visas. One after another after another, over three and a half years. He wants to apply for refugee protection, but during this time the Minister for Immigration has barred anyone who arrived by boat from applying unless he gives them permission to do so. Zaki waits for permission.'We didn't know if we’re getting another visa or not. Every six months when the visa expired, there was a gap between visas. Sometimes it could be weeks. So during this time we were panicking, because it happened when people's visas were expiring – they were coming and getting them away at midnight and putting them back to detention centres.' Every car that slowed on the road was a worry. Was it police? Immigration? It was hard to sleep, to relax. 'They will take us away,’ Zaki remembers thinking. ‘We had these moments all the way through.'Zaki’s fear is not irrational. His bridging visa with study rights was conditional on signing a broad, vague code of behaviour, and people who breached it, even unwittingly, could be re-detained. The risk hung over everyone on a tenuous bridging visa.Still, Zaki buckles down. His academic success is exceptional for any kid, but particularly extraordinary for someone in this ‘legacy caseload’, where the system has broken so many people. His achievements lead to a scholarship offer for a higher degree. He just needs a letter from Immigration saying he will be in the country for two years, enough to complete the course. 'I was like, a happy kid, you know? I have my diploma, I’ve got my trophy and everything – I'm like, “Wow, Immigration will be so proud of me. I achieved all this without any support.”'So, I walk into the Immigration office.'Zaki takes a number. Goes to the counter. Introduces himself. Your passport, please? No passport, sir. So why are you here? Zaki starts to explain. What’s your Boat ID? Zaki gives the man his number. The man goes away. ‘He comes back and says, “I can't help you.” ‘I'm like, “You didn’t even listen to me, what I need.” ‘He goes, “No, I can’t help you. Just go.”‘And I say, “This is my diploma, degree certificate, and this is my trophy. I went to college. I have these. I achieved this, and I need a letter from you to say that I will be in Australia for two years, because I think you didn't listen to me.” ‘“I can't help you.” ‘He pushed everything back to me and said, ‘’Are you going to go, or should I call the security?”‘By then I was in tears, like, I was so emotional that he even didn't have a look at what I have and need, didn't listen to what I said. And I was very scared as well, and I was like crying, in front of families. I took a seat and [hear]... “Are you going to leave?” I'm like, “Yeah, just give me some time, I'm leaving.”‘I was broken.'The college calls. Zaki tries to explain and hangs up. 'I was really down. Two weeks later, the college called me back, saying, “Did you get the letter, or what's happening now?” I said, “They didn't give me anything.” And they were super helpful – they said, “Do you want to do another diploma?” I'm like, “Yes!”’’Three years pass. Cars pass without taking Zaki back to a detention centre. He calls his mother every night. He studies full time while the volunteer gigs multiply. Taking people food. Student ambassador. Filling out forms for new asylum seekers, helping at RACS – so, by the time Zaki is allowed to make his application for asylum, he knows how it could go, for better or worse.For him, it goes the best it could. The decision-maker agrees that, as a Hazara targeted by the Taliban, Zaki has a well-founded fear that if he were returned to Afghanistan, he would suffer serious harm. He is found to be a refugee, at risk in his country of origin and needing Australia’s protection. But because he came by boat, he doesn’t get permanent protection. His protection is temporary, a five-year Safe Haven Enterprise Visa, a SHEV. The visa requires him to move out of Sydney, so he shifts to a regional area. It includes work rights, so, a week later, he has a full-time job. He knows how lucky he is that an employer will take him on and invest in his training despite the fact that his current visa will run out in 2021. 'My life has been in limbo since I was 16,' he says. 'People my age tend to have goals and dreams … what they want in five years, or in ten years. For me it's like, if I have tomorrow I'll be happy. 'Living in Australia for seven years, it's given me a lot of things that I really appreciate. I feel like I am, you know, human – like you're a part of a community. In Australia I don't have any paperwork that says I'm an Australian. But, you know, morally, and feelings-wise, I do feel like I'm an Australian. I have some really amazing friends I couldn't have had – they're from a different ethnic background, they speak different languages, but I still feel like I'm a part of their community. You know, like, just a normal human being, which in a lot of countries you can't have.'There are rewards. He keeps running. It’s just 'there's no finish, in terms of life perspective, for me. 'Everything is temporary.'In episode 2 of Temporary, hear how Zaki negotiated hunger, renting in Sydney, and a restrictive visa, to become an award-winning student who still isn’t allowed to call himself Australian. In her new book, Miranda Ward explores the unique place of almost-motherhood — an uncertain landscape characterized by waiting, wanting, hoping, and not-knowing.Miranda Ward | Adrift | Weidenfeld & Nicolson | January 2021 | 15 minutes (4,339 words)The bald conclusiveness of a positive pregnancy test draws a clear line between yes/no, this/that, knowing/not-­knowing. For a moment at least it clarifies everything, or distils it, into a single and irrefutable piece of knowledge. This certainty, when it comes to the body, is rare (later a doctor will tell me: if everything in medicine were as reliable as a pregnancy test, my job would be a lot easier), so I hold on to that piece of knowledge, which is proof of my own productivity, for as long as I can.But doubt, worry, have a way of threading their way through even the solidest conviction. Threat is everywhere: a light fever, an undercooked egg. Indeed the more I read the more I realise how fragile a pregnancy is, how it isn’t as simple as a positive test and a baby nine months later, which is something I suppose I always knew in the abstract but never had any real frame of reference for before. I was aware that some of my friends and acquaintances, for example, had had miscarriages, but I had not until now really understood what it meant, in both practical and emotional terms, to have to hold an awareness of this terrible possibility always alongside a hope, a longing, for it not to happen to you. Most of what I know about pregnancy, in fact, comes from fiction, from books, films, TV: the way certain signifiers – wooziness, weakness, nausea – are used to suggest a pregnancy before it is confirmed; the way, once it is confirmed, a woman must somehow both alter her behaviour drastically and hardly at all, vomiting copiously into a bin at work seconds before giving a presentation just as if nothing is amiss, but studiously avoiding, suddenly, a whole litany of food and drink; most of all the way a baby is almost always the inevitable result of a pregnancy. The plain fact of it – that at least one in four pregnancies end in miscarriage, perhaps more, since sometimes a woman might miscarry before she even knows she’s pregnant – had somehow eluded me, or else I had somehow failed to think of it in tangible terms.AmazonBlackwell’sWhat does that statistic actually mean, practically speaking? It means that nothing is a given. It means that there are people – a lot of people – for whom the result of a pregnancy is not a baby. It means that even the purest elation is often shaded, especially in the early weeks, when miscarriage is most likely, with fear.I develop a set of superstitions for protection; certain shirts for luck, certain routes home from the library or the grocery store, certain songs skipped or repeated. An aping at control. And for a while everything is normal, in the sense that nothing is normal, in the sense that I feel slightly ill, weary, a little as if I am not myself. My overriding emotion is happiness, but there is also a part of me that feels as if I have become separated somehow from my body, as if it is acting of its own accord, and the thinking part of me is just along for the ride. There are psychological adjustments to make – I have to play the phrase I’m pregnant over and over to myself to believe it; I have to think about what is good for me not in terms of my body only, but also in terms of the invisible body-­to­-be inside me. There are physical symptoms, too, though they are mild (another thing I didn’t realise: that while some pregnant women are indeed debilitated by illness or weariness, not everyone is). I am never actually sick, though I am dogged by a whisper of nausea that asserts itself at odd times and leads me to keep a pack of digest­ives on my bedside table. I can feel a largeness, a tenderness, to my breasts, and although I know it’s far too early for the pregnancy itself to show I feel fuller somehow, heavier than I was before I knew, as if the knowledge itself has some weight or substance to it.This is not an unpleasant feeling – because it is a novelty, and because the pregnancy is so unequivocally desired – but it is hard to escape a sense of uneasiness, too. I find myself tracing familiar routes around Oxford, where I’ve lived for years, ever since I moved to the UK after university; I know the roads well, and yet I feel every encounter between feet and pavement to be different now, because I am differently bodied. What I have is a sense, visceral and unignor­able, that my body no longer belongs wholly to me – and in a way it doesn’t. As I walk I feel not exactly a ‘we’, but a blooming plurality, an ‘I and…’, perhaps, the assertion of a possibility taking physical form. Where once I occupied my mind during walks with long, elaborate daydreams, there now seems to be no room for anything other than the immediacy of experience and the planning and execution of the tasks of my own daily life. I take to listening to radio shows and podcasts, tuning out my external surroundings and internal circumstances, focusing on the minute details of, say, a true crime story, losing myself in the voice of the presenter.* * *Geographers write about the inseparability of the body from our experience of place: we sense places, are bodily present in them, see them, hear them, smell them, move within them. How else do we know a favourite room or city or mountain trail? The body, as Tim Edensor writes, is the means through which we experience and feel the world.To which he adds: bodies are not only written upon but also write their own feelings upon a space in a process of continual remaking.What I am struck by in the delicate earliest weeks of pregnancy is that I am being both made and unmade; rewritten. The pregnancy is largely unspoken of: we have told our doctor, and our parents, which perhaps lends it a weight in the world that it wouldn’t yet have had we not told anyone, but day to day I move through the hours without anyone but us knowing, because the pregnancy is still invisible. When I stand in front of the mirror I see nothing different, but nothing the same, either. When I go to the swimming pool, as I do most mornings, an almost religious habit, the place of it has shifted, though the change is microscopic, under the surface. On a quiet morning I watch the play of sunlight on the bottom of the pool and I am in a foreign country. In the changing room, pulling off my wet suit after a shower, I am self­-conscious for the first time – can they tell? But I want them to tell, even though there’s no way they possibly could, even though when I think of it I have the sense not so much of the world tilting on its axis but of the axis itself having drifted elsewhere. I smile knowingly at a visibly pregnant woman undressing and she looks away, uncomprehending or embarrassed or both. I am the foreign country, or else I have lost the map of this place. Walking home, along the same roads I have always taken, the green of the trees fading into yellow, I feel somehow both lonely and plural.* * *And then.One morning, a few weeks after that first definitive, positive test, I wake up and feel my old self again – that is to say, not ill, not weary, not plural or novel – and that evening I experience some mild pain, a quick gush of blood which soon slows to an ambiguous but ominous trickle, and a sense of doom. I am not sure what the appropriate reaction is: denial? Despair? I cannot summon the energy to cook or even to eat dinner; although it is still early I retire to bed, lying on top of the duvet, curled into a question mark. Alexander lies down next to me, his body settling around mine. He tells me the things I both want and don’t want to hear: that it’s OK, that we don’t know for sure that anything’s wrong yet, that he loves me. He’s meant to be playing football in twenty minutes. Do you want me to stay? he says. I’ll stay with you. No, I say vehemently, as if this is in fact an uncharitable suggestion, you should go, you should play, what can you do at this point, what can I do? Nothing. Even after he’s pulled his socks over his shinpads, laced up his boots, he hesitates at the door: are you sure you don’t want me to stay? I don’t want you to stay, I say emphatically. If I were being honest – with him, with myself – I’d say exactly the opposite: stay, please. Instead I lie back and stare at the wall for an hour until he gets home and we go to sleep.The next morning I call my GP, who arranges an emergency scan for me at the hospital. The soonest the scan can be done is in two days, so in the interim period I carry on as usual: I go to meetings, answer emails, run errands. It’s not as hard to do this as I would have imagined it would be, and after all, what choice do I have? But it’s also indicative of the ongoingness that will characterise much of the next two months.I cannot summon the energy to cook or even to eat dinner; although it is still early I retire to bed, lying on top of the duvet, curled into a question mark.I would have imagined, too, that a miscarriage was a definite thing – yes/no, this/that, knowing/not­-knowing – a neatly shaped happening with a beginning, a middle, a definitive end, each closely following the other. Women say, ‘I had a miscar­riage’, and until now I have always heard their experience as being something contained, even while brutally uncontrollable: all those stories of blood-­drenched bathroom floors, of unimag­inable agony, of horror and shock, of sadness and then resolution (often in the form of a baby arriving a year or two on, as if some consolation must always be offered): what I understand now, of course, is that these stories are told retrospectively, packaged in the way that all stories, to some extent, must be. But when I phone the doctor I’m unsure, grammatically speaking, how to phrase my concern: do I say to him that I have had a miscarriage, that I’m having one, that I’m worried I might have one in the future? The idea of the miscarriage in progress perplexes the part of me that imagined that this is a thing that can only happen privately, violently, suddenly, because it is a thing that is happening without much noise at all, and meanwhile here I am transcribing an interview, here I am meeting with a freelance client, wearing a new skirt I bought yesterday from the charity shop, here I am buying groceries and planning dinner, with nothing but a question mark inside me.Alexander and I take a taxi to the hospital for the scan; it’s early morning and the driver is playing loud Pakistani pop, which is somehow soothing, and drowns out my own thoughts. In the waiting room Alexander scrolls restlessly through his phone. A little plastic radio on a cabinet in the corner of the room is pumping out cheerful tunes punctuated by cheerful radio host banter. I take my book from my handbag and lay it on my knees, open at my marked place. Knausgaard, A Death in the Family. In his younger-­self narrative, the author’s father has just died, while in his current­-self narrative, his partner is heavily pregnant, lumbering around, practically bursting with new life. But I cannot read on. I become fixated on a single paragraph, a description of a piece of artwork, which strikes me as incomprehensible. I read it over and over again until my name is called.The scan reveals an embryo with no heartbeat. I lie on the bed, naked from the waist down, a blue plastic sheet draped over my legs. Alexander holds my hand while the ultrasound technician swirls a wand around inside me, talking us through the image of my uterus on the screen. It is illegible to me – darkness, light, hazy shapes – but to her the meaning is crystal clear. I’m so sorry it’s not the news you were hoping for, she says. She gives me a wad of tissue to wipe myself with before leaving the room to let me get dressed. She leads us back to the waiting room, which is fuller now, no one making eye contact, the radio still humming; a doctor will see you soon, she says, to talk to you about what happens next. ‘Soon’ is an ambiguous word, and time becomes difficult to perceive; we are there for what feels like both an eternity and an instant. I take my book out again, stare again at that same page; Alexander unlocks his phone, moves his finger across the screen in a kind of robotic motion.What I am struck by in the delicate earliest weeks of pregnancy is that I am being both made and unmade; rewritten.Sometimes these things resolve naturally, the doctor says when we are finally called in to see her; sometimes intervention becomes necessary, or desirable. She schedules me for another scan the following week, so we can monitor whether there’s been any change: in other words, whether the products of conception, as the embryo is now known, have been partially or even wholly expelled. After the scan, she says, we can decide how to proceed; you don’t need to make any decisions now. Good, I think, though I’m a little hazy on exactly what kind of decision I might be called upon to make; she has described the various forms of intervention but I can’t quite situate them in relation to my own body, my own products of conception.She is very young, the doctor, soft-­spoken, apologetic. She says to call if anything changes before my next appointment, if I have any concerns. She gives me a business card, circles a phone number that’s operational 24/7. To minimise the risk of infection, she adds, seemingly as an afterthought, you shouldn’t take baths or swim.No swimming. Of course. But I am thrown by the thought of this: the removal of the most obvious physical coping mechanism I have for dealing with what is essentially an entirely uncontrollable physical situation. I realise I’ve said this out loud without really meaning to. A silence falls, either respectful or uncomfortable.I’m a swimmer too, the doctor says suddenly, as I’m standing to leave, abandoning, briefly, her professional distance. I’d hate not to be able to do it.After the appointment we walk to a Starbucks near the hospital. It’s dark and anonymous inside, and smells of sweet pastries and wee. I order a latte, two shots, why not, and we sit at a counter at the window, watching buses trundle by. It’s mid­-morning and the place is full of new mothers and their prams, though occasionally someone in scrubs or a suit hurries in and then out again. Alexander texts his boss to say he won’t be coming in to work today. Not just the day but the month, the year, stretches out before us, suddenly open. What will we do with it? What can we do? The coffee is too hot, tasteless, the milk burned, but I suck it down in a rush, turning the inside of my mouth furry. Before all this, the test, the pregnancy, the ungrowing embryo, we were planning a wedding; we had set the date, hired a venue, made arrangements with the registrar. We should have cancelled everything – my due date was too close to the wedding date – but we never did; too superstitious, or preoccupied, or both. Now, of course, I say, devastated, amused, we won’t need to change the date. We can simply pick up where we left off. I feel myself begin to rewrite the map again, to slip in and out of familiarity with myself and my surroundings. There’s a simplicity to it all, underneath the ambiguity, the anguish, that makes me almost giddy: for what is this but a reversion to my natural state, a return to old routines?A thought – terrible, comforting – hits me square in the face then, that there’s relief to be felt. The awful thing, the dreaded thing, has happened, and I need no longer fear it. I hate myself for feeling this but can’t let go of it, either, because I think it’s a way forward, a way out, a small tremble of light.* * *The second scan is no more or less enlightening than the first: there is still an embryo, there is still no heartbeat. No change, in other words: an unwanted stillness.The doctor gives me a leaflet, which outlines in clinical language the three ways of managing a miscarriage when preg­nancy tissue remains in the womb: expectant, medical, surgical. The first is the wait-­and-­see approach, taken on the assumption that the tissue will pass naturally out of the womb with time. The second involves taking a course of medication to stimulate the passing of the tissue out of the womb: a potentially painful, lengthy, and often messy process, not always entirely effective, sometimes necessitating the third approach anyhow, which involves surgical removal of the tissue.I still don’t know how to decide what to do, so I put it off: if nothing’s happened in a few weeks I’ll opt for some kind of intervention. I want above all to trust my body to do whatever needs doing, but already it’s betrayed me once, so what do I know?Still no swimming, obviously, the doctor says sadly. Other­wise, proceed as normal.As normal. Nothing is normal, I start to think – but then again, in a kind of terrible way, everything is normal again, isn’t it?* * *The present­-tenseness of the event, the miscarriage, which is not so much an event as a continual unfolding of uncharted territory, a vast grey area, makes it virtually impossible to talk about in any way that makes sense of what is actually happening. I don’t know what to tell people because the language I have is not elastic enough to encompass something which is past, present and future all at once. So I do what the doctor suggests: I proceed more or less as normal, going to meetings, going to the supermarket, scrolling mindlessly through Twitter, doing the laundry, eating, sleeping, working. I let myself lose track of time. At one point, in a notebook, next to a to-­do list, I write: The calendar is a kind of enemy, reminding me of the facts of things, the time it is actively taking to go through this process of miscarriage. I take to walking – long, slow strolls at the very edge of dusk, through parks and quiet suburban neighbourhoods that smell of woodsmoke and exhaust fumes. I feel my muscles going slack, and an irrational fear grows daily: what will my body become while I can’t swim?My fear is really a form of vanity. I know that with each day or week that passes without a swim my body will start to look subtly different. I’ll lose, am losing, the public indicators of my fitness – the muscle, the shape of my arms and legs, the things that say to other people that I’m disciplined, that my body is under control. And I don’t want them to see what I know: that nothing is under control, that this body is not working properly, that athletically, reproductively, it is not doing at all what it’s supposed to do.Mostly, though, if we’re honest, it’s the changes in our bodies that are in control of us, not the other way round.Words come to me on my walks, as they used to on my swims. Some of them are obvious. Why is this happening to me? I think selfishly, inevitably, as I climb the hill to the park on a soft bed of wet leaves, fresh-­fallen after a night of howling wind. But other things, too, drifting like the smoke and the fumes. Disobedience. Betrayal. Softening, slackening, slowing. Undisciplined. Back at home, in my notebook, I write: I guess I feel disconnected from a part of myself. Not that I’m not still the same person or can’t be again, but that for a while I and some other part of me are not quite coinciding. I’m talking about the swimming, not the miscarriage, or at least ostensibly I am. I have a deep sense of geographical dissonance, like a dream of a familiar place in which the location of everything is slightly wrong, so that you round the corner and suddenly come upon a street that should be miles away, or discover that all along there has been an extra room in your house.One Sunday afternoon, sitting in a booth at my local pub, I see a woman I used to see most weekday mornings at the pool; she always wore a bright pink cap, a navy swimsuit. She’s about my age, sitting with a friend, eating lunch. Perhaps it’s her local too, I think, for the first time realising, stupid as it sounds, that these people I’ve been brushing up against at the pool are people with lives outside that context, just like me.Occasionally I log on to Facebook and check the page for the triathlon club I belong to. I look through the list of times from a recent 400-­metre time trial, spotting familiar names, noting the improvements, and wonder how much I, too, could have improved by now. For a moment I’m gripped by something which feels a little like jealousy but isn’t quite – desire, perhaps, something almost carnal. But then the desire, or whatever it is, fades: I’m here now, and maybe, if I can admit it to myself, I’m actually a little relieved that I’m not sweating away in a pool, that I don’t have to worry about how fast or smoothly I can cut through the water, how hungry I’ll be later, how tired.* * *The poles of the earth have wandered, the journalist John McPhee once wrote: even that which seems most permanent and solid is, in its own way, shifting. It’s true literally – think for example of the tectonic plates, the movement of the continents, which still, on average, drift a few centimetres a year apart, about the rate at which our fingernails grow, as the geographer Doreen Massey frames it, a reminder that the body is never in stasis either. In other words the whole world is a continual work in progress; the present is not some kind of achieved terminus, Massey writes. To underline this idea, she describes the slow movement of what she calls the ‘migrant rocks’ that came, over the course of millions of years, to form Skiddaw in the Lake District. Solid and eternal as it seems, she says, the mountain is not timeless. Like she and her sister, staying in a hotel in Keswick, it’s just passing through. It was once elsewhere. It will be elsewhere again someday.It’s easy to lose your footing here, to feel that nothing is solid, but I’ve always found something comforting about this idea that place is essentially unfixed. The rigidity of permanence would be too much to bear, surely: who wants to be stuck in the same place forever? Who can know and love anywhere and not see that a point on a map is one thing, a living, breathing place quite another?It’s a concept that scales well – if the world is a work in progress, then so too is a city or a street or a swimming pool. So too is the body, which is, after all, as the poet Adrienne Rich puts it, the geography closest in; it’s the first place, the place we must make peace with – subject, like all places, to the pressures of time, of external rhythms and events, changing from moment to moment, year to year, getting older, bigger, smaller, more or less capable of performing certain tasks, more or less like it was at the beginning.There’s a simplicity to it all, underneath the ambiguity, the anguish, that makes me almost giddy: for what is this but a reversion to my natural state, a return to old routines?Sometimes we’re in control of that change, or we think we are. Exercise in particular gives us the illusion of power over our own physical futures. Take your recommended thirty minutes of activity a day and stave off all kinds of bodily evil. Lose a bit of weight, add a bit of muscle, establish a routine, live forever, or longer, anyway. The geographer John Bale wrote of exercise as a literal form of recreation: through time, repeated action, the body is re-­created so that it works better. It incorporates knowledge, becomes stronger, fitter. Progress. Maybe next week, or the week after, I’ll be faster than I was last week. All it takes is discipline, resolve, another few thousand metres racked up. Most of all denial: of the body that wants, of the possibility of vulnerability or limitation. A few years ago, I remember, I became obsessed with watching Olympic swimming races; I trawled YouTube, read interviews with the athletes, fascinated by all their talk of sacrifice and discipline. And isn’t this why I watched in the first place? To see what happens when we write certain kinds of want out of our body, and one singular, possessive, demanding want into it: to be the best, the fastest, the one standing on the highest platform of the podium?Mostly, though, if we’re honest, it’s the changes in our bodies that are in control of us, not the other way round. The fact of the matter is that not that long ago, my body was capable of run­ning 13.1 miles, of swimming 3,000 metres without complaint; not that long ago, my body was actually hosting another body, or the beginnings of one.And now everything is different, and everything will be different again someday, and different again, and different again.This excerpt has been lightly adapted for publication on Longreads.* * *Miranda Ward is a freelance writer, editor, and lecturer. Her memoir Adrift: Fieldnotes from Almost-Motherhood is published by Weidenfeld & Nicolson in the UK. She grew up on a cattle ranch in California and now lives in Oxford.Editor: Cheri Lucas Rowlands
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
You don't have permission to access this resource.For the next step, you'll be taken to a website to complete the donation and enter your billing information. You'll then be redirected back to LARB.To take advantage of all LARB has to offer, please create an account or log in before joining...
You're being redirected to our secure payment system...The Los Angeles Review of Books is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit. Help us create the kind of literary community you’ve always dreamed of. Donate to support new essays, interviews, reviews, literary curation, our groundbreaking publishing workshop, free events series, newly anointed publishing wing, and the dedicated team that makes it possible.
$250
$500
$1000
$2500
$5000
Support our online flagship magazine and the free trade of ideas. Receive the benefits of the annual Digital membership, including the digital Quarterly Journal and the Reckless Reader card that offers discounts or perks at participating bookstores.
Support our print journal and we’ll acknowledge you in the upcoming issue. Receive the benefits of the annual Print membership, including a limited edition LARB-branded tote, the print Quarterly Journal, the digital Quarterly Journal, and the Reckless Reader card that offers discounts or perks at participating bookstores.
Support writers who continue to push literary boundaries online and in print. Receive access to a four-part workshop on how to design and publish a book from scratch, plus a limited edition LARB-branded tote, the print Quarterly Journal, the digital Quarterly Journal, and the Reckless Reader card.
Support our virtual events series and we’ll name you a major donor on an upcoming events page and corresponding marketing materials. Receive benefits of the annual Book Club membership, which includes LARB-selected books, book club events with LARB editors, plus the book making workshop, a limited edition LARB-branded tote, the print Quarterly Journal, the digital Quarterly Journal, and the Reckless Reader card.
Support a student from a marginalized group to attend the upcoming LARB Publishing Workshop and receive updates on their progress and the scholarship in your name. Receive the Provocations Bundle, a selection of books from LARB Books, including N*gga Theory: Race, Language, Unequal Justice, and the Law by Jody Armour.
Donate $5000 or more and we’ll name you an essential donor on our website and in print. Receive the LA Classics bundle including a signed copy of James Ellroy’s Everyman’s Library edition of “The L.A. Quartet,” a selection of books from LARB Books, including “N*gga Theory: Race, Language, Unequal Justice, and the Law” by Jody Armour, LARB-selected books, book club events with LARB editors, the book making workshop, a limited edition LARB-branded tote, the print Quarterly Journal, the digital Quarterly Journal, and the Reckless Reader card.
Digital Quarterly Journal + archive + member card for participating bookstores + our weekly newsletter and events invitations.
Save $10 when you subscribe for a whole year!
Print Quarterly Journal + a limited-edition tote + all the perks of the digital membership.
Save $20 when you subscribe for a whole year!
Four books from our series and imprints + limited-edition tote + all the perks of the digital membership. 
Four LARB-selected books + access to conversation on each book with LARB editors + all the perks of the print membership.
Save $40 when you subscribe for a whole year!
By Pete CandlerDECEMBER 3, 2020MAN ALMIGHTY, my teammate exclaimed during a two-on-two basketball game in the late ’80s at Morris Brandon Elementary School in Atlanta. I think he was trying not to take the Lord’s name in vain, but our opponents took it differently. They interrupted the game to ask a classic Southern question: if we died that night, where we would spend eternity?If, during that pickup Jesus-moment, a wayward jump shot had missed its target, bounded out into the street, and rolled down the hill on Howell Mill Road, it likely would have come to rest along the curb where the road bottoms out in front of a neoclassical home built by the Ku Klux Klan.The house radiates placid ease and mint-julep-scented leisure as if it were custom-built for Southern Living. Its legacy has been secured by a listing on the National Register of Historic Places for its architectural merit, which means its actual history should continue to be politely ignored.Mary Elizabeth Tyler lived there for only three years in the early 1920s, but in that span she helped to rebuild the most notorious organization in American history. Along with her business partner and occasional paramour, Edward Young Clarke, Tyler ran the Propagation Department of the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan. In her first year, she had already begun to rake it in, pocketing $2.50 of every $10 for each initiation fee for new recruits to the Klan, which were plentiful.Not once in my time in Atlanta did I ever hear anyone talk about this house, point it out, flag its hidden history. I’m not sure how many people even knew then about its Klan association. I’m not sure how many know now. If they did, it was probably mentioned in the same hushed tones that some local whites also used for the word “Black.”The Klan existed then in an imaginary elsewhere: I did not yet know of its associations with Stone Mountain, where it was revived in 1915, but even if I had it would have helped to locate the Klan comfortably “out there” in the uncultured sticks. And in an elsewhile: the KKK seemed like a string of dead letters, still menacing in their angularity but more a threat in movies than in daily life.It certainly never occurred to me then that the Ku Klux Klan — during its second wind from 1915 to the mid-1920s — was reborn not in the hinterlands of Atlanta but at its posh and manicured heart: not in Stone Mountain but in Buckhead. My neighborhood.If, after that game in which I did not really question my eternal destiny, I went home and watched something on television that night, I was not likely to have been historically burdened by it. Mainstream American television asked very little of us in the late 1980s. Ten years earlier, American TV had shown at least mild historical curiosity, as the shadow of the Korean and Vietnam Wars still fell across after-dinner story lines. M*A*S*H was wildly popular, and its finale is still the single most watched television episode in history. Even The A-Team featured a crew of crime-fighting vigilantes who had been members of the same “crack commando unit” in Vietnam.But by the time I was being asked to consider my eternal future in the middle of a basketball game, even idealized and romanticized history wasn’t must-see TV anymore. The primetime lineup was suddenly bereft of automotive dramatis personae like The A-Team’s tricked-out black GMC van with a bitchin’ red racing stripe climaxing in a totally pointless spoiler, or Miami Vice’s characteristically un-subtle Ferrari Testarossa. For some reason, tastes had shifted away from a long and venerable legacy of car-driven TV drivel to cozily homebound domestic fare with occasional flashes of real humanity like Family Ties and Dallas, and America soothed what was left of its addled conscience about racial inequality in front of a nightly menu of almost entirely white and almost entirely happy families.Roots was 10 years ago. Racism was history, man. We had The Cosby Show.It’s possible that there is a relationship between the prominence of cars onscreen and an interest in history. American cars have always been a locus of cultural nostalgia, vehicles for easy-chair recollection that have tended to allow us to fantasize about a past that did not really exist. But that may have been better than indifference: even if automobiles served as proxies for actual history, they were at least a means to the past, however bent by sentimentalism and wish-fulfilment. The Cosby Show didn’t have a car.¤I was 10 the year Knight Rider premiered. Earlier that winter, laid under with a cold, I watched through the living room window while my brother and neighborhood kids frolicked in the greatest snow event in the city’s history. “SnowJam 1982” was a bona fide weather apocalypse in Atlanta terms, and a disastrous time for a kid to be on the disabled list, but for me it was a rare stint spent in a room furnished with formal couches and chairs strategically positioned to hide the yellow stains in the carpet contributed by our young puppy. Apart from Christmas mornings, we rarely ventured into that room. We watched TV in the den.Like most structures of a certain age in Atlanta, that house is gone now, as is the knotty-pine-paneled den with the black vinyl loungers where I perched myself on an oversized pillow in front of the cathode-ray tube television set. When it debuted in September, Knight Rider was the coolest thing my brother and I had ever seen on television. Centered around an impossibly cool Pontiac Trans Am with a British accent, it seemed to be the heir-apparent to the legacy of The Dukes of Hazzard, the archetype of the Badass-American-Car-Centered-TV Show.By the first season of Knight Rider, Dukes was entering the winter of its years, and unable to keep pace with technologically sophisticated carlust. The precipitating cause was a contractual dispute that led to the replacement of Bo and Luke Duke with the eminently forgettable Coy and Vance. But even when original cast members Tom Wopat and John Schneider returned to set for season five, the die was already cast. For all its 383-cubic-inch V8, 330-horsepower virility and traffic-cone orange impudence, the General Lee could not really compete with a black Trans Am with a brain. KITT felt like a business-casual reprise of The Bandit’s 1977 Trans Am, but it could talk, and drive itself. Suck it, Lee.The opening title sequence — KITT barreling camera-ward across salt flats — was the most interesting thing about Knight Rider. The pulsing electronic theme song was a notable pivot away from Waylon Jennings’s iconic theme for Dukes and also a harbinger of everything that was about to go wrong with country music. When the voice-over introduced Knight Rider as “a shadowy flight into the dangerous world of a man who does not exist,” the anti-authoritarian Robin Hood motif was in the same spirit as but considerably heavier than “just a good ol’ boys, never meanin’ no harm.”The Confederate imagery of the rebel flag and the name of General Lee were accepted in 1982 as part of the white cultural furniture of the South. Like the dog-pee-stained carpet in our family living room, it wasn’t worth it to think too much about it. Although it might — rightly — shock the cultural influencers of today, good ol’ boys straightening the curves in a ’69 Dodge emblazoned with a roof-top rebel flag seemed cool at the time. Making our way, the only way we knew how.And certainly the figure of Michael Knight (played by a consummately white David Hasselhoff) did nothing to evoke suburban anxieties, but that a show named Knight Rider did not evoke images of hooded Klansmen roaming the South in search of African Americans to intimidate, kill, or purge is indicative of just how immune my generation of privileged white kids had become to the language and mythology of the Confederacy.There are other more consequential rooms of my own and my city’s memory that have been rarely, if ever, visited — similarly furnished with fixtures intended to dress up a city’s history in bright colors with slogans laid about the cultural floor to hide the stains. I had grown up with deep familial roots in “the city too busy to hate,” trained by my education in private school to look ahead to the future more than at the past, and by my church to dwell in the eschaton more than in the present age, much less in what Thomas Wolfe called “the brown murk of the past.”Which may have something to do with my preoccupation with cars then: always moving forward, sometimes dangerously, they were avatars of American optimism, steel-and-rubber emblems of possibility and engines of progress. And Atlanta was then, and is still, pathologically obsessed with them. Even had I known that such cultural sub-basements existed, I doubt I would have had the sense or enough confidence to descend into their musty shades in search of historical knowledge.If we who were young and white in the 1980s could watch The Dukes of Hazzard and not think twice about the rebel flag on the roof of the General Lee — nor of the problems inherent in naming a car the General Lee — we could also easily bypass the racial politics of the flag as they were playing out just to the north in all-white Forsyth County. A series of demonstrations beginning with a march in celebration of Martin Luther King Jr.’s birthday in January 1987 led to a much larger march the following week, drawing out thousands of protestors and counterprotestors. Confederate flags flew, things turned ugly, and it was all televised.Forsyth had been all-white since 1912, when two white women were allegedly raped in the county. The ensuing fallout followed a familiar script. The crimes were pinned on local Black men. While the sheriff was mysteriously away, a white lynch mob stormed the jail where three of the suspects were being detained, murdered one of them in their cell, and dragged his body to hang from a lamppost in the town square that does not exist anymore. In the following months, white-hooded Night Riders conducted a racial cleansing of the county, forcing out virtually all of Forsyth’s Black residents.In early 1987, the nightly liturgy of dinner followed by the NBC Nightly News was acted out in red, white, and blue as defenders of Forsyth and of “high morals” flew Confederate battle flags — hundreds of them — to scare African Americans out of town. It became impossible to maintain the illusion that the flag represented “heritage” — it was manifestly a tool of racial oppression and violence, and you didn’t have to have graduated high school yet to have figured that one out.The saga in Forsyth could have been an unprecedented teaching moment, an opportunity for us white kids to learn about how the legacy of white supremacy was continuing to act itself out just a few miles away from Atlanta. But it didn’t. This semi-disclosure represented a road not taken — while I could tuck away a simple sense that the flags were designed to menace, it would be another 30 years before I would come to seriously question the meanings of those flags. Local and national Black leaders I had thenceforth been taught to regard as nonessential had been trying to get our attention for years, but I wasn’t listening. The Forsyth moment passed and left me, at least, believing that white supremacy was a bloodsport for fanatical rednecks and racists out there in the boonies.Despite an expensive undergraduate education and two graduate degrees, I held this assumption until an embarrassingly late age, when the language of white supremacy began to re-enter the cultural conversation. In truth it had never really left; it simply had become the province of authors I was trained — through a combination of formal education and my own self-incurred delusion — to think of as “Black thinkers” and writers, residents of a neighborhood of American intellectual life I had been given little reason to wander into. I recall a moment in the 1980s when, driving with my father en route to a football game in Athens, we stopped in traffic in the town center of Jefferson, Georgia. Lining both sides of the street were hooded Klansmen, passing out flyers for some rally or something. We passed through in silence, did not make eye contact, did not take a flyer. I rode on, still thinking that white supremacy meant the Klan, and surely that had nothing to do with me.Perhaps it was an ignore-it-and-it-will-go-away sort of moment, but the Klan didn’t really go away, of course. Even if it had, white supremacy would still be with us. In any case, “ignore and it will go away” is terrible advice, and especially when “it” is America’s not-so-secret love affair with white supremacy.The one thing that is guaranteed never to go away no matter how much you ignore it is your own ignorance. Which may explain why I and some of my high school friends could lounge on a summer evening in the late 1980s on the grassy esplanade spreading out from the foot of Stone Mountain like the infinite goodness of God, never once giving much of a thought to where we were. On folding chairs and blankets (the girls could indulge in a luxury forbidden them on our high school campus: laying fully horizontally on the grass), with a cooler full of non-adult beverages, we took in an offering of patriotic and family-friendly songs designed to warm the hearts of Georgians for the Peach State. Stone Mountain communicated ease: it was a Disneyesque resort of a kind, a mountain with an undemanding, handrail-assisted climb to the top, and the site of an almost impossible-to-explain extravaganza on balmy summer nights: the Lasershow.Lasers were all the rage in the 1980s. Movies and TV shows — Star Wars, Tron, Battlestar Galactica — employed them with feverish delight. I roller-skated among swirls of them, synchronized with ’80s music, at Jellybeans, “the rockin’ rollerina on Roswell Road.” The Reagan administration dreamed up a plan for shooting down incoming Soviet missiles with lasers. And in 1984, Chrysler introduced an “executive personal luxury coupe” named after one. So who wouldn’t find beguiling the prospect of sitting out of an evening to a whole show of laser beams projected on the side of a mass of solid granite?I don’t remember the main body of the Lasershow at Stone Mountain, but it is impossible to forget the climax: the laser-generated outlines of the three Confederate heroes whose horse-mounted likenesses are carved permanently into the face of the mountain. As loudspeakers blast Elvis Presley’s “An American Trilogy” — an emblematic medley in which irreconcilable American myths are put together in the same song and asked to play nice with one another — Robert E. Lee and then Jefferson Davis and Stonewall Jackson seem to take flight: their horses slowly begin to trot in mid-air and, swords raised, they take off for battle at a determined gallop. In a mild — if sentimentalized and slightly begrudging — gesture to the hell of war, battle scenes follow, at the conclusion of which a not particularly defeated-looking Lee raises his sword once more, only to bring its blade crashing down on his thigh. The broken sword falls to the ground, and the image of the fractured blade transforms into a map of the reunited nation, whereupon Lee resumes his stony pose for all eternity. The grand finale of the entire spectacle is the obligatory blaring of Lee Greenwood’s “God Bless the U.S.A.,” which serves to signify the symbolic redemption of the Confederate “struggle” as ultimately a kind of sacrifice to the American ideals of liberty, justice, and cheesy country music.It was a clever way of subsuming what I did not know then to call The Lost Cause into a story of noble sacrifice, the altruistic yielding of sectional interests to the greater cause of national union. The Rebels took one on the chin for the team. In retrospect, I don’t think it occurred to any of us to talk about just how damn weird all of this was. One fact that certainly never registered at the time was that Stone Mountain was a gargantuan monument to one way of misremembering history, the biggest and most aggressive Confederate monument in the country.As I leaned back into the warm grass of the esplanade to the sound of Alabama’s “Dixieland Delight,” my heart strangely warmed, it never once crossed my mind that my evening of light entertainment was unfolding beneath the very site where the Ku Klux Klan reinvented itself in 1915, that not quite 75 years earlier, the first light show at Stone Mountain consisted of a 16-foot burning cross.I listened to King’s “I Have a Dream” speech on cassette tapes countless times in my adolescence, and felt myself moved by the idealism of King’s vision — but moved in an abstract way, perhaps, since I never made the connection then between the lofty Christian nobility of King’s soul-jarring calls for justice and the material realities of where I lived. Unaware then of the resonances of Stone Mountain as a holy site for white supremacists and Lost Causers, I didn’t think to notice the deliberate power of King’s decision to mention it on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial at the March on Washington in 1963, didn’t consider how the power of that moment connected to a specific place I was probably then blithely enjoying seeing lit up with laser beams. But being moved by King’s speeches and sermons is no great achievement; anyone can do it. King’s greatest moments in the pulpit or on the dais had the power to effect in me a movement of the heart, maybe, but not yet a personal turning of memory. That would come later.The only noteworthy feature of the carving that struck me then was how unfinished it so obviously was, the rather lazy pile of cut stone fragments at the base of the mountain where the reflecting pool was supposed to be suggesting some sudden arrest of effort. The horses remain half-finished, the whole thing a fairly crude and violent imposition of human artifice and will-to-power onto the largest mass of exposed solid granite on planet earth. It looked even then like a meticulous scar, the product of millions of small, surgical hammer strikes enacted by some interior principle of action I did not know how to name. On the most charitable reading, the Lasershow could be thought of as an elaborate effort to make the most out of an irreparable wound of nature; and insofar as anyone fell for the high-tech trompe-l’oeil it was at the cost of being prevented from looking too closely at the human scars the monument is not very interested in.Only much later, would I start to look again at the monuments to the Lost Cause that had become like a tasteless fungus in the cultural drinking water — it was there, and terribly bad for everyone who consumed it, but most of us white folks just took it for granted or ignored it or weren’t even aware it was there, or what it was doing to us. All of which is deliciously ironic, given that I voluntarily chose to subject myself to a fabulously tacky display on the biggest Confederate monument in the world.¤Stone Mountain has been there for millions of years, but it wasn’t until 1915 that it got its close-up, thanks to Hollywood. Following the blockbuster premiere of D. W. Griffith’s The Birth of a Nation that year, Mrs. E. Dorothy Blount Lamar, president of the Georgia division of the United Daughters of the Confederacy, praised Griffith as “a friend to the truth about those days of reconstruction.”Birth of a Nation was, she said, a “truthful portrayal of the sorrows of those times, it has done a magnificent work for us in setting the justice of our attitued [sic] toward our troubles at that period before an uninformed north.” Lamar exhorted all the UDC faithful to “call for it insistently,” to get out and see the film, to persuade their local theater operators to screen it. In the same speech, Lamar reported with great excitement the “unbounded enthusiasm of the world-famous sculptor, Gustav Borglum,” for his plans for the Confederate memorial at Stone Mountain, which Lamar called a “wonderful phenomenon” to memorialize “Our Cause.” A week later, The Atlanta Constitution ran a two-page spread in its Sunday edition, featuring praise for the film from around the country. On the front page of the same issue, a small notice reported:Impressive services of the past week were those conducted on the night of Thanksgiving at the top of Stone Mountain. The exercises were held by fifteen klansmen who gathered at the behest of their chieftain, W. J. Simmons, and marked the foundation of the invisible empire, Knights of the Ku Klux Klan⁠.The Klan 2.0 repaid Hollywood’s blessing by borrowing the act of burning a cross (used by Griffith for the film) for the first time on Stone Mountain. The film finally made its debut in Atlanta on December 6, two days after the state of Georgia issued an official charter to the Knights of the Ku Klux Klan. At the very same time, The Constitution reported a wave of arson attacks by marauding “night riders” in Cherokee County north of the city that led African American residents to flee the county, much as they had done following the racial cleansing of neighboring Forsyth County in 1912.The convergence of these historical episodes is hardly a coincidence; on the contrary, they mark milestones in the authorization of the Lost Cause version of history, the state seal of approval on a reinvigorated white supremacist regime and a mythological history to support it. By the end of a tumultuous 1915, with Leo Frank lynched, the Stone Mountain memorial underway, and the Klan restored, a blockbuster film celebrating Negro decadence and white virtue was just the thing white Atlanta needed to restore and reinvigorate its faith in the righteousness of its own “cause.”Even if I had become aware at a younger age of Stone Mountain’s entanglements with the Klan, it would still have been easy to think of white supremacy at a comfortable distance. Stone Mountain was way the hell out there, in another county, not yet absorbed into the amnesic Atlanta that was swallowing us all.By the curious civil liturgy of the Lasershow, the world’s most obnoxious Confederate monument was made to appear banal — not even really a Confederate monument at all, so much so that we could lounge before three outsize Rebel superstars and not bat an eye. The carving had the air of antiquity, and like many such monuments, disguises its own history. While the initial work on the monument began in 1923, it lay dormant for 40 years until it was revived in 1964 at the height of the Civil Rights movement and at the behest of Marvin Griffin, the segregationist governor of Georgia from 1955–’59, who never made any bones about his opposition to Brown v. Board’s federally mandated integration of public schools.I had also assumed that the state flag had always had an embedded Confederate flag. You just assumed that because it was there, it had always been there. Only later did I learn it had been incorporated in 1956, two years after Brown. One of the sponsors of the bill in the Georgia State Senate was named Jefferson Lee Davis.¤In my youth, the little park that now marks the center of Buckhead was very different from the epicenter of a new urbanist explosion that it is today. Like many locales in Atlanta, it has a short memory. Bagley Park in the center of Buckhead, the Klan’s headquarters, had once been the site of an African American settlement that was eventually bought out by Fulton County to create the diamonds where I played Little League baseball until the sixth grade.There were still gravestones there, but I never asked about them or wandered among them. And no one I knew could ever explain how Buckhead had gotten its name to begin with. In the 1980s the only actual image of a buck head visible anywhere in the area was atop the marquee for the Buckhead Cinema whose message was unchanging for decades: “ADULT DOUBLE FEATURE.”In front of the nearby Cotton Exchange on Roswell Road, a local gray-haired eccentric known as The Birdman, in light blue short-sleeved Oxford shirt, horn-rimmed glasses, and khakis, regularly rode his bicycle, flapping his arms up and down. The Birdman is long dead, but the Cotton Exchange has survived a frenzy for destruction that has gone on for decades in Atlanta. When it was first built in the 1920s, it was used to manufacture robes and gowns for the Ku Klux Klan, and was the source of a good deal of wealth for Mary Elizabeth Tyler and Imperial Wizard William J. Simmons. I passed it hundreds of times on the way to Henri’s Bakery on Irby for turkey on rye before realizing what it was. The original Henri’s has been replaced — like almost every other historic structure in Atlanta, it seems — by a chic new mixed-use development, but the Cotton Exchange is somehow still standing. It is historic, but few really seem to know why.South on Peachtree Road a mile or so, there is even less of a trace of what once marked the corner of Peachtree and E. Wesley. About the same time Mary Elizabeth Tyler lived in her house, the massive Greek revival mansion that stood on the corner served as the headquarters of the Klan’s local and national operations. Simmons used it as a Klan showhome, and planned for the European-style garden sculptures of famous Night Riders — and one of himself. The headquarters of the trenchantly anti-Catholic Klan was purchased in 1936 by the Roman Catholic diocese of Atlanta for the construction of a new cathedral dedicated to Christ the King. There are no markers to what Atlanta’s history was at these sites, but there are also no markers to what it might have become at the corner of Collier Road and Howell Mill.What is now a city green spot named Ellsworth Park straddling either side of Peachtree Creek was going to have been the campus of the Klan-sponsored University of America. The planned curriculum would require students to take a course in the Bible, and another on the Constitution. Its secretary and general manager, “General” Nathan Bedford Forrest II — grandson of the Confederate general — laid out the aims of the school:We will teach that this is a white man’s country, so designed by those who laid its foundations and that it must be so maintained by those to whom it has come as a precious heritage, in all that is entailed as privilege and as responsibility. […] We will teach the whole American doctrine in contrast with the doctrines of other countries and races, other kinds and creeds, and in such a way as to convince the student that it is better to be a genuine white Protestant American citizen than to be anything or anybody else anywhere on all the earth.That wasn’t all. “We will have a university in Atlanta that will compare favorably with Harvard, Yale, Princeton, or any other of the big schools of the east,” Imperial Wizard Simmons claimed. Today at the corner of Collier and Howell Mill there is no visible evidence of what might have become of this place. It could easily have happened, but it did not — not because of external pressure but because of a congenital habit of corruption and an unprecedented ability to talk a big game but fail to deliver.The demise of the Klan in Atlanta in 1923 was not due to federal investigation or massive NIMBY resistance but to internal mismanagement and chronic corruption. Its leaders were vicious white supremacists, but they were also opportunistic charlatans who saw an opportunity to spread their message in a fraudulent and lucrative fashion. While Stone Mountain is a convenient location to which to outsource Atlanta’s Confederate and Lost Cause legacy, it’s still there in Buckhead if you know where to look.In recent years, it seems the hellhound on the trail has been catching up with Atlanta: while the city remains the most prosperous, diverse, and powerful city in the South, the hold of the Lost Cause narrative on local identity has diminished. But vestiges still cling to the feet of the myth: four plaques erected in 1920 describing, in classically Lost Cause terms, the “Siege of Atlanta” still stand outside the main entrance of the state capitol building where, for two days 100 years later, the body of John Lewis lay in state in the rotunda.The incongruity of the moment that was hard to miss: Lewis, a lifelong footsoldier for voting rights and full citizenship for African Americans, surrounded by the iconography of the opposition, a veritable portrait and statuary gallery of onlooking, now mute secessionists, slaveholders, segregationists, and white supremacists: Alexander H. Stephens, John Brown Gordon, Robert E. Lee, Benjamin H. Hill, Gene Talmadge, Thomas E. Watson, Marvin Griffin, Lester Maddox. Most silent of all, and curiously missing on the day of Lewis’s funeral: the portrait of my distant cousin, Governor Allen Daniel Candler. In the spot where it should be is a bare wall, a disencumbered picture hanger.Allen was the pee-stained living room of my family, a chamber of collective memory visited so infrequently and so habitually kept dark that eventually no one could recall what was in there. Whatever the memory of Allen Candler had been at one time, a hundred years later, the darkness of family ignorance had overcome it.By the time I really began to learn about him, he had become all but forgotten about in our branch of family lore. He was unknown to me for most of my life until a few years ago, when a single flicker of light in the form of a friend’s casual mention of a book about the lynching of Sam Hose began to dispel the darkness, and gradually illuminate the long-unlit corners of Allen’s history and legacy to Georgia, and to me. By the time my eyes had adjusted, I had learned that Allen had been governor during the most notorious lynching in the state’s history. He had done nothing to prevent it, and blamed the episode on Blacks. His administration oversaw the implementation of Plessy v. Ferguson’s “separate but equal” policy on race. Despite the direct pleas of W. E. B. Du Bois made to him in the governor’s mansion on Peachtree Street, Candler did nothing to prevent the state’s segregation of passenger rail cars. His chief political legacy had been the establishment of the white-only Democratic primary system, a feature of Georgia electoral politics until 1944.I never had to be troubled by his memory. Perhaps some cruel logic left him out precisely because it was understood that my knowing about his white supremacy would have done nothing to change the system of privilege by which I have come to benefit from his political machinations.One of the ways I’ve come to think about white privilege is in terms of the stories that you can get on without: stories about the world, yourself, your family, your city, the past. If you are a person of color, these are stories you need simply to achieve daily existence. For example: The story of Trayvon Martin or Eric Garner or George Floyd or Breonna Taylor — to say nothing of Emmett Till or Medgar Evers or Jimmie Lee Jackson — is a cautionary tale for the purposes of instructing the young and reminding the old that none of your accomplishments nor even your inborn dignity as a human being will count for anything if some representative of the white world decides one afternoon that you are a threat to them. Parents of Black children tell them the stories of Trayvon and Emmett because they know that their child’s name could be the next one added to the long list of names of the victims of white brutality, a list they must keep alive for themselves because the state will certainly not do it on their behalf.Black Atlantans probably are far more likely to know this history than I am. White privilege means there are stories you do not have to be burdened by, neighborhoods of the imagination you think you can casually avoid without damage to your soul. My life as a white person could have turned out differently if I had learned to inhabit a different narrative geography, to be shaped by the practice of alienating mental spaces. But I didn’t have to.¤My son Charlie is 10 that summer. Lately he and his three brothers have been obsessed with the films of the great Japanese animator, Hayao Miyazaki, whose masterful films often deal with the hidden, and even frightful beauty of nature, and the inveterate human will to dominate and destroy it and one another. I only discovered Miyazaki later in life, so we’ve gotten into his work together, as a family. We have all grown up with him at the same time.Charlie and I are headed from Asheville to Atlanta in a Honda minivan. I want to show him some of the places I love, for no other reason than that I hope he will love them, too: Henri’s Bakery for turkey on rye; the subdivision that used to be my grandparents’ house; the Morris Brandon basketball court. We will take breakfast at the Silver Skillet, ride the streetcar down Auburn Avenue, stop at Ebenezer Baptist, the Royal Peacock. We’re also going to see some of the homes built by Candlers of the segregationist era, mainly on Ponce de Leon, the park-lined boulevard that marked the frontier between Black and White Atlanta. The same street on the white side has one name, and another on the Black side. My great-great-grandfather lived on that boundary at the corner of Ponce and Briarcliff, which becomes Moreland Avenue. His house is long gone, but we will go look for it anyway.It is worth asking why any of this stuff matters, if at all. Maybe I am interested in family history; maybe I am seeking some place to anchor my own memories, some small plot of earth to which to bind my own wayfaring self. It could be that I am simply trying to manufacture a history I do not really possess, a surrogate past that I might lean on, that might hold steady for just a while longer. The house I grew up in is all gone now, and I have little to return to in the way of a site that still holds a memory of self should I forget. Maybe that’s what I am looking for on Ponce. I don’t know.There is something nonsensical in all this, in my desire to give my children a sense of connection to a place where they have never lived, to cultivate in them an attachment to a space inhabited by their forebears they would never have heard about were it not for a random set of coincidences in my own life. It risks being an artificial, enforced attachment and not a real, organic one. But at bottom I just want them to be less naïve than I was, less ignorant than I am. To have a history we can grow up with together. To give them some sign that boundless curiosity will always be met with an ever-greater mystery, that as much as you think you know there is always an infinitely greater knowledge that you do not possess. That as long as you search the grounds of the world for some hint of yourself, you will never fully find it. That you will ever remain a mystery to yourself. That every seeking and finding only prompts more seeking; and that you may often find what you did not seek, and that may be the thing you needed the most.I have given Charlie a Nikon F3 made about the same time as Knight Rider, loaded with Ilford HP5 Plus black-and-white film for the weekend. I tell him to be discriminating with his use of film. It’s not like taking pictures with a cell phone, I tell him. You have to be patient, I say, secretly hoping he shoots up a whole roll because he loves the feel of it — the weight of it, the vibrations in the hand from the mechanical click of the shutter — and has to exercise restraint because he doesn’t want to stop.Gainesville proclaims itself “The Poultry Capital of the World.” Local hero and global chicken magnate Jesse Jewell (1902–’75) revolutionized the industry, and his company employed many people in north Georgia. Just on the edge of the town center, a monument to the city’s claim to fame rises 30 feet or so over Poultry Park. It is known as the “Chicken Monument,” which makes sense in view of the bronze rooster that tops the obelisk. But it is less a monument to the gallant bird — or the fact that more foods are compared to the taste of chicken than any other food — than a tribute to the ability efficiently to slaughter and process chickens en masse. Gainesville may or may not still be the world’s chicken capital, but it is home to possibly the world’s most American monument.It’s more than a little ridiculous, but we didn’t come here to see a chicken. Down the road a piece is the real goal: the Alta Vista Cemetery. It is getting late in the day: the golden hour of late evening is just beginning. The sky relaxes a bit from its usual late-August gray and returns to a marine sort of blue in which cottony thunderheads show off. One, in the distance, is mildly threatening. Its dark underside seems to ride on a band of golden sky.One monument in the middle of the burial ground sticks out, but it is not what we came here for either. It is the final resting place of Confederate General James Longstreet. This gravestone mentions only Longstreet’s life up until the end of the Civil War in 1865. He lived another 39 years, but you wouldn’t know it from this site because he enjoys a conflicted legacy. Beloved by many Confederates and their sympathizers for his military leadership in the Army of Northern Virginia, he is regarded by many of the same as a traitor for allying with the Republican Party during Reconstruction. In 1874, after the election of Republican William Kellogg as governor of Louisiana, members of the Crescent City White League, a white terrorist organization, stormed the US Customs House in New Orleans in an attempted coup of the state government. Longstreet led a multiracial detachment of the Metropolitan Police against the White League in the ensuing “Battle of Liberty Place.” He is not on Stone Mountain.Charlie stands with the Nikon in front of the grave of Governor Allen Daniel Candler, and shoots. The last rays of daylight fall across the name on the tombstone. Unlike me at his age, Charlie knows that name. When the negatives come back a few weeks later, I realize what I already knew. He’s a natural. He’s got the eye, the patience, the vision. The scene is so dramatically colored that it feels like a sign that we have arrived at our journey’s end. But we have a ways to go yet.On the road back to Atlanta, I-85 is inescapable. Outside Charlie’s window, an enormous cumulonimbus, backlit by the lowering sun, against a gradient sky from cerulean to amber. In a truly sane universe, everyone would be stopping in the middle of the eight-lane highway to take in the undeserved beauty of a fire-ringed cloud at dusk. It appears hand-drawn, painted on the back of the sky.It looks like a Miyazaki, Charlie says.It’s tempting to stop. But what can you do? Make your way, the only way you know how. You can’t hold on to the moment. You make some sacrifices, give yourself over to the mad tide of high-speed efficiency. It only goes in one direction. I have to keep my eyes on the road.Charlie stares out the window at the cloud. Keep looking, I say to him, hoping that he will see what I cannot.¤RELATEDYou’re Tearing Me Apart: On William L. Barney’s “Rebels in the Making: The Secession Crisis and the Birth of the Confederacy”By Bill ThompsonTrue Southern Heritage: An Interview with S. A. CosbyBy David JoyHow to Forget: On Lewis Hyde’s “A Primer for Forgetting: Getting Past the Past”By Sebastian StockmanA Deeper SouthBy Pete CandlerWhite Collars and White Hoods: On “The Second Coming of the KKK”By Robert SlaytonMOST READ ARTICLESThe Great White Reunion: On Duncan Bell’s “Dreamworlds of Race”By Bassam SidikiPilot Episode: On the Greatness of Kaley CuocoBy Philippa SnowBangers: On Terry Southern’s “Blue Movie”By Charles TaylorEndless Constellations: On “Women in Concrete Poetry 1959–1979”By Theadora WalshThe DisappointedBy Gerald HowardADD TO YOUR BOOKSHELFAlmost HomeSubscribe to LARB's FREE Weekly Newsletter:By submitting this form, you are granting: Los Angeles Review of Books, 6671 Sunset Blvd., Ste. 1521, Los Angeles, California, 90028, United States, http://lareviewofbooks.org permission to email you.Discover our first BESIDE destination in LanaudièreBack to natureEscaping a wilderness rehab and hitchhiking across a state, Simon fought hard against letting nature change him. Text—Simon Hudson
Illustrations—Mélanie MascléI did not go willingly. At 3 a.m. I got woken up by my parents struggling with the words to tell me I was going away. They had signed custody over to two ex-Marine types who were also in my room; they would be taking me on a plane to the woods of Montana.I knew my parents had been planning to send me to some kind of rehab soon, but I didn’t expect it to happen before the end of the school year. They had gotten a glimpse of the trouble I was getting into (weekend disappearances, a discovered shopping list of drugs, suspension from school for fighting, manipulative emotional breakdowns) and decided that overreacting was better than underreacting. The escorts were an addition because they rightly deemed me a flight risk.I lived up to their expectations when I made my first escape attempt at the Seattle Airport check-in counter. It was 4 a.m. and the airport check-in area was empty except for the stanchions and connecting straps set up to corral the travellers who would be arriving in just a couple of hours.As I stood behind my escorts at the ticket counter, I had a feeling that their attention had momentarily drifted from me to the agent. I saw my window and leapt for it.And I managed to get some good distance away from my kidnappers, too, until I ran into a slow-opening automatic sliding door. I turned around to look for another route and discovered that running away from people in an airport post-9/11 led to several government agencies being alerted. I tried to juke around them but was tackled to the ground and put in cuffs. After explaining to Homeland Security why they were transporting this minor, my escorts had me on my flight headed to my new summer camp without any further hiccups.When I arrived in Montana, I had to admit that, despite my protests, my parents had made a good choice of where to send me. I have always loved the outdoors, whether camping with my dad, school trips to go kayaking in Alaska, or hiking in Wyoming. But I couldn’t handle losing my self-determination; I was outraged.Three Rivers Montana was a program for troubled and/or bratty teens of all stripes based on the principle that “Nature cannot be manipulated, but instead demands good choices.”After a blindfolded drive to the camp to meet with the group, I was informed of what the general schedule of my life would be for the foreseeable future (they insisted the duration of my stay was entirely up to me). Each morning we would wake up, warm up with calisthenics, drink 1000 ml of water, eat breakfast, load up our external frame packs, and then hike. They would not tell us how long we would hike, but the average was seven hours and we weren’t allowed to talk. Much of the hiking was off-trail, keeping us from getting a sense of direction or running into other hikers, not that there were many in the Gallatin Mountain Range of southwestern Montana.Arriving at our camp for the night at the end of each trek, we would go into our survival work. Hooches—thick tarps draped over a line and the corners tied down with cord—were our main shelters: one “mama hooch” for the cooking area and one personal-sized for each of our sleeping spots. We then went on to dig our latrine and firepit, carving them out so they could be easily refilled and resodded the following morning.We each had our own food for the week: plain, dehydrated ingredients went a long way with a hungry imagination stimulated by the silent treks. The catch was that hot meals required building our own fires with wooden bow drills. If you couldn’t achieve the small cherry of a coal with a bow drill and build that into a fire, well, your dining options were significantly limited. Imagine being drenched in sweat, arms cramping out, just to see a trickle of smoke, and in the end your dinner is cold powdered mashed potatoes.At the end of each week, we would remain in one spot for two nights to resupply. A new set of counsellors would rotate in, bringing with them the new supply of food and letters from our parents. We used the downtime to meet with a psychologist and complete coursework on topics ranging from navigation, constellations, and botany to anger management and family conflict resolution.I joined the group on a resupply day, and so I had a chance to send a first letter to my parents. I listed everything wrong with their decision; I threatened to disappear if they didn’t bring me back.For dramatic effect, I signed it in blood from a cut I got when sawing a sapling for my bow drill (I didn’t know these letters were actually faxed in black and white).(Here’s a video of me reading the letter at the event Grownups Read Things They Wrote as Kids. Rereading the letters, the word “arrogant” comes to mind.)My botched escape attempt from the airport had put the counsellors on alert, so I decided I should lie low and give my parents a chance to change their minds and bring me home. I was also keen to learn how to make fire with only sticks and twine, which I thought would be handy if and when I needed to escape the backcountry.Without meaning to, I changed in that first week while waiting for my parents’ letter. Daily treks in silence are an effective way to get anyone to reflect on their lives and consider what’s really important. My mental fog lifted, and I saw clearly that the substances I had been using were blurring my days, weeks, and even hours into one chaotic haze. I knew then that while they may have “opened my mind” to new ways of seeing the world, they had long darkened my perspective by making me dysfunctional and anti-social.After learning to make fire with sticks and having my revelation about drugs, I decided I had gotten all I needed out of this camp and that it was time to go. When I received a letter from my parents rebuffing my proposal to bring me home, I made my second escape attempt. This time I got out.I saw my opportunity early the next morning while the counsellors were a hundred yards away at the campfire. I was ready with a couple of apples and full water bottles. I didn’t wait to second-guess it, I just went, leaving behind a letter that said, “If I do die on my path to freedom, it was completely worth it because I have the power to make a decision for myself and I am in control.”(I also wrote a list of confessions I carried with me in case I didn’t make it. Here’s the recording from another GRTTWK event of the letter I left behind at 29:06)My plan was to hitchhike to Missoula, where my dad had grown up and still had close friends living there. I had gotten a glimpse of a map from one of the counsellors and saw that Missoula was about 300 miles [483 km] away. I ran about 12 miles [19 km] before I made it to the highway, where I pulled out a piece of my sleeping pad into which I had carved “MISSOULA”.It took me only two rides to get all the way there. The first guy freaked me out at first; he looked like a cop because of a large antenna on his pickup, which turned out to be a car phone. He didn’t talk much and was skeptical of my story about how my camping group had agreed to not report in if we got separated from each other, but didn’t push the issue. He gave me a Gatorade and let me call friends back in Seattle.He didn’t point out that the voicemails I left for my friends seemed to conflict with the story I had told him—he just offered me beef jerky and told me how he bowhunted grizzlies, as well as that his daughter’s safety was the most important thing in the world to him.Along the way, he dropped me at a gas station while he ran some errands in town. Going into the gas station was the first time I realized how naked I was without any money or ID. I asked to borrow a cellphone to call my parents. Refusing to tell him where I was, I managed to get from my dad the number of his friends in Missoula. I hung up and went to get my second ride a little further up the way.My second ride was from a contractor who regularly travelled between Bozeman and Missoula. As soon as I got into his little blue pickup with bright yellow lightning bolts, he asked me to crack open a beer for him and then told me his life story. Much of it was about his sorrow for a friend who had won a huge insurance settlement and then proceeded to destroy his life with drinking and gambling. From his car I called my dad’s friends in Missoula, who by that time knew I was coming.When we got to the home I called my parents to let them know I had made it okay, and to ask them to fly me back to Seattle. They insisted instead on coming out and meeting me in Missoula the next morning, and driving back to Seattle together. That worked for me. At this point I felt like I had made my point, that my parents had heard it, and things were on their way to being back to normal. We still needed to discuss betraying each other’s trust, but we could get to that at some point on the road. I took a long shower and shaved the longest moustache I had ever grown.The next morning my parents arrived and we all went out for breakfast. After our families were finished catching up, we said our goodbyes and got in the car to head back.My parents looked back at me, and it was the first time we had really seen each other since they got there. They were looking at me like they didn’t know me. They asked me what I was thinking; they weren’t asking so much as expressing the confusion I saw on their faces. I couldn’t understand why they wanted to insist on having the tough conversation right then and there, until I looked around and saw the same escorts that had taken me to Montana walking up along either side of the car. I suddenly realized I was in the back of a two-door coupe, unable to lift the seat up to escape.I had thought I was free, and now I was trapped again. I was out of ideas and so I turned violent. I grabbed my parents and swore I wouldn’t let them out. I was ready to do more harm, but a part of me watched the situation unfold from outside the car. I could see that I was hurting people who were genuinely trying to help me and loved me and would always put everything aside when I was in trouble. I had hit a limit. I knew what I was doing wasn’t worth the control I was trying to win back, so I let my parents go and attacked the escorts. Thankfully, I was a scrawny 15-year-old kid, and so I couldn’t do much harm. My parents got out intact, and I again found myself handcuffed, headed for the woods.I eventually gave up cursing and kicking from the backseat, and the escorts and I made peace over McDonald’s.By the time I arrived back in the woods I had decided that my best way out was to finish the program in good faith. In fact, it was a relief to give up on trying to guess how long I would be there and make it go by as fast as possible. This time, instead of just one week to let the haze lift, I got six more weeks to really see.Montana is known as “big sky country.” On our long hikes through the mountains, the wide summer sky framed everything we saw: eagles perched on cliffs looked like giant boulders before swooping into the valley below; mountain lions took a path along the ridge that ominously intersected with our bearing. Beneath our feet the snow melted, edible glacier lilies and berries spread out, the colour of the rocks shifted from deep reds and blacks to translucent pinks and blues of quartzite and rare lightning glass.The vastness above our heads and below our feet provided the space for me to unwind all the unaddressed thoughts and intuitions I had numbed out.I remembered the things I wanted to do and create, the things that sparked my curiosity, but mostly the people that were important to me with whom I wanted to share those things. I understood how I had intentionally broken off relationships as a way to hide from my shame of being a terrible friend. I had such an outpouring of old, packed-away ideas to examine and process that the long walks were never boring.These intense moments of clarity persisted even in my sleep. Each night as I lay in a bivy sack under my tarp hooch, my thoughts morphed into dreams that were as vivid as real life—my subconscious working out what I couldn’t when I was awake. I once dreamt our group was trekking through a park back home in Seattle and we encountered some of my friends in a circle getting high. I left the trek to go join them and I sat down in the circle just in time for my turn in the rotation. One of the counsellors came up to me and asked, “What are you doing?” I was surprised at how I hadn’t even managed to muster a doubt about rejoining my old life. At the same time, I was also certain it wasn’t what I wanted to do. I got up and got back on the trail. Then I woke up.—Dive into Green Screen, a BESIDE Journal that investigates the tension in our modern lives between connection and disconnection, between nature and technologies. Montana was a pivotal moment in my life. From that experience, I learned a basic lesson: that I want to contribute something positive to the stream of life; that it will not come through anger and fighting, but through understanding of others and giving of myself. While I never did drugs again, I did try drinking a couple months after returning home to Seattle because I thought it connected me to others. I quickly relapsed into my old behaviours of burning up relationships, and within a month I was close to the same isolation I had created before I was sent away. I knew I had strayed from the principle I had learned in Montana and was close to ruining everything I had rebuilt. I also knew my life didn’t have to go that way, so instead of pretending I had things under control and numbing more, I asked for help from people I saw making a positive contribution in their lives. I followed their example, I gave up drinking for good, and I committed to putting this new principle of life first.I have been sober ever since; I have maintained some of my rebelliousness, but I fight far less (and never with my parents).As I learned the work of making a contribution (i.e. being an adult), for almost 10 years, I barely got back out into the wilderness—though I kept nature in my mind as a sacred place. I now live in Montréal, Canada, and a few years ago I started to explore the outdoors here with friends.This last summer, I was in the Québec backcountry with my partner on a small island on a lake. I was thinking about what made the Montana sky so big. We were lying on a boulder, looking up at the stars, hours away from any ambient city light. Without the light pollution of civilization to frame it, the starry sky dropped all the way back behind the silhouette of the surrounding mountains. At that moment I could see with my own eyes how the sky envelops the entirety of earth, and I felt awe at how relatively small me and my made-up problems were. I realized it was the same kind of awe I felt many times in Montana.Now, no matter where I am—even on a cloudy day in the city—I can look up and have that same experience of the “big sky.” There will never be any running away from it.Simon Hudson was born and raised in Seattle, WA where he grew up with easy access to the mountains and waterways around the Puget Sound, a thoroughly organic diet, and new agey idealism. In school, he discovered economics and was fascinated by the machinations of capitalism and business. He has been following his curiosity with business ever since, satisfying it with a career in editorial communications. He has been living in Montreal, QC for the last ten years and currently works at Element AI, a company building artificial intelligence solutions for enterprises, where every day he is reminded of just how human business really is.Two issues per year25% OFF previous issuesFree Shipping in CanadaTo receive the latest news and dispatches, subscribe to our newsletter.On the solstice of what seems destined to be a difficult winter, the words of Valérie Lefebvre-Faucher come as a healing balm.What we can learn from Inuttitut, a language shaped by humility, poetry, and the land.Shabana Ali on the unequal barriers faced by climbers of colour.Since 2016, our collaborator Juliette Leblanc is getting used to country life (and finding out what the little house on the prairie is really like).Bridging the gap between humans and nature.Advertisement 
All images via InstagramMY MOMMIES have been quiet all week, which is not how I like them. Lolo and her littles Sav and Hunty have taken one of their Silkie chickens to the vet for a broken leg. Jess and her husband Colton are still—still!—waiting for Brynnleigh at 40 weeks. Daryl-Ann is at Chick-Fil-A. Bernadine is at Chick-Fil-A. Arika is at Chick-Fil-A. Dani’s dog is being lethargic so she posts a poll asking whether she should seek treatment or wait it out. Most people vote wait it out. These kinds of posts leave me itchy, unimpressed. I like it best when my mommies are posting about how they’ve long resisted sharing their flat-earth beliefs, but that today, the Lord has put it on their hearts to tell the world the truth; how Katy Perry is really JonBenet Ramsey or how a man in a fedora at a Trump rally is really JFK Jr. in disguise; how if someone threatens their children with a Covid vaccine they’ll hide them in the attic like Anne Frank, they’ll bring out their guns, they won’t let Shill Gates microchip their babies.  It is summer and it is hot. I’m quarantining in western North Carolina, learning the sounds of different bugs. Every day feels long, boring, almost analgesic compared to the dark, choked spring I spent in Brooklyn, wiping down my groceries and holding my breath for 30 seconds at a time to make sure I still could. Besides Twitter and the news, the mommies are my last remaining link to the deranged. “Should this maybe not be the last thing you do before you go to sleep every night,” asks my boyfriend, looking over my shoulder as I scroll, in the fetal position, facing the wall. He cites a recent uptick in my vivid home invasion dreams, the dreams I have when I feel powerless. I tune him out and zoom in on a graphic a mommy named Jaelynn has posted to her stories: a series of overlapping circles labeled NASA: DARK SPACE MISSION and ANCIENT BUILDER RACE and VATICAN and BLUE AVIANS and OFF-PLANET HUMAN SLAVE TRADE.“I feel like I’m really learning something about America,” I tell him. “Are you?”IN FEBRUARY I decided to follow some Mormon mommy bloggers on Instagram. For weeks they’d been popping up on my Discover page, beautiful blonde women with icy eyes and passels of children who looked exactly like them. The mommies seemed like a different species of girl than me. Every day I woke up overeducated, underpaid, uncertain of when I’d last shaved my legs. But with the mommies, every day someone new was pregnant; every day there was a new VICI try-on that stretched for 20 slides, each one a swipe-up link to purchase tie-dye sweats and felted black hats and Christian-girl-autumn-style knee-high boots. Some of the outfits were cute, and I thought: This is why Instagram is showing me these women! It wants me to buy things. I did not buy the mommies’ special clothes and I felt superior, smarter than the algorithm. Still, the mommies grabbed something in me. I’d followed them, at first, so I could gape at the uncanny landscaping of their lives—but the more I watched them, the more I noticed their imperfections, their vulnerabilities. Some of them seemed, maybe, a little more unmoored, a little too in need of attention. Brittany posted lots of sad photos of her handsome dead husband; her captions always suggested God had taken him for a reason (while plugging a pricey workshop for widows and widowers). Ivy hawked Monat hair products, but she worried that her youngest had been injured by the heavy metals in the DTaP vaccine (she spelled it “v@((!n3,” to avoid being censored by !nst@gr@m’s f@ct ch3ck3rs). Everyone was selling something. Everyone was in pain.I created a second account, saltlake_saltlick, to observe them more closely, without my real friends’ dogs and to-read stacks and dying houseplants cluttering my feed. I followed all my mommies, and I followed the mommies they followed. Homesteaders. Wifeys. Boymamas. Christ followers. Empaths. Holistic healers. Herbalists. Astral travelers. Antifeminists. Ohio dwellin’, Oahu livin’. Lilah, Heather, Sydnee, Sierra, Aubrey, Krystal, Jinger. I learned their names and their children’s; I studied the rhythms of their days. The mommies had husbands who worked in landscaping or the military, who politely smiled for the camera once a week when their wives sat them down to livestream a Q&A about marriage to a hundred thousand people. The mommies had babies with names like Raider and Rifle and Arkham and Taytum and Barley and Nehemiah. The mommies were custom-building their own mansions, buying their six children matching sets of sparkly clothing, having biweekly shoots with professional photographers to produce one beautiful image that would accompany a long caption about what it means to question your faith without abandoning it. I couldn’t believe people lived like this. The final week in February, on the last plane ride I’d take all year, I used the free Fly-Fi to scroll for three straight hours while I hurtled from Florida, where I’d been visiting my family, to Brooklyn. I toggled between my mommies and my emails, planning out a Super Tuesday party with my best friends and a trip to Beacon the following month. I landed, I went home. I shopped for more groceries than usual. I tried ignoring the news. The Super Tuesday party was sad, the trip to Beacon got canceled, lockdown began. I followed more and more mommies.The mommies started wearing t-shirts sunnily screen-printed with the phrase FREEDOM KEEPER and attending anti-mask rallies. They posted videos implying they were foregoing chickenpox vaccines in favor of exposing their children to the virus via mysterious, black-market-looking envelopes labeled VARICELLA. They posted that they were approaching new vibrational energies, that they were moving into a fourth dimension of consciousness, that they were becoming a part of the Great Awakening. On Twitter, someone was recirculating a tweet from January: Something shifted. Shits about to get real weird.One of the mommies changed her avatar to a caricature of a mincing Jew with large lips and long fingers wrapped around a flute, a short line of small blond cartoon children trailing behind him. Another mommy posted a graphic featuring three old men and three lizard people. WHO THEY WANT YOU TO THINK IS IN CONTROL, said the text above the men; WHO’S REALLY IN CONTROL, said the text above the lizard people. The caption read: dart board emoji, sparkle emoji, lizard emoji, sparkle emoji, planet Earth emoji. Just another reason to not eat Oreos, posted one mommy, offering a handy guide to the Satanic crosses and Freemason symbols hidden in the patterns on the chocolate cookie. One mommy lost her pregnancy at 11 weeks and had a non-socially-distanced funeral, no masks in sight. She buried the fetus in her family’s plot; she posed for photographs weeping, wearing sparkly hair clips that said ANGEL BABY. At the end of the funeral, she released 11 blue butterflies. NOW IT’S JUNE. There’s an amazing new steam mop out and all the mommies have it. Cops are beating protesters unconscious with their riot shields and the mommies are all posting the same graphic, which reads i understand that i will never understand above a line of fist emojis: one black, one brown, one white. The steam mop is made by Bissell. Soros is paying Antifa to usher in the New World Order, which will persecute Christians and Republicans so Jews and socialists can finally rule the globe. The infrared thermometers that now take our temperatures outside grocery stores or doctors’ offices are acclimating us to the idea of having guns aimed at our heads. Marina Abramovic has taught Jay-Z and Lady Gaga and Hillary Clinton and Rihanna to cook and eat the spirits of small white children. The Bissell steam mop is only $79.99 on Amazon and I have to try it. The West Coast wildfires were started by left-wing arsonists. Yoga is Satanic. Tarot is Satanic. When a celebrity wears a Band-Aid on their left hand they’re telling you they eat children. When a celebrity wears a flower crown they’re telling you they eat children. When a celebrity wears dark eye makeup they’re telling you they eat children. If I swipe up the Bissell steam mop will be automatically added to my Amazon cart. The Deep State did 9/11. The Rothschilds did 9/11. Jeffrey Epstein did 9/11. On October 17th Trump will announce JFK Jr. as his new running mate. The Bissell steam mop is going to change my life. The mommies are unconcerned about catching Covid. YOUR BODY IS NOT BROKEN, they post. GOD GAVE YOU AN IMMUNE SYSTEM FOR A REASON. The mommies have found the perfect chunky scarves for fall. The mommies believe that ten minutes a day of walking outside barefoot will safeguard you against any virus, that the fluoride in our water is a chemical weapon that makes us more susceptible to disease. The mommies’ husbands’ vasectomy reversals were successful; the mommies are expecting miracle babies. The mommies advertise a $425 water filter. The mommies are hiking in Utah, hiking in Hawaii. They know that the Earth has grown weary. The mommies go collectively crazy for a little graphic that shows a passage from Revelation in which every instance of “mark of the beast” has been edited to instead read “mask of the beast.” Some mommies love the Snoo, a motorized bassinet that rocks your baby to sleep. Others say the Snoo causes SIDS. Others still say SIDS is really caused by vaccines. The mommies affirm the statement “Black Lives Matter,” but they do not support the Marxist Leftist Organization BLM Inc., which they know supports the decentralization of the family. The mommies are posting pictures of bloody fetuses at every stage of development. The mommies are posting infographics about how every Covid death is really a death caused by the rollout of 5G. The mommies are sure you will love this perfect wrist wallet. The mommies reject false prophets like Rachel Hollis of Girl, Wash Your Face fame. The mommies are calling their three-day-old babies little chonks. The mommies are retiling their kitchen backsplashes. The mommies are ready for the return of the Messiah. The mommies are ordering a size up for a cozier fit.On 9/11, a mommy posts a picture of two people jumping from the Twin Towers and captions it this photo right here is why I’m willing to speak out against the synagogue of Satan. Are the lizards in control, I wonder, or is the synagogue of Satan? Is there some relationship between the two? The mommies sell essential oils, get hair extensions, hold large indoor parties where they fete their one-year-olds. They post gender reveals and they pray the end of Roe v. Wade is near. October 17th comes and goes; JFK Jr. is nowhere to be seen. The year is winding down, but what is a year anymore? Time is a bowl of mush. One of my mommies puts up her Christmas tree the day before Halloween and posts a time-lapse of her children trimming its branches with tinsel. Some of my friends start their sentences, As soon as there’s a vaccine. The mommies start theirs, As soon as Jesus comes back. Election day comes and goes. The Saturday after, at 11:27 am, Brooklyn is one happy shout. But my mommies warn me that ten days of darkness are coming, that this has all been scripted, that the Texas Rangers are about to take Sleepy Joe into custody. We are entering a period of spiritual warfare, they say. We are coming to the end of everything.Every day thousands of Americans die. Every week my screen time is up another 4%. My heart aches, a little, wishing I could believe that the fires aren’t a now-uncontrollable consequence of human-hastened climate change, but instead have been engineered by anarchists; that the virus isn’t a virus—one our government has let spread and spread, while many, like my mommies, do nothing to contain it—but a scary story concocted to keep us in our homes so that the lizard people can take control. It’s easier to invent underground enemies than it is to confront the culprit that is right in front of us. It’s easier to blame the unseen than to look at what we’ve done to each other. When my boyfriend asks me what, exactly, the mommies are teaching me about America, I don’t have a ready answer. But I found something, and I stared at it hard and often. The lesson has to be somewhere I haven’t yet looked. If I put my phone down, I’m afraid I am going to miss it. Alexandra Tanner is a writer based in Brooklyn. A graduate of the MFA program at The New School, she has received grants and fellowships from MacDowell and The Center for Fiction. She is the fiction editor at Triangle House Review.
                    By submitting this form, you are consenting to receive marketing emails from: Jewish Currents. You can revoke your consent to receive emails at any time by using the SafeUnsubscribe® link, found at the bottom of every email. Emails are serviced by Mail Chimp.

 
 
 
 
 
 
More results... 
Things first began to feel off in March. While this sentiment applies to everything in the known and unknown universe, I mean it specifically in regard to America’s supply of dry, store-bought bucatini. At first, the evidence was purely anecdotal. My boyfriend and I would bravely venture to both our local Italian grocer and our local chain groceries, masked beyond recognition, searching in vain for the bucatini that, in my opinion, not to be dramatic, is the only noodle worth eating; all other dry pastas might as well be firewood. But where there had once been abundance, there was now only lack. Being educated noodle consumers, we knew that there was, more generally, a pasta shortage due to the pandemic, but we were still able to find spaghetti and penne and orecchiette — shapes which, again, insult me even in concept. The missing bucatini felt different. It was specific. Frightening. Why bucatini? Why now? Why us?We began to talk about it, quietly and carefully, in May. “Are you guys having trouble finding bucatini? We haven’t found any in a while,” said my friend Dan, one of my most bucatini-headed friends, during an otherwise innocuous Saturday-evening Zoom session. I felt a chill, like I’d seen a ghost, perhaps the ghost of Pietro Barilla, founder of the Barilla pasta empire. “We actually … haven’t been able to find it either,” I said. The conversation halted as dramatically as if we’d just seen someone stabbed to death with a bucatini noodle inside one of the little Zoom windows.Our other friends stared at us in horror. “I also haven’t been able to find any bucatini, actually,” said another friend, slowly. “Maybe it’s just a temporary thing, and maybe it’s just in our neighborhoods,” I said, feeling the fear rise like pasta water in my throat. “I’m sure the bucatini will come back.”But it did not come back. Spring turned to summer (allegedly; there is no hard proof of time actually moving forward). Summer turned to fall. All the while we searched high and low for bucatini, at Whole Foods and Russo’s and New York Market and Key Food, our friends searching at City Acres and Food Town and Brooklyn Harvest, stumbling upon it only occasionally and then panic-buying it, then feeling bad for panic-buying it, then repeating the cycle. As Dan’s partner, Chanan, recently recalled, “All I know is, once it ran out, it stopped being replaced. We’ve had to compromise and eat spaghetti, fusilli, and rigatoni. It’s an added layer of uncertainty during an uncertain time.” Still, we pressed forward, pretending things were fine, forcing smiles when we knew deep down all we wanted was to wring our hands and scream into the dark sky. Our only solace was that we assumed this was likely a New York–specific problem, one that, if we really wanted to solve, we could do so by traveling discreetly to another state.Would it be worth renting a car to drive to a store in New Jersey, or possibly Pennsylvania, to buy bags of dried pasta? For bucatini, we considered it. Bucatini is spaghetti but thicker and with a hole in it, meaning it absorbs 200 percent more sauce than its thinner, hole-free brethren, due to math. When asked via email for comment on bucatini’s allure, New York City pasta magnate Frank Prisinzano simply told me, “Lol it’s spaghetti with a hole in it. Who doesn’t like that?” In 2018, Bon Appétit deemed it the “best long pasta,” citing its powerful sauce-absorption capabilities and its general slurpiness. Bucatini Head Dan put it thusly: “There’s something about the hole. It feels more luxurious.”I’d like to go a step further and praise its innate bounciness and personality. If you boil bucatini for 50 percent of the time the box tells you to, cooking it perfectly al dente, you will experience a textural experience like nothing else you have encountered in your natural life. When cooked correctly, bucatini bites back. It is a responsive noodle. It is a self-aware noodle. In these times, when human social interaction carries with it the possible price of illness, bucatini offers an alternative: a social interaction with a pasta.But the problem, I would learn, was not limited to New York. In the fall, I was speaking with my mother, a longtime resident of suburban Chicago, and, as it often does, the conversation quickly turned to pasta. “Rachel,” my mother said gravely. “I haven’t been able to find bucatini anywhere at home. Do you have any in New York?”My heart stopped.“Mom, slow down. What are you telling me right now?” I asked, trying to keep my voice level. “I am telling you,” she said, “that I have not been able to find any bucatini in months.” She had even taken the step of writing an (extreme mom energy) email to the head of customer service at De Cecco, her preferred bucatini brand:I am a HUGE fan of Bucatini pasta. I have not been able to find it for many weeks at any store. It is my favorite pasta to cook. ARE YOU STILL MAKING IT????Please tell me how to get some.Bucatini HQ had replied to her in Italian: “BUONGIORNO SIG. Si sono sempre in produzione. Mi potete fornire il paese.” (“GOOD MORNING SIR. Yes, they are always in production. Can you supply me with the country.”) My mother had explained where she was, then shortly thereafter had received a phone call from a man named Brian who was, apparently, her regional De Cecco sales executive. He left a voicemail: “I did get your message that you’re seeking bucatini,” said Brian. “Bucatini is on FDA hold. We are still producing it, but there were some issues, some hiccups with the FDA. Unfortunately, it’s not likely we’ll have bucatini until January at best. I’d look for it in February back on shelves.”I instantly decided that as a serious journalist, it was my duty to figure out what the literal fuck was going on. I Googled “bucatini shortage” and found only one article on the topic from April 2020, wherein SNL star and Vulture alum Bowen Yang lamented to W magazine, “There’s more of a bucatini scarcity problem than there is a toilet-paper issue, I think.” Bolstered by Bowen’s confirmation, I then pitched this very story you’re now reading at the next New York Magazine brainstorm and instantly received a frantic chat from my co-worker Matthew Schneier: “Just have to say a huge THANK YOU. My sister and I have been plagued by this mystery for months.” When I mentioned the story to other friends in other cities, almost all of them confirmed that they, too, had been unable to find the noodle in their various urban and rural settings. I also found a bunch of tweets like this.I felt more determined than ever to solve this mystery, not just for myself but for the cast of Saturday Night Live and also the rest of the people of the United States of America, who had been through too much for too long to then have insult added to injury via the spontaneous and inexplicable disappearance of the best noodle.I began my inquiry by reaching out to De Cecco, sending several messages to the Italian email address that had replied to my mom, then calling poor Brian and leaving him multiple messages. After a week, I had still received no reply, confirming my suspicion that something extremely insane was going on. My natural next stop was the National Pasta Association, which I was pleased to discover actually does exist and is not just a fever dream I once had. I knew that if anyone would know what to do, it would be the NPA. Quickly, it set me up for a phone interview with Rosario Del Nero, a whimsically charming chef and spokesperson for the organization. When I asked if he had heard about the bucatini shortage, he laughed wildly and replied in a thick Italian accent: “Of course! It’s me! I have bought them all! Bucatini is the most sensual of the pastas!”After ten minutes of conversation about why bucatini is sexy and which sauces go best with bucatini, we got down to business. Rosario told me that he’d heard nothing about a bucatini shortage, but suspected bucatini had just gotten caught up in the larger churn of the pasta shortage. “Dry pasta is typically extruded, pushed through a big die made of bronze. Spaghetti, you push it through once and it just comes out. Bucatini is much more complicated, because of the hole, the center.” Chef Rosario continued: “It’s a specialty shape, and it’s trendy — there was a bucatini craze even before the pasta shortage,” he explained, attributing its relatively newfound popularity in part to Alison Roman’s shallot pasta recipe (which, in its purest form, calls for bucatini) and what he called the “Amatriciana craze” of the past few years (another recipe that generally calls for bucatini). Despite these dual crazes, he explained, bucatini is “not as popular” as your spaghettis and your pennes, and that fact, combined with its complex creation process, meant that it was likely one of the first shapes to suffer during the shortage. “If you have a difficulty making pasta, first you make the [types] with the most demand,” he said, sounding reasonable enough.But I sensed something more sinister was afoot, specifically regarding De Cecco–brand bucatini and its alleged skirmish with the FDA. Rosario expressed surprise at this, telling me he hadn’t heard anything about any kind of situazione with the FDA. “Maybe we’ll find some conspiracy, some worldwide thing,” he said, delighted. “That would be phenomenal. You would be remembered as the whistle-blower of the bucatini world crisis.” When I told him that De Cecco’s rep had been ignoring me, he gasped. “Maybe he’s been silenced!” he said. Rosario said he’d get back to me when he’d done his own internal investigating — and he did, mere moments later.“Rachel!” he roared. “I’ve touched closely to the reason. Because of the environment, people have been using bucatini as straws, instead of a plastic straw.”“I’m sorry, what?” I asked.“Yes. You can buy them. There are a couple of companies making them. You can have your soda and then eat your straw,” he said. “It’s like eating your fork or knife.” My mind reeled as it tried to understand and accept this information as true. “But pasta is not a ready-to-eat product,” Rosario added. “You have to cook it. So when you use pasta to drink sodas, you’re drinking and eating a not-ready-to-eat product. You put yourself at risk because that product has never been pasteurized or killed. And the only pasta cut affected is bucatini because of the hole.”This made both perfect sense and absolutely no fucking sense at all, the sort of demented-timeline event that could only happen in 2020, when everything is, metaphorically, an innocent piece of pasta turned into a straw in a bid to help the environment that actually ends up being fatally dangerous. I confessed to Rosario that every time I made bucatini, I ate several raw strands per minute as I cooked it, as a sort of barometer of al dente–ness. I wondered if I was now going to die because of it, and I made peace with this instantly.After a pause, Rosario replied, “I think the risk is probably one in a billion. I wouldn’t worry too much.” Even so, he seemed nearly certain that the pasta straws were the reason behind the FDA “hiccup” and promised that we would “get to the bottom of it.” We still weren’t sure: Did the FDA hold apply to all bucatini, or just De Cecco — and if it was just De Cecco, and the issue was pasta straws, why was De Cecco being singled out as a pasta-straw perpetrator?To gather more information on the ever-deepening noodle mystery, Rosario directed me to Carl Zuanelli, the chairman of the National Pasta Association and CEO of Nuovo Pasta. But before I spoke with Carl, I sent an email to the FDA asking, in as professional a tone as I could muster, what the ever-loving hell was going on. Then I did a deep dive into the FDA website, where, to my great shock, I found a buried couple of jargon-y paragraphs published on March 30, 2020, that did indeed mention De Cecco bucatini.As someone who is not actually a food reporter by trade, and by law am not allowed to read sentences with this many numbers in them, I had no idea what any of this meant. When I got on the phone with Carl, the NPA chairman, I read the FDA paragraph out loud to him; he seemed just as surprised as Rosario had been. “You informed me about this,” he said. He then broke down the jargon for me, explaining that “many years ago” the U.S. government had mandated that pasta — which they call “macaroni,” like they’re the Sopranos — be made with “enriched flours,” with certain minimum and maximum criteria for various sorts of vitamins and nutrients (which is why pastas in the U.S. are labeled as “enriched macaroni products”). In Europe, which houses the grand nation of Italy, where De Cecco is made, the standards of identity are different. (“Not better or worse,” Carl explained, “just different.”) So while the De Cecco bucatini might have been “in balance” for the E.U., the U.S. had found its iron levels lacking — specifically by 2.1 milligrams. This, to me, seemed both petty and confusing. Why had the FDA singled out De Cecco in the first place to test its iron levels? Why were they quibbling over such a small number? And if the issue was specific to De Cecco, why were we all experiencing a shortage of bucatini more generally?I continued my campaign to reach someone, anyone, at De Cecco for an explanation and timeline for resolution. I asked Carl for a contact, and he said he assumed they would reply soon. “I don’t see why they wouldn’t. I would think they’d want to and get more bucatini press.” Carl’s contact did not reply, and when I called them, their phone number did that fuzzy-dial-up thing where it sounded like someone signing into AOL in 1995.I emailed Dave De Cecco, who I imagined to be the heir to the De Cecco empire, by guessing his email address multiple times. He did not reply, and later I realized he may not be at all related to the De Ceccos, which is another investigation for another time.* I emailed De Cecco’s export department, which replied simply, “First of all thank you for your interest in De Cecco brand. With reference to your kind email I inform you that your request has been forwarded to our department in charge. In case of interest they will put in touch directly with you. Thank you once again for contacting us and remain at your disposal for further assistance.” But they were not at my disposal for further assistance. I finally got Brian, the midwestern De Cecco sales executive, on the phone by calling him anonymously, and he seemed startled and displeased by my call. “Oh gosh, I’m probably the worst person to talk to about that,” he said. “I don’t have any more insight into it.” He gave me the email and phone number of a supply-chain guy named Marco, who never replied to my messages and whose voice mailbox has been full for a month.In the meantime, the FDA finally replied to me, despite the fact that it was very busy approving a life-saving vaccine for billions of people. “Unfortunately, due to scheduling conflicts, we are unable to participate in a phone interview at this time,” wrote a spokesperson named Courtney, with more politeness than I deserved, as I was, again, bothering her with questions about noodles during an unprecedented express vaccine effort. “However, on March 30, 2020, De Cecco bucatini was placed on import alert because it was misbranded as it failed to meet the required standard of identity. Specifically, the iron level in De Cecco bucatini was below the designated level as required by the standard of enriched macaroni.” When I asked whether De Cecco was trying to fix this issue or how the FDA had even discovered the issue in the first place, Courtney replied, “It’s an extremely busy time for us at FDA.”Seeing that Courtney was not going to give me all of the answers I needed, I decided to file an FOIA with the FDA requesting access to, and copies of, all documents related to the import alert for De Cecco’s bucatini product. I also requested a rush on the documents, writing by way of explanation that “people deserve to know.”As I waited impatiently for the FDA’s FOIA reply, I got another call from Carl from the NPA, who blew my mind with a tale that sounded so Coen brothers–y I could not believe it. The reason behind De Cecco’s fall from FDA grace, he said, could potentially be traced all the way back to the early 1900s and the beginning of what was once called the “National Association of Macaroni and Noodle Manufacturers of America.”Around World War II, Carl explained, the established noodle industry (henceforth referred to as Big Pasta) was “upset” by the introduction of Nissin’s ramen noodles into the country, which were “completely out of spec” with what the United States then recognized as noodles — specifically because the ramen was being sold for a lower price and with what Carl called “lower standards” of nutrition. “They were really pressed,” said Carl. That’s when the “standards of identity” were created: Big Pasta made sure that all noodles had to meet certain specifications to be considered “enriched macaroni products” and sold in the United States. As time went on, it would seem, the petty beef spun out into a juicier beef, with the main agitators of Big Pasta turning on each other. Nearly 120 years after the Macaroni and Noodle Manufacturers’s inception, that beef finally came for De Cecco. Weeks after we were first in touch, Courtney replied to tell me that De Cecco’s products were “collected as routine surveillance of imported products,” but Carl had a more intriguing theory: “It sounds as if someone was not happy with De Cecco’s product coming in and looked at it and saw that it was out of spec,” he said. “The FDA doesn’t typically go around looking. They’ve got plenty of other things to do.”Thrilled by the There Will Be Blood of it all, I reached out to a legal source who asked not to be named but who has deep knowledge of the inner workings of Big Pasta. The legal source, whom I will call Luigi for fun but whose real name is very different from that, confirmed Carl’s suspicions. “FDA is quite slow to take action involving standards violations. I’m speculating that a competitor put some heavy pressure on FDA,” he said. “It’s not the only way this happens, but for the FDA to put any resources into this, it would have to be somebody who really cared with some clout. Maybe a competitor who brought in a member of Congress to pressure the agency.”When I told Luigi that De Cecco was dodging me, he laughed. “That doesn’t surprise me,” he said. “I suppose they just don’t want to comment.” But he reiterated that there was no real reason the FDA would “sample a macaroni product for enrichment levels at the border unless they got some info and received some pressure to go after it.” Luigi also told me that this was entirely legal and absolutely kosher. With regards to my FOIA, Luigi told me that it would likely be declined on the basis of “documents related to an ongoing enforcement action — but that tells you something.”Invigorated, I reached out to several pasta manufacturers to see if they would speak to me about the greater bucatini shortage. The only one that hopped on the phone with me was Barilla. A representative for the company — who was an extremely good sport and discussed the significance of sauce coverage with me for several minutes — confirmed that Barilla had, in fact, pruned its bucatini SKU, along with several other shapes, solely owing to the sheer demand of pasta during the pandemic. She also told me they’d seen an increased demand for bucatini owing to its elegance and restaurant-like quality, and that this combination had, indeed, created a mild Barilla bucatini shortage. She did comfort me mildly by saying that the company had started to slowly increase production back in July and that we’d begin to see it back in normal quantities sometime soon. “We still have to ration it throughout the country so everyone gets a little bit of their favorite shape,” she explained.I asked casually if she was at all familiar with De Cecco’s bucatini shortage. “No. I’m not aware,” she said. “Have you had any FDA kerfuffles?” I asked, twirling my hair around my finger even though she could not see me because we were on the phone. “No,” she said, clarifying that Barilla pasta has always contained “adequate levels” of enrichment. “We’ve never had that issue.”Carl, who was by now becoming audibly exhausted by me, confirmed that he’d heard from several pasta manufacturers, some of whom were on the list of those that did not reply to me (including Ronzoni, Prince, and Treehouse), that they were, similarly, “severely pruning back the different cuts in order to have longer runs of the most popular cuts, just to produce it as efficiently as they can.” Carl added, “I’m not saying there’s a bucatini shortage. I’m saying the less popular SKUs, of which bucatini is one, have been on their cut list.” He also told me, sighing, that, “frankly, due to your investigatory work,” he was now working to standardize the standards of identity between countries. “What had been an issue in our legal-affairs committee is now anecdotal, based on the info you’re giving me, affecting negatively some members of our association, i.e., De Cecco,” he said. “I am working behind the scenes on this.”Carl didn’t say it, but I was pretty sure he thought about calling me “the Bernstein of Bucatini” and that my work will now help to fix the standards-of-identity issue that has long plagued our fair continents. I had confirmed that the bucatini shortage was real and understood that the bucatini shortage was a combination of factors: the pandemic’s pasta demand, how hard it is to make bucatini because of its hole, De Cecco’s strange and untimely barring from the U.S. border. But these victories felt lacking.Ultimately, I had more questions than I did answers. I did not, for example, understand who from Big Pasta had targeted De Cecco and why. I was also slightly worried that I had inadvertently made myself a target of Big Pasta. And more importantly, I did not know if I would get to taste De Cecco’s brilliant, sentient noodle ever again. At time of press, I am still waiting for the fruits of my FOIA request, as well as for literally anyone from De Cecco to reply to me. De Cecco, if you’re reading this: Please contact me immediately, then also put 2.1 milligrams of iron into your freaking bucatini and help rescue us from this national nightmare.This post has been updated because I can’t remember who told me about Dave De Cecco but upon further reflection he seems entirely unrelated to the De Cecco family.Our top picks in food writing for 2020.Through December, we’re featuring Longreads’ Best of 2020. After revisiting the food stories picked by the team this year, we’ve narrowed down our favorites. Whether you are a fan of marmalade, bagels, or sushi, we hope you find something you enjoy. If you like these, you can sign up to receive our weekly email every Friday.* * *This is a story that puts you through a whole gamut of emotion — from frustration, admiration, joy, to sadness — all while discussing fried rice on a bagel.The protagonist behind the bagel is Michael Thompson, an inmate of Muskegon Correctional Facility in Michigan, who has served 25 years of a 40- to 60-year sentence for selling marijuana in Michigan, a state where cannabis is now legal. But it is not his own plight that is concerning Thompson — he has been moved by the story of a Black man killed by a Minneapolis police officer — George Floyd.Wanting to find a way to mark Floyd’s death, Thompson decided to share a special meal with his inmates in a “celebration” honoring Floyd’s life. Such a simple concept is a monumental task in prison — and you feel great pride in the inmates you are joining on this mission. First, there is the issue of money — Thompson wanted to feed the whole unit, but resources meant it had to be capped at 50 inmates. Some food was donated, and the rest Thompson bought from the commissary. Then there were tools — the entire operation had to be carried out using “only flimsy plastic knives, a single microwave, and empty popcorn bags.” The men struggled, tearing their hands up with plastic while cutting, but at the end, each “attendee was served one celebration bagel, a bag of chips, and a soda.” And that food was so appreciated — for some, the first cold pop they had drunk for decades.More than just the enjoyment of the food, this meal brought the men together, even though they had to eat separately, because: “After they returned to their cells, each man sat in silence for 8 minutes and 46 seconds. And then they began to eat.”As a food writer, Corey Mintz loves a supermarket more than most — in fact, he got married in one: “between the cash register, the root-vegetable table, a group of … friends and family, and a display of maple syrup.” In this piece, he gives us a fascinating history of the supermarket, whilst bemoaning what is unwittingly being lost by more and more people as they choose to order their groceries online.Written just before COVID-19 hit in full force, the topic is eerily prophetic of things to come. When Mintz discusses the loss of “getting out of the house; the freedom of choice; being in a large, expansive space; the visual stimulation of all that abundance on the shelves,” he was unaware that the arrival of the pandemic was soon to rush this reality to the fore for millions. However, as mental health deteriorates alongside isolation in 2020, the accuracy of some of Mintz’s other points is undeniable: The idea that interactions with local storeowners — or “weak ties” — “improve physical and mental health and … reduces loneliness.”This year supermarkets have been bombarded by a new wave of online customers, and the herculean feat it takes to get a delivery slot suggests that the figures in this article — that 1.5 ­percent of people in Canada and 3 percent in the U.S. order their food online — are already out of date. Now that people have discovered the delight of bananas and chocolate biscuits turning up at their door will they ever go back to their local supermarkets? If these community interactions are lost on a permanent basis, what is the long-term cost?Mintz will certainly be hoping that in the future we remember that “while other human beings can be annoying—clipping our nails on the subway, calling instead of texting, disrespecting the unwritten rule that the middle seat on a plane gets armrest preference—we need one another.”This essay resonates with the pure joy that a particular food can bring, but it’s not the most obvious of foods — a bitter citrus fruit boiled in sugar to create a breakfast condiment … a.k.a marmalade.Potts’ language draws you into the kitchen with her as she brews up her concoctions, so you can almost feel the steam and stickiness as she drops “saffron strands into a couple of the jars, stirring last minute, and they hang, suspended in the jelly, perfect threads.” The pleasure she derives from her “potted sunshine” is apparent, but more fascinating is the complicated world of marmalade that she explores. A central theme of British culture — eaten by Samuel Pepys, James Bond, and Paddington Bear — it inspires fanaticism. Invited to judge at the World’s Original Marmalade Awards, Potts discovers that “the tricky, maddening nature of marmalade is precisely why people love making it.”Along with Potts, we brace ourselves “for the marmalade obsessives” she would find while judging for four days at Dalemain. And yes, 50 sheep were dyed orange in readiness for this year’s festival, but despite herself, Potts finds herself entranced by this eccentric world, and when she is the first to try the marmalade that ultimately won the Double Gold International Marmalade award in the artisan category, she “wanted to ring everyone I know and tell them about this stuff.” It turns out the subculture of marmalade is rather delightful.Once back at home, and in a global lockdown, Potts finds comfort in making her own marmalade: “there is something inherently optimistic about preservation, about putting something away for your future.”Read this loving homage to marmalade, and you too will find “a small optimism, a hope of orange-colored happiness in your future.”In this essay, Marie Mutsuki Mockett evokes the vivid associations we can have with food. She argues that the food of our youth — given to us by our mothers — formulates our palette for the rest of our lives. As a teenager, in the hospital with pneumonia, Mockett craved “Japanese soul food” — her mother brought her pickled sour plums, rice, and seasoned ground beef, and her “body reconstituted itself out of her nourishment.” Even today, when she is sick, she yearns for those flavors.Now the tables have turned, and with her mother aging, it is Mockett who is bringing meals that bring her comfort, such as elegant flats of sushi with “the spinach … steamed, the water squeezed out, and the leaves placed into strips.” Despite her mother leaving Japan for the United States decades earlier, it is the food she grew up with, and taught her daughter to love, that they share — their personal and regional history interwoven.COVID-19 has now robbed Mockett of the chance to share meals with her mother — whose nursing home was one of the first to shut its doors to visitors. She manages to express her devastation with a simple, yet searing, description: “Sometimes I get a photo of her eating her meals. There is no sushi on her plate.”This year has been a struggle for many small restaurants — with so many having to shut their doors. In this piece, Gabrielle Hamilton tells the story of the closure hers — Prune — but it is the tale of many. Written from a first-person perspective this is a deeply personal essay that exposes the pain of shuttering a lifelong dream.Prune was 20 years old when the gates were finally rolled down. A bistro in Manhattan’s East Village, when it was born “there was no Eater, no Instagram, no hipster Brooklyn food scene.” Hamilton worked seven nights a week “driven by the sensory, the human, the poetic and the profane — not by money or a thirst to expand.” However, once she cut her first payroll check, she understood, that poetic notion aside, she was running a business. When COVID-19 hit there was “one piece of unemotional data to work with: the checking account balance,” and there was not enough in it.It took a week to shut the restaurant. A week of cleaning and “burying par-cooked chickens under a tight seal of duck fat to see if we could keep them perfectly preserved in their airtight coffins.”Then followed weeks of paperwork — desperately applying for grants and unemployment that failed to appear. Then further weeks of idleness and quarantine, and the realization that although there was still a month of food in the freezer, what about somehow getting hurt and needing serious medical care with no insurance? More questions followed: Is Prune necessary? Will restaurants survive the pandemic?Having decided against delivery and going online, sticking to her vision of her restaurant “as a place for people to talk to one another, with a very decent but affordable glass of wine and an expertly prepared plate of simply braised lamb shoulder,” Prune’s shutters are still down.* * *Read all the categories in our Best of 2020 year-end collection.
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
Captain Scott took jars to the Antarctic with him, and Edmund Hillary took one up Everest. Marmalade is part of the British national myth. Livvy Potts wants to know why.Olivia Potts | Longreads | July 2020 | 15 minutes (4,161 words)The dark wood-panelled dining room is quiet, heavy with concentration. Around the room, six pairs of judges sit at tables crowded with glass jars. As the light catches the jars they glow amber, saffron, primrose. The only real sounds are the murmurs as the pairs of judges consult, and the regular pop! of sterilized jars as they open. Occasionally, there is the tap of a pen against glass, signifying that a gold medal has been awarded, followed by quiet applause or cheers depending on how sugar-drunk the judges are.This is the judging room of the World’s Original Marmalade Awards, an annual event in Penrith, England, in the English Lake District. I’m here because I’m obsessed with marmalade. Not with making or eating it — although I enjoy both — but the enigma it represents. I suppose I’m obsessed with those obsessed with it: what is the appeal? Marmalade is made from a sour, bitter fruit that doesn’t grow in the UK; a fruit that requires days of preparation to render remotely edible. And yet, marmalade holds a central role in British life and British culture. It appears in the diaries of Samuel Pepys; James Bond and Paddington Bear eat it. Officers that served in British wars received jars of marmalade to remind them of their home country. Captain Scott took jars to the Antarctic with him, and Edmund Hillary took one up Everest. Marmalade is part of our national myth. I want to know why.***Marmalade in Britain is overwhelmingly made from citrus aurantium, the bitter orange grown in the Spanish city of Seville. This city produces over 4 million kilos of the orange a year, almost entirely for export to Britain for the marmalade market. How on earth did that happen?James Bond and Paddington Bear eat it. Officers that served in British wars received jars of marmalade to remind them of their home country. Captain Scott took jars to the Antarctic with him, and Edmund Hillary took one up Everest. Marmalade is part of our national myth. I want to know why.Some would have you believe that marmalade was born in a vacuum. That, like Post-it notes or penicillin, it was invented all of a sudden, brought about by a confluence of unlikely factors. The story goes like this: it was a dark and stormy night. The rain fell in torrents, and a Spanish cargo ship was forced to take an unscheduled dock in Dundee, though it could as well have been anywhere; any port in a storm. Its cargo: oranges. A Dundee grocer, James Keiller, rashly buys up the whole load of them. He quickly discovers these oranges aren’t sweet and fleshy, but face-puckering sour and bitter, more pip than fruit. His mother, Janet, in an attempt to produce something, boils them up with tons of sugar. And so, marmalade was born.The truth, I’m afraid, is rather more prosaic. We know that Seville orange marmalade in Britain predates this charming tale: there are British recipes for conserves of Seville oranges as far back as the 1587 A Book of Cookrye, and a marmalade very much like the one we eat today appears in a recipe book by Eliza Cholmondeley published around 1677. The Keiller family probably were the first to produce Seville orange marmalade on a commercial scale, but the Spanish ship story was and is just good PR. It is likely, according to C. Anne Wilson’s The Book of Marmalade, that the cargo ship would only have been carrying large quantities of Seville oranges because there was a ready market for them in Scotland, and that Janet Keiller would not have needed to invent a recipe for the orange marmalade, as many were in circulation by that point in England and Scotland. The expansion of the railways came at just the right time for the Keillers, and when Queen Victoria took a shine to the stuff, it quickly became fashionable in London. Once commercial production was underway, marmalade became a celebrated British export, perfect for overseas trade, able to travel long distances preserved by its sugar content, and capable of withstanding extremes of temperature.In any event, marmalade was also made with other things long before it was made with the Seville orange. Early marmalades were often made from quince, and closely resembled what we now call membrillo: a thick paste that could be moulded and would hold its shape. A recipe from 1587 reads “stir it till it be thick or stiff that your stick will stand upright of itself.” Like membrillo, this marmalade was eaten after dinner, alongside sweetmeats, and as a digestion aid (one thing the Scottish did do in the nineteenth century was move marmalade from dinner to the breakfast table). It was a luxury item, sometimes flavored with prized ambergris, rose, and musk. It was given as gifts as a show of generosity and riches: Henry VIII received “one box of marmalade” from Hull of Exeter in 1524.Quinces also gave marmalade its name: the world comes from the Portuguese name for the fruit, marmelo. Indeed, early port records tell us that marmalade first arrived in the UK from Portugal, though our appetite for the stuff meant it was soon coming from Spain and Italy too. It didn’t take long for English travellers to discover the recipe — a happy occurrence, since quinces grow very well on our temperate isle. We were, for a short time at least, an independent marmalade-making nation, until we got a taste for the foreign bitter orange.Kickstart your weekend reading by getting the week’s best Longreads delivered to your inbox every Friday afternoon.Sign upOnly in English does marmalade connote a citrus-based preserve containing peel. In Greek (marmelada), French (marmalade), and Italian (marmellata), the word just means “jam,” with the fruit added afterward to distinguish. Thus marmellata di arance is orange jam: sweet, pulpy. Only marmellata di arance amare is what the English think of as marmalade. And it’s not just Romance languages: marmelad in Swedish, Marmelade in German, and marmelade in Danish, all generic terms for any fruit cooked in sugar. The British clearly think of marmalade differently from the rest of the world.***There are many ways to make marmalade. Some boil the fruit whole; others prefer to cut the peel first. The merits of pressure-cooking are fiercely debated. But broadly speaking, marmalade is made by separating the citrus fruit into its different components — pips, peel, pith, juice — and boiling, before adding sugar and boiling again. Generally, the pith, pips, and flesh are tied up in a muslin bag. The peel is sliced into equal sized strips or chips. The muslin bag and peel are left to soak overnight in the water. The following day, the peel is cooked until tender. Sugar is added, along with any reserved juice, and heated gently until it dissolves, before the heat is ratcheted up to bring the mixture to a rolling boil. In 10-15 minutes, the mixture should have reached 105°C/220°F — jam temperature — meaning that it will set once cool. If you make it with Seville oranges, it’s something of a nose-to-tail preserve: the pips and the pith contain enough natural pectin, a gelling agent, to set the marmalade without additional ingredients. Nothing is wasted. In theory, it’s a straightforward process; in practice it is riddled with possible unforced errors. You can overboil it, underboil it, add too much acid, add too little acid; you can burn the syrup in the same batch you undercook the peel. You can pot too hot, you can pot too cool. Over the years, my husband, Sam, has encountered every one of them.It was Sam who properly brought marmalade into my life. He was late for one of our early dates because he was waiting for his marmalade to set. He arrived, clutching a sticky, still-warm jar of Seville orange marmalade, in lieu of flowers. Back then, I didn’t even really eat marmalade. I certainly would never have countenanced making my own. Why would anyone bother? Was he aware that you can buy it in the supermarket? I was a criminal barrister, and the point in my life where I would ditch criminal law in favor of retraining in pâtisserie was still years in the future.It was Sam who properly brought marmalade into my life. He was late for one of our early dates because he was waiting for his marmalade to set.But Sam came from a long line of marmalade lovers and marmalade makers. In marmalade season —  in the UK, Seville oranges are only available for a few brief weeks from the end of December to mid-February — it’s all his family talks about, with long WhatsApp threads devoted to techniques, yields, sets. Sam was a good cook, but not an especially enthusiastic one: he cooked simple, functional meals. But marmalade was different. Marmalade making was, for him, non-negotiable. Even if we had shelves packed full of the previous years’ labors, when January rolled around, more must be made.(It’s not just Sam and his family who are fanatics. So devoted are the marmalade makers of the UK that it’s possible to buy canned, prepared Seville orange peel and pulp, “Ma Made,” the marmalade equivalent of a cake mix box — just in case you get that marmalade-making hankering outside of season.)For the first few years of our relationship, this was something I simply endured. Love the man, love his marmalade. As I got into cooking, I tried to make my own a few times, with varying success, but never quite caught the bug. (Besides which, we had an awful lot to get through. Even a small batch is a lot of marmalade for two people.) It all seemed so unpredictable; some years, whole batches had to be reboiled as Sam muttered darkly about it being a “low-pectin year.”Once you’re hooked, of course, this is all part of the appeal. Lucy Deedes is a veteran of both the homemade and artisan classes of the World’s Original Marmalade Awards, scoring three gold medals in the artisan. “You have to get things right at the right time. I’ve never made jam because it’s not much of a challenge. Marmalade only has three ingredients, but every batch is different, and sometimes it just doesn’t turn out.”In other words: the tricky, maddening nature of marmalade is precisely why people love making it. It’s a bit like sourdough: if you’re going to get into it, you have to really get into it. Even then, failure lurks around every corner —  but so does the possibility of improvement. That’s irresistible to a certain sort of person; marmalade attracts the obsessive. Helena Atlee, author of The Land Where Lemons Grow puts it more bluntly. “Marmalade attracts bigots. They believe in one true product made from the sour oranges the British call Sevilles, and coming most probably from a steamy Scottish kitchen in Dundee.”For the first few years of our relationship, this was something I simply endured. Love the man, love his marmalade.I want to meet some of these obsessives, and understand the hold that marmalade has over so many. And I think I know where to find them: the World’s Original Marmalade Awards.***I arrived at Dalemain, where the awards are held, against the odds, having battled Storm Ciara to make it to the flooded and snowbound Lake District. At that point, I was fairly sure that extreme weather conditions would be the biggest challenge the awards would face this year. How much February Olivia had to learn. I first spoke to Jane Hasell-McCosh, who is the founder of the awards over the phone, asking if I could interview her and perhaps a couple of the judges for this piece. ‘“We can do one better than that,” she told me. “Would you like to help us judge?”I agreed on the spot, but afterward, I began to worry that I didn’t know enough about marmalade for the gig. Thanks to Sam, I eat it far more than I used to, and would tend to choose it over jam. But is that enough? Well, it was too late for that. On my way up to the judging, I braced myself for the marmalade obsessives of which Helena Atlee writes — if not bigots, then at least fundamentalists. I was ready to be told there is only one true way to make and enjoy marmalade, and that any deviation from it is an aberration and, possibly, a perversion.Dalemain is astonishing. The main frontage is Georgian, built in 1744, with the old hall dating far further back to the 12th century. It has been in the family for over 300 years. Although from the outside the house looks like a National Trust property, when you step inside you immediately realize it is a family home. Laundry hangs in the huge stone kitchen, dogs weave between legs, and back copies of Vogue spill out from under a table in the hallway. On the walls, portraits of distant ancestors mingle with recent family photos. In one of the guest rooms, a bed gifted by Queen Anne still resides. (The mattress, I am told, has been changed.)The awards began as a one-off. Fifteen years ago, rural Britain was still struggling after being decimated four years earlier by the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease, a highly infectious disease which affects cows and other cloven-footed animals, and generally requires widespread culling of livestock. Jane wanted to do something to bring her local community together, something cheering. There was never any plan for it to become a regular event.The fact that it did is perhaps down to Jane’s formidable organizational nouse, though I believe her when she tells me how much the growth and success of the event took her by surprise. That first year, around 60 jars were received, almost exclusively from local competitors. This year, there are more than 3,000 entrants from 40 countries around the world, plus spin-off festivals in Japan and Australia. During the time I spent at Dalemain, two separate production companies were filming.After 15 years, judging has been honed to a fine art. The way it works is this: the marmalades are tasted on plastic spoons (never double-dipped), without the interference of bread, oatcakes or any other vehicle. Bath Oliver biscuits (a savory cracker) are on the table as a palate cleanser. Each entry has a scorecard and is judged on its appearance, texture and flavor, with points available for lack of smudges on the jar, color, brightness, peel distribution, jar filled to the top, balance of jelly to peel, set, size of peel, texture of peel, balance of flavors, balance of acidity, length of finish, and “overall harmony.” The marmalades can receive a commended, a bronze, a silver, a gold, or nothing at all. Those which have scored top marks are then re-judged: there is a Best in Show awarded to the top homemade marmalade, and a “Double Gold” award given to a handful of the very best across the categories. The winner of the best homemade marmalade is sold in the luxury London department store, Fortnum & Mason.After a short briefing, and armed with our spoons, we were ready to start judging.There are more categories than you could shake a stick at: in the homemade category, as well as the standard Seville orange (which have two sub-categories), dark and chunky marmalade and “other citrus,” there are categories for children, first-timers, men, gardeners (where the predominant ingredient beyond the citrus was grown by the competitor), octogenarians, and campanologists (bell-ringers). Special categories of former years have included everything from peers, political & clergy, to hairdressers.The range is mind-boggling: a sweet potato and coffee marmalade from Taiwan sat alongside a lime glitter marmalade, which looked like something a teenage girl would daub on her eyelids. A coconut and chocolate marmalade elicited groans when it was plucked from a crate, followed by raised eyebrows and “not bad!”s once actually tasted. I tasted fruits I’ve never even heard of, let alone tried: daidai (the Japanese equivalent of the Seville orange, bitter, pocked, and pithy), tachibana (a wild mandarin found in Southern Taiwan and Japan), kawachi bankan (a Japanese pomelo), and tangelo (a sweet tangy orange that tastes, to me at least, like jelly beans).It is no coincidence that some of the most striking and delicious citrus fruits previously unknown to me come from Japan, and that the Japanese tend to enjoy particular success at the awards. Marmalade is big news in Japan, despite the absence of Seville oranges. Two years ago, Seiko and Yoriko Ninomiya, Japanese marmalade makers, received a double-gold award for their marmalade, a yuzu and ginger and, suspended in the jelly, tiny yuzu peel stars. They came to marmalade as a hobby after they retired from careers in the airline industry. They have been involved in the inaugural Japanese Marmalade Awards, which are held at Yawatahama, where the citrus groves tumble down the hills to the ocean. This year, they have come to the Lake District to help judge the World awards.I was told by more seasoned judges that when I tasted a full mark, gold marmalade, I would know immediately. And they were right. I was the first person to try one of the marmalades that ultimately won the Double Gold International Marmalade award in the artisan category, and it was stop-you-in-your-tracks good. It too was a Japanese marmalade, made from the endangered tachibana fruit, which tastes like a Seville orange crossed with a mandarin — but it’s not just the flavor that set it apart. This was a reduced sugar marmalade, which often results in a loose, syrupy set, but here was a set so perfect that many full-sugar marmalades fail to achieve; crystal clear, wibbly jelly; identical, perfectly cooked peel was suspended throughout the jar. How could a marmalade be so clever? I wanted to ring everyone I know and tell them about this stuff.…here was a set so perfect that many full-sugar marmalades fail to achieve; crystal clear, wibbly jelly; identical, perfectly cooked peel was suspended throughout the jar. How could a marmalade be so clever?***It’s hard to comprehend when you’re sitting in the stone kitchen of Dalemain, but marmalade’s appeal is not what it once was. Thane Prince, a British cookery writer, preserves specialist and judge of The Big Allotment Challenge, tells me that British tastes and customs have moved on. “It’s old-fashioned. I think the appeal was that it was exotic. A luxury product, and these things always have caché. But now it’s just old-fashioned. And people don’t have breakfast in the same way.” During the height of marmalade’s popularity, a cooked “Full English” breakfast, accompanied by toast and marmalade was standard. But Britain’s marmalade consumption has been in decline since the 1960s. Perhaps establishing marmalade as a breakfast food was actually sealing its fate. We have less time for breakfast now; we pick something up on the go, from a coffee shop. More and more of us avoid sugar, or carbs in general. None of this bodes well for marmalade’s future.Its bitterness probably doesn’t help, either. We are programmed to dislike bitterness, as Jennifer McLagan explains in her book Bitter: A Taste of the World’s Most Dangerous Flavor. In nature, bitterness often suggests something poisonous, which is why babies screw up their faces at bitter tastes. As we age, we lose taste buds, and learn to like bitter things: coffee, cigarettes, Campari, dark chocolate. But each is a struggle. And with marmalade, many of us seemingly never get off the ground, plumping instead for jam, or peanut butter. It is certainly true that peanut butter and chocolate spread are gaining ground in the share of the spreads market, where marmalade resides. Marmalade sales were in steady decline from 2013.Even in decline, though, marmalade has sway in the supermarkets because of its status as a basket item: one that shoppers use to judge where to shop. As such, it is a common loss leader, meaning retailers sell it at a rock-bottom price to get people through their doors. At the time of writing, a one-pound jar of marmalade can be had for as little as 27p (34¢), an impossible price on which to make a profit.But, the tide may be turning. The 2017 release of Paddington 2 — which involved a set piece showing Paddington making marmalade in prison — increased marmalade sales by 3 percent in the UK after a steady four-year decline, according to supermarket data collected by research firm Kantar. It’s fitting, perhaps, that Britain’s distinctly un-British national preserve might be saved by a bear from darkest Peru.***I didn’t get the conclusion I expected to when I began researching marmalade. I thought my marmalade journey would end with the festival that accompanies the World’s Original Marmalade Awards: a festival festooned in orange and oranges which celebrates this absurd tradition, as well as the people who perpetuate it. In a normal year, there are classes and presentations, tastings and exhibitions, a church service, all devoted to marmalade. Even the sheep go orange: 50 were dyed in readiness for this year’s festival (it was supposed to be fewer but Jane tells me they “got carried away.”) At the judging in Dalemain in February, the excitement for the festival was palpable. But of course, it was not to be: COVID-19 swept in far more comprehensively and destructively than Storm Ciara. A festival that attracts hundreds of international visitors and involves repeated tastings was off the table long before we went into lockdown.Even as a peripheral player in the awards, it was deflating. But then I came home and made marmalade.***I am standing in my kitchen in London in front of a large pan full of orange jelly, trying to put all the advice and tips that I was given over my four days in Dalemain into practice. I need to make sure the peel is fully cooked before adding the sugar. I need to avoid squeezing the muslin bag so the jelly doesn’t become cloudy. Despite my best efforts, I turn my back for one second (OK, two minutes) to wash out my jars for sterilizing, and turn back to find that the marmalade has whooshed up and spilled all over my hobs in a big sticky puddle. I soldier on, undeterred. Fifteen sticky minutes later, my marmalade is approaching the magic 105ºC. I deploy the wrinkle test — twice, just to be sure — which involves cooling a spoonful of the mixture on a frozen plate, to see if it forms a skin which wrinkles. I leave the marmalade a few minutes before potting, determined not to make the classic “potting too hot” error (which introduces tiny air bubbles into the finished product). And, although no one but me or Sam will ever see this batch, I make sure each jar is filled right to the top.I stand back and admire my five-and-a-half jars and… I get it. Of course I do. How could I not? My jelly isn’t quite crystal clear, but it is basketball orange, bright and glowing. I dropped saffron strands into a couple of the jars, stirring last minute, and they hang, suspended in the jelly, perfect threads. It may not be award-winning, but it is the best I have ever made. It really does feel like I’ve potted sunshine, a moment in time.It really does feel like I’ve potted sunshine, a moment in time.British food writer Diana Henry describes preserving as “holding onto a season, a particular mood” — she calls it “one of the most poetic branches of cooking.” I love this idea. Simone de Beauvoir felt similarly. “The housewife has caught duration in the snare of sugar, she has enclosed life in jars.” There are few fruits for which this is more true than the Seville orange, which you can find in the shops for a handful of weeks; the ability to pot and revisit that season six months down the line is its own breed of kitchen magic. Each jar tells the story of both the season and the maker. When I spoke to fellow judge Will Torrent about the nature of the marmalade awards, he found that this emotional quality seeped into the judging as well as making of the marmalade. ‘There will be a story that has led to that marmalade maker entering at that point. Food awards can sometimes become very serious. It becomes very technical, and yes there is a technical element to this, but at the same time — and I think this is the way I judge — it’s, ‘How does it make me feel?’ And it brings such joy, and it rubs off on everyone else.”But right now, since global lockdown, it’s more than that. There is something inherently optimistic about preservation, about putting something away for your future. You are saying, “I will be here in a year’s time, and so will this marmalade.” Making marmalade is a lot of effort, and by that token, it is a commitment. Marmalade is a tether to your own future, it’s a savings account. It is shoring yourself up against the instability and uncertainty of life. You do not make marmalade without a small optimism, a hope of orange-colored happiness in your future.Marmalade is something stable in an uncertain world. It has survived plagues and wars, fires and uprisings. I know that the marmalade I make today will still be there tomorrow. It doesn’t actually need a festival — it doesn’t even need supermarket sales. Marmalade has staying power. That is surely why the British love marmalade so much: because tomorrow everything will be different, but marmalade will be the same.***Olivia Potts is a food writer and chef. After a career as a criminal barrister, she retrained in patisserie at Le Cordon Bleu. Her first book, A Half Baked Idea: How grief, love and cake took me from the courtoom to Le Cordon Bleu won the Fortnum & Mason Debut Food Book Award and is published by Fig Tree, Penguin. She is the Guild of Food Writers Food Writer of the Year 2020***Fact checker: Julie Schwietert CollazoEditor: Krista Stevens
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
MeanjinThe Best of New Writing in AustraliaA building with a cross on top, what is that? It’s a gathering place where decent, wholesome people come together and they share values protected by that American flag. It could be said that that beautiful building flanked by those arches signifies more or less the same thing.—Ray Kroc, The Founder (2016)I can’t remember the first time I entered a McDonald’s. In the same way that I can’t remember my first Lego set, or exactly when the jingle for Lube Mobile was burned into my subconscious, it exists as a cultural behemoth hazily rooted in the mythology of Australian childhood like hot fries sticking out of a crisp chocolate sundae. On primary school playgrounds there was cultural capital in the ritual of it all, as we resented and revered the children who were granted regular passage, bearing the plastic talismans to show for it. As we grew older, wired afternoons after school, drunken evenings and all-nighters were powered by the comfort of a well-known mouthful, and the promise of fats fantastical and familiar.A bad habit after a long day over the years transforms into tradition, of Friday night Happy Meals with their tissue-paper pocket of fries and injection-moulded treasures, the adored sticky surfaces and sloppy ice-cream cake of a McDonald’s PlayPlace party, or the highway rest areas and bypasses where one found respite, recognisable flavours, and two curved, blonde arches like a beacon guiding you to safety no matter how far from home one strayed.My own childhood remains punctuated by these visits, the McDonald’s outing a necessity on the first evening of my and my sibling’s fortnightly visits to our grand-parents, their reluctant two plain hamburgers and a shared black coffee an endured kindness that enabled our longing for food that tasted like we imagined love felt. We stood on our toes to see above the counter, deliberating between indulging our craving of crisp, cadmium-yellow Chicken McNuggets or the coalition of a Cheeseburger’s plastic cheese, single pickle and modest ketchup smear, a union as perfect as if it were sanctioned under the eyes of God himself.As we grew older and our tastes matured, it’s as if the brand reflected this back to us. The iridescent cheese betwixt the hilled bosom of bread still sat centre stage, but they were now flanked by a range of health-conscious options. The introduction of a salad range turned the first sod of topsoil onto what would eventually be buried by the success of McCafés, their IKEA-accent, exposed-beam chic and carefree, casual ads sheltering you from the incandescent glow of your burger-shaped reality: the size of your fist and with enough calories to last you 27 hours.And yet as our lives shifted and the company changed, there remained one constant, a figure around which the McUniverse would continue to spin. From his humble beginning in 1963, Ronald McDonald ascended to a throne no-one believed possible, first mate and figurehead of a ship traversing global waters with unsinkable aplomb, juggling his roles as chief happiness officer of a multinational, magical patriarch of McDonaldsland, and a friend to anyone in need of a sandwich and a smile.I remember several of Ronald’s incarnations fondly, in particular the grinning magician of Saturday morning cartoon advertisements. As I grew up glued to the children’s TV shows my grandparents had fastidiously taped since my birth, I got to experience almost a decade of Ronald’s on-screen life compressed into single weekends away; ever-changing and yet always the same.So it came out of the lustrous blue when, in December of 2017, McDonald’s announced that Ronald was being retired for good. The decision circled quickly, spelling the end of more than 50 years of magic as clowns around the world were told they had mere months to hand in their uniforms. Maybe history caught up with him, a legacy hire from the age of company men and careers embarked upon for life, maybe you just sell enough hamburgers and all you can smell is the bullshit.Except, Ronald was never real. Despite being one of the most recognised mascots, if not figures, in the world, Ronald McDonald has only ever been a fictional mouthpiece. A global ensemble of masked men brought this figment of a Merry Andrew to life. Once stripped of the plug in a carefully constructed facade, he could only leak hot air; no more human than the likes of KFC’s Colonel, Uncle Ben, or Tony Abbott. And yet Ronald’s retirement didn’t occur in a vacuum.For a company whose every PR move is focus-grouped to the inch, and whose kitchens are designed to the millimetre, to bury a body with shoes as big as his had to have been a strategic decision years in the making. The age of Ronald McDonald could be considered capitalism’s golden era,[1] so what does his disappearance mean for not only McDonald’s, but brands around the world? Where can we go from here?We’re quick to point a finger at a moment in fast food where everything changed, but the reality is that for a company that banks on consistency, McDonald’s’ success is found in its ability to constantly change. From the A/B testing in 1962 of a pescatarian option to attract Cincinnati customers during Lent that led to the Filet-O-Fish,[2] to the trial and success of McCafé in an early-nineties Melbourne, the key to McDonald’s’ global domination has been in response to a culture that, despite their best intentions, remains stubbornly larger.One can chart this continual convergence with shifting norms through a globally changing menu, selling Teriyaki beef to Japanese customers,[3] doughnuts to Germans, and even creating an entirely beef- and pork-free experience in India,[4] and yet maintaining the illusion of a global homogeneity. McDonald’s went to great lengths to develop a brand identity as uniform as it was globally accessible, like pulling a string of red and yellow prayer flags from up their sleeve.Mary-Angie Salvá-Ramírez writes that the ‘renowned golden arches of McDonald’s symbolize a corporation that achieves uniformity and allegiance to an operating regimen without sacrificing the strengths of American individualism and diversity’.[5] Their most successful slogan, ‘I’m lovin’ it’, speaks to this, invoking the simultaneously individual and universal emotion of love and tying it directly to us as the subject. Salvá-Ramírez remarks on this sleight of hand, noting that ‘McDonald’s manages to mix conformity with creativity’. Like casting a spell, McDonald’s retains an international veneer of uniformity—if we are all lovin’ it, there must be a coherent it for us to love.This narrative weaving became the primary role of Ronald, a clown fundamentally created to sell junk food to children and going on to break down the line between fiction and fact, his painted face promising to bypass the uncanny valley entirely.[6] Not alone in his task, he was joined by a cast including fan favourites Grimace, The Hamburglar, and Birdie the Early Bird, but also The Happy Meal Gang, Mayor McCheese, Fry Kids, The Professor, Vulture and a character literally named ‘Iam Hungry’.[7] For nearly 40 years this cast padded out McDonald’s’ worldwide ad campaigns, most famously in the fictional utopia McDonaldsland, and yet no-one quite worked magic like the king clown himself.Unlike the denizens of greater McDonalds-land, and indeed the messy world of food mascots at large, Ronald’s position as salesperson, clown and (debatably) man, placed him in a league of his own. When Ruth Shalit talked to Anh Nguyen of General Mills about the Honey Nut Cheerios Bee, he revealed ‘he’s not a salesman who tries to sell you the product. He’s more like your best friend. A friend who interacts with you to try the product.’[8] But with Ronald also holding a position of corporate authority, we are expected not only to know and love him, but also to trust him. It’s in this halfway state, simultaneously not human but more than just a corporate cipher that Ronald’s true power is recognised.While talking to these bizarre PR hacks, Shalit finally manages to track down someone who had once worked on Ronald’s portfolio, who I’ll remind you is talking about a fictional character. She writes:I asked the spokesman if he could at least describe to me what he considered to be Ronald’s true nature. ‘We’re on background, right?’ he said. ‘Because I’d be more comfortable doing this on a background basis.’ When I assured him we were, there was a long pause. ‘OK,’ the spokesman finally said, his voice dropping to a whisper. ‘He is kids’ fun magical friend.’[9]And yet this not so secret inclination hides the harsher reality, that his role is as much one of missionary as it is companion to the unwashed masses, spreading the good imperial values of clean eating and clean living in the name of America. McDonald’s serves as a far more successful export than pure politics, going so far as to outnumber patrons to Lenin’s tomb upon first opening in Moscow, and now drawing in customers in over 120 countries. What we might consider as the background radiation of our modern lives—those golden arches a fixture perhaps of our work lunches, road trips and regrettable late night-decisions—has become positioned as a sacred ritual around the world.Anthropologist Conrad P. Kottak wrote in the 1970s of the ‘temporary subordination of individual differences’ that occurred in the fast-growing restaurant chain, breaking ground alongside council chambers, courthouses and churches across American heartlands. ‘By eating at McDonald’s’ he writes, ‘not only do we communicate that we are hungry, enjoy hamburgers, and have inexpensive tastes but also that we are willing to adhere to a value system and a series of behaviours dictated by an exterior entity’,[10] chiefly the United States. As the world has changed since, however, and flags and crosses have increasingly gone out of fashion, arches remain in place across the landscape, giving no sign of going anywhere.There is a particular power in selling hyperreality, as Russell W. Belk describes it, ‘a sanitized version of reality, cleansed of strife, world problems, dirt, prejudice, exploitation, or other problems of everyday life’.[11] While most visible in the foam latex and paint-fume fever dream of a McDonaldsland commercial, we too see it at work in restaurants around the world; the foreign-familiar of ritualised food practices exported on a global scale. Thomas L. Friedman teased out a golden arches theory in 1996,[12] claiming that no two countries with a McDonald’s had waged war against one another since doing so, but Belk takes the idea like a bag from a bank and runs with it, writing that ‘with Ronald McDonald leading the way, multinational consumer goods corporations are now breaking down international barriers that have withstood armies, missionaries, crusaders, and politicians of the past’.[13]However, while Ronald’s unique positioning as a leader is significant, it is not more so than his role as a clown. It’s through this unique place of overlapping authority and jester-dom that we might begin to understand why the world no longer has room for Ronald. As David M. Boje and Carl Rhodes write, ‘although he is orchestrated by the corporation to deliver a corporate message, he can also mock and criticize McDonald’s itself’.[14]This function they refer to as double narration, and explain it as ‘how when an author (the corporation) represents the words of a character (Ronald) what that character says is never under the full control of the author’. This stems in particular from the reality that Ronald was always multiple figures, in multiple countries, speaking 25 languages,[15] as much a cultural ambassador as he was cartoon character. The ability to control such a figure grew increasingly limited the wider McDonald’s’ reach extended, and a one-size-fits-all cog has no room in a meticulous behemoth.Whereas mascots have become increasingly popular for brands due to their ability to be curated and controlled—Kevin Lane Keller, professor of marketing at Dartmouth College’s Tuck School of Business, notes that ‘companies are turning to fictitious spokespeople because the real ones are getting thrown in jail’[16]—Ronald found a way out from under the crushing weight of binders of trade secrets, full to bursting with exactly how he meant to speak, act and think, and yet failing to predict this shift.Maybe it was inevitable. Throughout history, clowns have spun plates on the knife edge of power, and have remained both aware of and beyond the pull of it. Though to look at this figure now is to place him in a peerless category. When we start at the recent Ronald and draw a line back through the greasepaint of history, it is straighter than one might expect.While the sad man with the painted smile is no longer an object of curiosity, far more likely to attract parody or subversion in the horrific or haunted, or simply to be pawned off as cliché in bad Batman reboots, this wasn’t always the case. The lineage of clowns extends back through time, the role consistently one of subverting expectation for comedic turn or alarming effect, the gaudy adornment going a long way to inform us that not everything will be as it seems. To see Ronald today is to see him stand alone, but that he exists at all is solely on the shoulders of one of the greatest performers to have lived: the great clown Joseph Grimaldi.Until the nineteenth century, clowns formed a largely diverse brethren, a ‘harmless, sentimental’[17] cohort loosely grouped by conduct, but Grimaldi changed everything. Born in London to a dysfunctional family of dancers and harlequins, Grimaldi was groomed practically from birth to be a performer, receiving praise in the press for his turns and tumbles at six years of age.As he worked on and off stage in a number of London theatres, recognition of his natural ability grew, coming to a head in 1800 in a play by Charles Dibdin that required he wear a ‘garishly colourful’[18] outfit, an attire quickly copied throughout the city. Victorian journalist Andrew Halliday wrote of Grimaldi’s new costume, and its function in his appearance as a ‘great lubberly loutish boy, irrevocably altering the clown’s persona from an identifiable (though outdated) servant into some kind of temporally nonspecific man-child he called “Joey”’. In his article on the period, ‘Clowns on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown’, Andrew Stott writes:Grimaldi oversaw the transition from the red-haired ‘rustic booby’ that had remained more or less unaltered since its popularization by Richard Tarlton in the sixteenth century to the heavily made-up and colorfully attired clowns that we are familiar with today.[19]Unlike clowns preceding him, Grimaldi transformed every inch of himself, from the white foundation covering his face, neck and hands, to a wide red-painted mouth and vaulted brows, leaving no part of his body unadorned. Stott writes of this new creation, and how it ‘implied a much stricter division between character and performer than had been presented before. Grimaldi was literally subsumed … and subsequently, “Joey” and “Grimaldi” came to be perceived as distinct entities, even opposites engaged in a battling but reciprocal relationship.’Central to this metamorphosis is that his off-stage predilections and character were as present in the tellings of his life as his performance-derived persona, ‘[affording] him a legitimacy that was otherwise denied by his profession’. That he could be present on stage for a courageous feat or a ‘Grimaldi’s leap’ (‘any manoeuvre, literal or conceptual, performed at great personal risk’) only furthered the fascination with the tortured and moribund man who performed them, fans flipping between the arts section and the tabloids, equally entertained by both.It’s in this ‘branded identity’ of two distinct entities that we find the modern clown’s home, successful due to being ‘easily recognizable in the crowded marketplace, continually developing to offer new satisfactions but remaining reassuringly familiar’. Stott writes, ‘With the clown’s “slap” as a constant reminder of self-division, Grimaldi’s carefully calibrated economy of pleasure and pain becomes not only the defining feature of his career but also the mysterious source of his talent.’Grimaldi pioneered a modern form of clowning that continues to this day, and yet Ronald bucks the trend once more. Unlike Grimaldi’s Joey and his persisting brotherhood, to peel the mask off this corporate cipher reveals no inner workings or personhood, only a careful Chinese Room of jargon and frying oil. While he cashes in on the legitimacy that a painted face affords, implying its grease-free counterpart by default, we know that he is an artifice and respond accordingly.Many factors led to the modern coulrophobic turn: the increasing use of clowns as fictional figures of horror and perversity, the public favour slowly shifting away from the anonymous performer, let alone a couple of midnight sightings of creepy clowns across the United States a few years back not helping their cultural cachet one bit. But it many ways it came down to trust. There was a time in which it felt like magic for a clown to pull a coin from behind your ear, but these days it just feels like you’re being shown a dollar menu.That Ronald was to be retired came as a surprise, but lobby groups had been openly calling for the dismissal for the better part of a decade. McDonald’s CEOs stepped in each time the campaign raised its voice, including in 2014 when Don Thompson defended Ronald against claims that he encouraged unhealthy eating for children, and instead ‘only spreads joy and smiles’.[20]And yet we now know this isn’t strictly true. McDonald’s has always implemented a degree of positive spin, with no example more emblematic than painting Stella Liebeck’s ‘hot coffee’ lawsuit in the early 1990s as the number one scapegoat of legal frivolity, carefully brushing over the fact that her compensation was commensurate with having suffered third-degree burns over 16 per cent of her body,[21] which required two years of recovery after the incident.Several years prior to that case the company had suffered another legal defeat. In a lawsuit dubbed the McLibel case, McDonald’s poured millions of pounds into prosecuting the distribution of a small 1986 leaflet on the grounds of misinformation.[22] The leaflet, titled ‘What’s Wrong with McDonald’s’, claimed a range of workers’ rights and animal-health violations, alongside broader claims of mass deforestation and economic imperialism.Much to the embarrassment of McDonald’s, while the defence was found liable for overstating several claims, the judge found some of the factsheet to be accurate, including that McDonald’s endangered the health of their workers and customers by ‘misleading advertising’, they ‘exploit children’, they were ‘culpably responsible’ in the infliction of unnecessary cruelty to animals, they were ‘antipathetic’ to unionisation and they paid their workers low wages: not exactly the carefree visage they had hoped to cultivate.As much as the company tried to bury the ruling, a growing environmental movement and a shifting public perception of the powers of advertising would go on to have the findings reflected in legislation. In 2008 Britain legislated a ban on selling food ‘high in fat, salt, and sugar’ to kids,[23] with Australia introducing its own voluntary codes just a year later, aiming to reduce the targeting of junk-food advertising at children. While these have hardly changed since, a shift in public consciousness towards how brands interact with children had begun.It’s no coincidence that this period coincided with the slow demolition of McDonaldsland. Like an old growth forest cleared to run cattle, as the cast of characters were mulched and recycled to make room for McDonald’s’ new ‘eco-savvy’ era, maybe it was just easiest to throw the big guy out with the bathwater. Ronald could never entirely take the fall for the company’s misdeeds, but maybe his image no longer haunting the halls of Hamburger University would at least show they were taking the critique seriously; Ronald’s disappearance serving as one last Grimaldi’s leap.As our communal tastes have changed from the days of plastic cheese and packet-mix milkshakes, so have our appetites for how they are sold to us. Once the love-language of a brand to its audience, the place of a modern mascot has never been less sure-footed. Brands of today no longer hope to speak to us through an external force, as our friends and companions, but instead directly to us, bypassing the need for an interpreter or idol entirely.Our interactions with companies today aren’t just a search for a product, but a method and ideal of living as well; only money stands in the way of being granted access to a mode of being. We can see this constant wrangling in the many calculated moves that brands now take, from KFC sending the colonel to DJ at a popular Miami music festival,[24] or giving a sandwich brand an anime wife,[25] or rebranding semi-fictional rice farmer Uncle Ben from complicated racial stereotype to ‘empowered’ black CEO.[26]As brands try to become a part of our internal lives and thought processes, sweeping their sins under the sticky carpet in the process, they break down the screen of artifice that separates us from them, consumer from consumable.There’s a hyper-distillation of this occurring on Twitter, as companies vie for the cred or clapback that could land them on your timeline, laughing and pressing that MF retweet button as underpaid interns write on-trend copy and hamburger brands start beef. As companies become indistinguishable from their handles and PR snark, we develop favourites, fandoms, and god-forsaken reams of furry art, and yet none of this escapes the control of corporate intent. Behind each of these witticisms and woke brands are a team of people holding multi-level strategy meetings to determine which emoji might best establish their laissez-faire market dominance; meanwhile, our interest wanes in the wake of it all.McDonald’s is no stranger to this online whirlwind, announcing the introduction of their wide-eyed, unflinchingly carnal mascot Happy to English-speaking customers via a tweet that provoked outrage, as commentators and columnists filled inches on every aspect of a single image, becoming something that whether you loved or hated, you had an opinion on and therefore paid attention to.As native content became king overnight, Ronald woke up to a world with no room for him. His gradual access to the power of double narration meant he could escape what McDonald’s required of him, slowly, carefully; taking on the simulacrum of a life. In this new age of the ad, McDonald’s could no longer tolerate a spokesperson that in any way existed apart from them, and this was the beginning of the end for him.Increasingly, it’s a visible function of globalised capitalism that Ronald can only be a paradox. As brands want to find their way from an external entity we engage with to a part of how we view ourselves and our identities, there is no longer room for a single character or voice. We are asked to write the script and star in the ad that is our lives, making sure to tag, like, comment and subscribe, bringing the hyperreality into our cars, living rooms and mealtimes of our own accord. Boje and Rhodes practically eulogise him in their article, writing ‘Ronald has played a game of leadership that refocused the linguistic and symbolic reality of McDonald’s’,[27] and in true neoliberal style, he performed himself out of a job.As founder Ray Kroc flew across the American Midwest, searching for the perfect crossroads and hill crests to place his ever-expanding restaurant empire, he left no stone unmeasured in the physical foundations of brick-and-mortar kitchens, but without knowing, maybe McDonaldsland’s roots were damned from the start, rotting under the concrete and linoleum surface all along.Where once talking hamburgers, smiling faces and a stranger in a clown suit might have been enough to convince us there was magic to it all, the spark has since faded. Seeing an ensemble of singing foam-latex Chicken McNuggets only serving to remind us of the unreality of what we are actually eating, just as seeing the friendly face of Ronald reminds us of the real clowns he can only ever be a faded facsimile of.I can’t remember the first time I set foot in a McDonald’s, and I can’t remember the last time I found myself in one, either. Despite the occasional pang of nostalgia, of food only made edible by memory, nothing has tempted me back there as an adult. Yet, I wonder how this will change if I have children of my own; the pure, satisfying burn of hot fries on barely formed tastebuds, of Baked Apple Pies and Thickshakes, of going through the drive-thru after dark in the back seat and feeling like the whole world could one day be yours.Grace Dent, writing on the way that processed food and class intersect, asks this question of herself and ponders the joy of being able to reward her niece with fast food. She muses, ‘I do not want her to grow up eating McDonald’s. But, at the same time, I grew up being rewarded with McDonald’s and remember those moments as pure happiness.’[28] This memory, this golden glowed look to the past is how I view Ronald too.Unlike the pastors and engagement officers of other faiths and foodstuffs, Ronald never needed to pretend coolness; he was only required to be the dag with a fresh bag of fries spreading the good word. And yet where religious leaders openly promote themselves as the leaky vessels of their lord’s work, Ronald was presented as your pal, all the while a literal conduit from corporation to consumer, breaking Filet-O-Fish for the gathered, smiling as the collection basket made its way around. Maybe no metaphor is more apt than the hundreds, perhaps thousands, of Ronalds handing in their costumes, out of work, found face down in the water as the marketing sails pick up new winds.I think Ronald was on the way out well before anyone could admit it was happening, a character so beholden to the bacchanal orgy of symbolism that clowns now evoke that he grew inseparable from the balloon-laden suburban nightstalker or the haunting id of It. I think at his peak Ronald represented the world’s most famous act of artifice; a friendly facade, but a facade none the less, and we now live in a world that is only interested in the real. I think that Ronald just got old, the corollary of a capitalist success story.Just as there is no beef burger without the felled tree, the chemical runoff or the stagnant minimum wage, time too has its natural by-products. Still, it feels like Ronald McDonald deserves a more honest eulogy than this, not just of wiping the slate clean for a new day’s specials, of a burdensome silence into the sweet and sour night, but maybe this is part of the master plan.As we hunger for something more authentic, more organic, more real, perhaps Ronald is best left buried, a product to project our nostalgia upon, to salivate over not the Cheeseburger, but the memory of the Cheeseburger we ate as a child, and the clown that took a bite before offering it to us like it held the secret of knowledge itself. Maybe not, and the day has set on our hero. A clown fades from history and we continue on nescient, the only headstone a pair of yellow arches on the dark horizon. • Liz Duck-Chong is a freelance writer, researcher, filmmaker and sexual health advocate whose work has been published widely. You can find her online at @lizduckchong.[1]      Pantone PMS 123 C.[2]      One rejected idea was the Hulaburger, a slab of grilled pineapple in a bun.[3]      See <https://awol.junkee.com/McDonald’s-menu-international-variation/68802>.[4]      See <https://www.bbc.com/news/business-30115555>.[5]      Mary-Angie Salvá-Ramírez, ‘McDonald’s: A prime example of corporate culture’, Public Relations Quarterly, vol. 40, no. 4 (Winter 1995) p. 30.[6]      The closer to real a humanoid object/face appears, without reaching reality, the more uncomfortable we become.[7]      See <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BoUhhArHtUg>.[8]      Ruth Shalit, ‘The Mr. Peanut chronicles’, Salon, 24 March 2000, <https://www.salon.com/2000/03/24/doughboy2/>.[9]      Ruth Shalit, ‘The inner Doughboy’, Salon, 23 March 2000, <https://www.salon.com/2000/03/23/doughboy/>.[10]    Conrad P. Kottak, ‘Rituals at McDonald’s’, Journal of American Culture, vol 1, no. 2 (Summer 1978) pp. 370–376. <https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1542-734X.1978.0102_370.x>.[11]    Russell W. Belk, ‘Hyperreality and Globalisation: Culture in the age of Ronald McDonald’, Journal of International Consumer Marketing, vol. 8, no. 3 (January 1996) pp. 23–37.[12]    Thomas L. Friedman, ‘Foreign Affairs Big Mac I’, The New York Times, Dec. 8, 1996 <https://www.nytimes.com/1996/12/08/opinion/foreign-affairs-big-mac-i.html>.[13]    Belk, ‘Hyperreality and Globalization’.[14]    David M. Boje and Carl Rhodes, ‘The leadership of Ronald McDonald: Double narration and stylistic lines of transformation’, Leadership Quarterly, vol. 17. no. 1 (February 2006) pp. 94–103.[15]    Shalit, ‘The Mr. Peanut chronicles’.[16]    Shalit, ‘The inner Doughboy’.[17]    Andrew Stott, ‘Clowns on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown: Dickens, Coulrophobia, and the Memoirs of Joseph Grimaldi’, Journal for Early Modern Cultural Studies, vol. 12, no. 4 (Fall 2012) pp. 3–25.[18]    Stott, ‘Clowns on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown’.[19]    Stott, ‘Clowns on the Verge of a Nervous Breakdown’.[20]    ‘Clowning with kids health’, Corporate Accountability, (November 2017) <https://www.corporateaccountability.org/resources/case-ronald-mcdonalds-retirement/clowning-with-kids-health/>[21]    See <https://www.treehugger.com/corporate-responsibility/truth-behind-McDonald’s-hot-coffee-lawsuit.html>.[22]    Distributed by London Greenpeace, no relation to Greenpeace. Find the full leaflet at <http://www.mcspotlight.org/case/factsheet.html>.[23]    See <https://www.businessinsider.com.au/McDonald’s-told-to-change-ads-by-childrens-advertising-review-unit-2015-5?r=US&IR=T>.[24]    See <https://www.thedrum.com/news/2019/04/01/kfcs-colonel-sanders-plays-live-dj-set-unusual-ultra-music-festival-sponsorship>.[25]    See <https://news.avclub.com/the-arbys-waifu-is-here-and-were-in-hell-1833166317>.[26]    See <https://www.nytimes.com/2007/03/30/business/media/30adco.html>.[27]    Boje and Rhodes, ‘The leadership of Ronald McDonald’.[28]    Grace Dent, ‘The processed food debate is delicious, MSG-sprinkled class war’, The Guardian, 2 June 2018, <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2018/jun/02/grace-dent-processed-food-delicious-msg-sprinkled-class-war>Site by Madeleine EganThe best way is to begin with the orange. The Washington navel. Put your thumb into the bellybutton and slide. The dimpled peel, the velvet white veins soft and webby when you lift them off the fruit, and then the segments in your palm. Burst of juice, the slivers shiny as jewels.The Inland Empire -- far-flung land of Riverside and San Bernardino Counties -- begins with the orange. Riverside, Colton, Rialto, Fontana, San Manuel, Rancho Cucamonga, Corona and Hemet and San Jacinto, all the way to Temecula, Murrieta, Pala and Pechanga. I can't name them all here -- not yet. But I want to begin these dispatches from my native land with the orange, because it's good to remember how we began here and how we can survive another hard time.Not just in the Inland Empire, but in Los Angeles and Orange Counties, in the San Fernando Valley and the High Desert, people planted trees in their yards when they got here back in the 1880s and the 1920s and the 1950s. Tangerine and lemon and avocado, loquat and persimmon and nectarine. That was part of the promise -- a bounty of fruit in every yard, and leaning over the fence to share it with whoever had just bought the house next to you, wherever they had just come from.When people made fun of Southern California, I always defended our forests primeval. Not Europe's wolf-haunted fairy tale woods, or the great forests of America -- Appalachia and Adirondack. We had tumbleweeds and chaparral, pine forests in the mountains, cottonwoods along the rivers, and then the surreal trees of the true desert -- Joshua trees like frightened clowns and smoke trees like ghostly exhalations.In Marcel Pagnol's novel, "Jean de Florette," an old farmer tells his son that when they acquire the acreage he wants, they will plant a magnificent orchard of fig, plum, peach, almond -- "a thousand trees in twenty lines ten meters apart ... it will be as beautiful as a church, and a peasant won't enter it without making the sign of the cross."Our non-native woods were paradise. In spring, white blossoms like millions of stars fall in perfumed drifts. In summer, we dangled our feet in the canals where water grass waved at the bottom of the silent currents. Water cascaded from the cement irrigation pumps into the furrows between trees, like silver ribbons in the heat.Eliza Tibbets started the first two seedling navel orange trees. A statue of her was recently unveiled in downtown Riverside, and it seems a fitting time to remind ourselves of the woman who transformed California's landscape, not just with daring but with generosity. (I still drive past the Parent Navel Orange Trees, at the corner of Arlington and Magnolia Avenues, every week.) She was married three times, an abolitionist (her third husband, Mr. Tibbets, campaigned as a "Radical Republican" who tried integration in Virginia), a suffragist who tried to vote in 1871, a spiritualist who led séances in Riverside when she got here. But in 1873, she sent to Washington's new Bureau of Agriculture for the first two seedling trees of a new variety of seedless oranges from Bahia, Brazil, and planted them in her yard in Riverside. She kept them alive with dishwater, shared the fruit and more cuttings, and changed the economy and the very look of Southern California. (Neither she, born in Cincinnati, or the seedlings, were natives.)By 1886, entire towns like Rialto, Bloomington, Corona and Redlands were laid out around groves of Washington navel orange trees. Packing houses for Sunkist Growers and other cooperatives were built, the Santa Fe Railroad took boxcars full of fruit all over the nation, and oranges were shipped around the world. By 1895, Riverside had the highest per capita income in America, thanks to the citrus industry.The faces of Southern California changed with citrus, too.  Chinese laborers, Italians and Mexicans and Japanese and African-American southerners, Dust Bowl refugees from Oklahoma and Texas and Colorado -- all picked and packed and trucked oranges.  I grew up with their kids.My own mother came here from Switzerland.  Her father had left the Alps for Canada, which didn't work, and then Florida, which was worse. He'd seen iconic postcards of orange groves laid out like geometric treasure under snow-capped lavender mountains.  He settled his family in Fontana. I grew up at the edges of a neighborhood called Highgrove, where citrus had been planted early in the century.  My mother, for whom a single orange had been a Christmas gift during World War II in Switzerland, never lost her reverence for the navel. Every morning she laid segments of peeled orange beside our oatmeal.  They were truly part of a golden dream. The Inland Empire has made recent headlines not for highest per capita income, but for the fastest-growing population, for high unemployment and home foreclosures, and child hunger. But our legacy of fruit, and Eliza Tibbets, could be how we'll survive what might be called years from now The Great Recession. We could go into the yard, where someone years ago planted a tree:  Washington navel or Valencia orange, Meyer lemon with its sweet mellow flavor, seedless tangerine that falls into segments like small dimples in the palm of your hand, dark Brown Turkey or green Mission fig, golden loquat or Blenheim apricot, like the eighty-year-old tree in my own backyard.  It's the earliest tree anywhere around here, the deep-hued fruit ripening the first week of June, and for twenty-three years I've delivered bags of apricots to my friends and neighbors and family.  My friend Kari brings me tangerines in December, my neighbors Kim and Rafael climb to pick hundreds of long, green thin-skinned Fuerte avocados and hand them over the fence (four crops a year!), and Sherril brings lemons from across the street.And every winter, Faye and Gurdon Merchant leave five or six brown grocery bags full of the sweetest Washington navels on my front porch.  No note necessary.  I met them twenty-two years ago, when their son was in my class at Riverside City College, and they have been kind to me since.  Both born in Riverside Community Hospital, they went to the same junior high and high school as my daughters attended, and many of my neighbors.Six bags - I'm always grateful, since they ship oranges all over the country. I divide the harvest into smaller portions and deliver them all over Riverside - subcontractor to the Merchants' generosity.  I have friends and family who've never met the Merchants, but they look forward to those oranges -- the sweetest, most juicy navels they have ever tasted. They keep us going all winter.In old neighborhoods like mine, this has been the way forever. But in the new gated communities and just-born suburbs, let's hope everyone plants a lemon or tangerine tree. James M. Cain's "Mildred Pierce" begins with Burt Pierce trimming and watering his avocado tree at their new tract house in Glendale. And when Walter Mosley's iconic Easy Rawlins buys a house in South Los Angeles in the 1940s, the first thing he does is plant a lemon tree in the front yard.Mildred Pierce survives after her husband leaves with the help of her neighbor, who brings a stewed chicken.  Mildred repays her with pie. Last month, I left a box on the dirt by the Merchants' gate.   Tomatoes, zucchini, corn, and strawberries from my yard. The Merchants came out to visit, and we stood a few feet from a shallow cement ditch that runs along their property and toward the Santa Ana River.  It's the last original private irrigation channel in the city, they told me.The groves are nearly gone now, housing tracts named for what they've erased. Where there were hundreds of trees and one house on ten acres, there are forty houses and maybe forty trees. But there can still be oranges.When I was a child, we sat in the groves, digging off peel with grimy thumbnails. Our parents were right. The orange was a marvel. Inside the velvet rind, the segments were a thousand shards of glisten and juice.Send us a comment - what's growing in your yard, who do you share it with, and where are you from?Public Media Group of Southern California is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.Tax ID: 95-2211661FCC Public Inspection File | Privacy Policy |Terms of Use© 2021 - Public Media Group of Southern CaliforniaWe’re huge fans of Katy Kelleher’s writing on color. She recently wrote a spot-on piece for Vogue about Pantone’s odd “color of the year” choices. (Spoiler: a drab gray, paired with a pale yellow.)Over at the Paris Review, she does in-depth profiles of color as part of a column named — get this — “Hue’s Hue.” We’ve shared a few of these nerdy delights as editor’s picks in the past; we especially loved recent ruminations on periwinkle, russet, and verdigris. The entire series is worth your time.Periwinkle goes by many names. You might know her by one of her more fabulous monikers, like sorcerer’s violet or fairy’s paintbrush. In Italy, she is called fiore di morte (flower of death), because it was common to lay wreaths of the evergreen on the graves of dead children. The flower is sometimes associated with marriage (and may have been the “something blue” in the traditional wedding rhyme), sometimes associated with sex work (because of its supposed aphrodisiac properties) and also with executions. I grew up calling her vinca, a pretty little two-syllable name, taken from her proper Latin binomial, Vinca minor. My mother cultivated periwinkle in our forested Massachusetts backyard, encouraging the hardy green vines to trail over the boulders and under the ferns. I would have been delighted to know even a fraction of vinca lore back then, but I knew nothing except she was poison. I could eat the royal-purple dog violets, but I was not to pick the vinca. Vinca was poison and poison meant death.Mary Stuart was six days old when she became the Queen of Scotland. Her precious body was guarded from that moment onward, moved like a pawn on a chessboard from one castle to another. Maybe the people would have loved her if she hadn’t been spirited away to be raised in France in 1548, but perhaps they wouldn’t have. Maybe Mary was doomed to always be loathed for her femaleness and her Catholicism. By the time she returned to the newly Protestant Scotland at age eighteen, she had spent over a decade in the French court, developing a taste for elaborate gowns and flashy jewels. She was tall and graceful, beautiful according to some accounts, but this didn’t endear her to the common people. While Mary was strutting around in fine lace and velvet and elaborate lockets, her people were told that God wanted them in chaste, sober clothes. Embroidery was deemed “unseemly” as were “light and variant hues in clothing, as red, blue, yellow and such like, which declare the lightness of mind.” Instead, the Scots were told to wear simple fabrics in “grave colour,” such as “black, russet, sad grey, or sad brown.”This depressing list comes from a summary of the 1575 General Assembly of the Kirk, recorded in the Domestic Annals of Scotland. Although the upper classes continued to wear silks and velvets and pretty bright dresses, most people wore their sad rags. It was more practical, to be dressed in dark gray and black and brown. Life for the lower classes was hard. The clothing reflected this fact.And yet, thrown in with those drab colors was russet. In this context, russet was both a general chromatic descriptor and a specific type of rough spun cloth, colored with a mixture of woad (a member of the cabbage family that was used to make a blue-gray dye) and madder (a similarly yellow-flowered herb whose roots could be turned into a pinkish-brown dye). Russet wasn’t a bright color, but it was at least more cheerful than “sad grey,” it had a bit more life than black. While Mary, Queen of Scots reportedly wore vivid scarlet under her black mourning clothes, her people dressed like dead leaves and gray stones. At their most vibrant, they could wear the color of rust, of dirty root vegetables, of aging fox fur.Verdigris is the ur-turquoise. The name comes an Old French term, vert-de-Grèce (“green of Greece”). It is also sometimes known as “copper green” or “earth green,” since the pigment was commonly made from ground-up malachite or oxidized copper deposits. Certainly, verdigris owes a great debt to copper (symbol: Cu), as do the gemstones turquoise (chemical composition: CuAl6(PO4)4(OH)8·4H2O) and malachite (chemical composition: Cu2CO3(OH)2). In America, we’re more likely to call these green-blue shades turquoise (from the Old French for Turkish, or “from-Turkey”) or Tiffany Blue (coined in 1845 with the publication of the Tiffany’s Blue Book catalogue and trademarked in 1998) than we are to invoke old-timey verdigris. Yet I prefer the odd old name, with its vivid consonants and slithery tail. The word sounds unstable, fittingly fluid for such a liquid hue.Read the column
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
Here’s a selection of profiles that resonated with us this year. If you like these, you can sign up to receive our weekly Top 5 email every Friday.* * *At GQ, Mosi Secret offers a moving portrait of Joe Louis Cole, Larry Barbine, Rev. Joey Crutcher, Selwyn Jones, Jacob Blake III, and Michael Brown Sr., who are the fathers and father figures of Michael Brown, Terence Crutcher, Daniel Prude, Rayshard Brooks, George Floyd, and Jacob Blake — all Black men who were killed by police brutality.Their lives were transformed by the worst kind of news, a blow that left everything that followed so suddenly and painfully different. Not only have they suffered the abrupt and traumatic loss of their loved ones, but often just hours after being stunned by tragedy, they grieve before news cameras. They are transformed from ordinary people into symbols of this country’s injustice, symbols onto which so much meaning other than their own is projected. How easily could that parent have been me, grieving my child, the thinking goes. And yet these fathers endure such moments in uneasy juxtaposition with the mythical assumption that they don’t even exist.These fathers and father figures, in just being present, fight against a myth of the absent Black father, one that began in 1965, when “Daniel Patrick Moynihan, then an assistant secretary of labor, delivered a report to the Johnson White House, The Negro Family: The Case for National Action, arguing that the plight of Black American communities was in decline due to a simple factor: the crumbling of the family unit and, in particular, children being raised in fatherless homes.” What Moynihan’s report failed to convey was the way in which social structures meant to assist actually penalized the nuclear Black family.Just weeks after the study’s release, riots broke out across the Watts neighborhood in Los Angeles and critics latched onto the report to blame the ensuing violence on what Moynihan called “the deterioration of the Negro family.” The number of fatherless families, Black and otherwise, would rapidly grow in the following decades—a trend partly driven by the nation’s primary welfare program, in which for a period some states considered families ineligible for benefits if an adult male was a member of the household. The legacy of that policy and Moynihan’s report continues, and the notion of troubled, fatherless Black men has resurfaced after each national reckoning with racial injustice, including in the aftermath of George Floyd’s killing.“John Scalzi, the former president of the Science Fiction & Fantasy Writers of America, heralded Jemisin as ‘arguably the most important speculative writer of her generation.’” (Edit, mine.) Jemisin’s fiction is imaginative, original, and immersive and I’ll just say it: I’m an unabashed fangirl.In this portrait by Raffi Khatchadourian at The New Yorker, we learn about the personal dreamscapes that inspire Jemisin’s fiction and the critical influence that Noah, her artist father, had on her development as a writer. We get a glimpse into the systemic racism Jemisin has experienced in her career and into some fantastic writing that offers hope amid the chaos of a failed civilization.Accepting her third Hugo, Jemisin stood at the lectern, with the rocket-shaped award beside her, and declared, “This is the year in which I get to smile at all of those naysayers, every single mediocre, insecure wannabe who fixes their mouth to suggest that I do not belong on this stage, that people like me could not possibly have earned such an honor, and that when they win it’s ‘meritocracy,’ but when we win it’s ‘identity politics.’ ” Holding up the award, she added, “I get to smile at those people, and lift a massive, shining rocket-shaped finger in their direction.”“How Long ’til Black Future Month?” includes one of her earliest published stories, “Cloud Dragon Skies” (2005), in which an ecological disaster has caused most of humanity to abandon Earth for a ring-shaped space colony, built from crushed asteroids, beyond Mars. “Old foolishness lay at the root of it,” notes the narrator, a young woman named Nahautu, one of the few who stay. The planet has rebounded, except for the atmosphere. The toxic chemicals it has absorbed combine to form a new kind of life:One morning we awoke and the sky was a pale, blushing rose. We began to see intention in the slow, ceaseless movements of the clouds. Instead of floating, they swam spirals in the sky. They gathered in knots, trailing wisps like feet and tails. We felt them watching us.Terra Fondriest’s ode to Ozark life in text and visuals at The Bitter Southerner is firmly set in the before times, when you could safely hold a wedding without masks, and when you could mix with more than members of your household without fear. What I loved most about his piece is how it exalts in simple joys — the best kind. This piece cleanses your mental palate not only with words and images, but with its grace.Motor down just one dirt road, and you’ll begin to collect moments that are unique to this part of the South we call the Ozark Hills. Up and down hills and across creeks, maybe stopping in the middle to listen to the water flow and then heading back up, you’ll pass vistas of seemingly endless peaks dotted with cattle pastures. You’ll see wild turkeys dash across the road in front of you on their way to the acorns and hickory nuts in the forest on the other side. If your windows are open, you might hear waterfalls cascading down the drainage ways after a hard rain, or the interior might fill with dust and the smell of oak leaves burning during a dry spell. You might meet a truck coming at you on the narrow road and see how it pulls off near the edge of the woods to let you pass.And if it so happens you decide to put roots down and call these hills home, you might start to develop relationships with certain parts of the creek or different bends in the road. You might start to become familiar with the people nestled in the hills who have been here for generations and those who arrived recently, just like you. You will slowly become part of the cadence of everyday Ozark life.While Fondriest is new to the area, she understands that the only way to find her place is to get to know her neighbors and to earn their trust.I am still the same introverted girl who grew up in the suburbs. Getting to know new people makes me more nervous photographing for this project. It’s a challenge that is daunting on most days, but the camaraderie built by pushing through that with my subjects yields the intimacy I strive for in my storytelling. Some of the folks I photograph are friends and neighbors, but others are people I meet through circumstance, whose everyday story I find interesting and a good piece for my Ozark Life story quilt. But I approach them. I might talk to them right away about my project, or I might let it simmer a bit and get to know them over days, months, even years before I bring up my project and my request to photograph them. Building a relationship is important, because it makes the pictures secondary.In 1974, Joe Biden had just lost his first wife Neilia and his daughter in a car crash and as the youngest person in the Senate at age 31, it is the sum of these things that make him “good copy.”Joseph Robinette Biden, the 31-year-old Democrat from Delaware, is the youngest man in the Senate, which makes him a celebrity of sorts. But there’s something else that makes him good copy: Shortly after his election in November 1972 his wife Neilia and infant daughter were killed in a car accident. Suddenly this handsome, young man struck down in his moment of glory was prey to scores of hungry reporters clamoring to write soul-searching stories.What intrigued me about this piece at The Washingtonian is the pure swagger Biden displays for reporter Kitty Kelly. Oh 1974, you were a different time, indeed.In his office in the New Senate Office Building surrounded by more than 35 pictures of his late wife, Biden launched into a three-hour reminiscence. It wasn’t maudlin—he seemed to enjoy remembering aloud. He was the handsome football hero. She was the beautiful homecoming queen. Their marriage was perfect. Their children were beautiful. And they almost lived happily ever after. “Neilia was my very best friend, my greatest ally, my sensuous lover. The longer we lived together the more we enjoyed everything from sex to sports. Most guys don’t really know what I lost because they never knew what I had. Our marriage was sensational. It was exceptional, and now that I look around at my friends and my colleagues, I know more than ever how phenomenal it really was. When you lose something like that, you lose a part of yourself that you never get back again.“My wife was the brains behind my campaign. I would never have made it here without her. It’s hard to imagine ever going through another campaign without her. She was the most intelligent human being I have ever known. She was absolutely brilliant. I’m smart but Neilia was ten times smarter. And she had the best political sense of anybody in the world. She always knew the right thing to do.“Let me show you my favorite picture of her,” he says, holding up a snapshot of Neilia in a bikini. “She had the best body of any woman I ever saw. She looks better than a Playboy bunny, doesn’t she?“My beautiful millionaire wife was a conservative Republican before she met me. But she changed her registration. At first she didn’t want me to run for the Senate—we had such a beautiful thing going, and we knew all those stories about what politics can do to a marriage. She didn’t want that to happen. At first she stayed at home with the kids while I campaigned but that didn’t work out because I’d come back too tired to talk to her. I might satisfy her in bed but I didn’t have much time for anything else. That’s when she started campaigning with me and that’s when I started winning. You know, the people of Delaware really elected her,” he says, “but they got me.”Some detractors accuse him of shrouding himself in widower’s weeds, of dredging up his late wife in every speech. But Biden prides himself on being candid and honest—”That’s the only way I could be with the wife I had.” He understands the accusations: “I’m not the kind of guy everyone likes. My personality either grabs you or it doesn’t. My sister says I almost lost the campaign because ofmy personality, and my brother-in-law says you either love me or you hate me. I’m not an in-between type.Speaking of intriguing men in very different times, at Granta we have Rebekah Frumkin’s portrait of her uncle Sidney Franklin. Discontent with the prospect of a potentially hum-drum existence as a teacher or an accountant, Franklin, armed only with persistence, self-confidence, and a desire for fame, ditched his Brooklyn-based identity in 1922 to fashion himself into a matador on a dare. What’s more, he became very good at it.On 26 April 1976, after suffering a stroke that robbed him of the ability to walk and speak, the matador Sidney Franklin died in a nursing home in Manhattan, roughly thirteen miles from his native Brooklyn. Fifteen years earlier, on 2 July 1961, Ernest Hemingway donned his ‘emperor’s robe’ and shot himself in the head with a double-barreled shotgun. As young men, the two had split bottles of brandy in Spain, had traveled through the countryside together (a remarked-upon odd couple, one clean and effete and the other greasy and unshaven), had watched bombs explode in Madrid during the Spanish Civil War. The New Yorker journalist Lillian Ross had said theirs was a friendship between a great man and a lesser one. I am the grand-niece of the lesser one.After six years of touring successfully in Mexico, Sidney fought his way to the central stage of the bullfighting world: the Plaza de Toros de la Real Maestranza in Seville. On 9 June 1929, Sidney would acquit himself expertly in the ring, earning praise from Spanish aficionados and major newspapers. Again, adoring fans would flood from their stadium seats to lift Sidney up on their shoulders. Again, they would tear his traje apart, but these would be Spanish hands tearing, the hands of people who considered their arenas too good for Mexican toreros. Sidney would be carried back to his pension and strangers would crowd him – they would even join him in the shower. ‘I enjoyed and savored what I had done with an intensity almost sexually sensual,’ Sidney wrote, and later: ‘All the sexes seem to throw themselves at you.’ The Brooklyn Eagle, which had been covering Sidney’s story in lavish terms since his debut in Mexico, would publish headlines such as ‘Brooklyn Bullfighter Wins Great Ovation in Brilliant Spanish Debut’ and ‘Ten Thousand in Seville Arena Cheer Him as He Dispatches Bovine Foe with Single Stroke.’Sidney was more than a novelty, a weird American who’d decided to try his hand at a foreign sport: he was a bullfighter in his own right, el único matador, and to his extreme satisfaction more than a little Spanish. He fashioned himself as a sort of cultural ambassador to Spain, singularly capable of introducing bullfighting to his American countrymen. ‘I shall not return to my hometown, Brooklyn, until I have gained fame throughout Spain,’ he told the Eagle. ‘I am sure that as soon as Americans are able to understand the beauty of this art, they will take to it, the same as they have taken to other sports.’ He joined an elite group of Spanish bullfighters whose company he continued to keep for decades.* * *Read all the categories in our Best of 2020 year-end collection.
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
Joseph Robinette Biden, the 31-year-old Democrat from Delaware, is the youngest man in the Senate, which makes him a celebrity of sorts. But there’s something else that makes him good copy: Shortly after his election in November 1972 his wife Neilia and infant daughter were killed in a car accident. Suddenly this handsome, young man struck down in his moment of glory was prey to scores of hungry reporters clamoring to write soul-searching stories.According to his staff he was hounded for weeks by the media. “It was awful in the beginning,” says Chazy Dowaliby, a press aide. “A few weeks after Neilia’s death we got a call from Sally Quinn of the Post. She wanted to do a story on the Senator as Washington’s most eligible bachelor. Naturally we said no but it wasn’t easy because she kept calling all the time. She wasn’t the only one. Women’s Wear Daily called morning, noon, and night. And so did every female magazine in the country. They all wanted to write some kind of weeping willow story on him and he knew it. So he told us to refuse all press calls.” Biden wouldn’t even talk to journalists like the Post‘s David Broder, and he wouldn’t appear on the “Today” show or “Face the Nation” or “Meet the Press.”Although time has softened the pain of those early months in the Senate, Biden’s staff still protects him. The few reporters admitted in the past eighteen months have been asked to concentrate on Joe Biden, Senator, rather than Joe Biden, tragic figure. But the combination of youth, death, and a Kennedy-style upset victory continues to fascinate the press. How did an unknown attorney with only two years’ experience as a county councilman manage to topple Delaware’s firmly entrenched 63-year-old Republican Senator Caleb Boggs? Boggs, a two-term Congressman, two-term governor, and two-term Senator, wanted to retire in 1972; President Nixon persuaded him to run for a third term, suggesting that he resign after a year. Then Nixon planned to appoint Congressman Pierre DuPont to Boggs’ seat, keeping Delaware on the Republican side of the aisle. Biden spoiled the game plan. He was unknown—his statewide recognition factor was eighteen percent, compared to Boggs’ 93 percent—but he defeated Boggs in 1972.Biden had little time to savor his victory. The week before Christmas 1972 he was in Washington putting a staff together. His wife, baby daughter, and two young sons were driving home on a highway west of Wilmington after shopping for a Christmas tree when a hay truck hit their station wagon. The car was thrown over an embankment, and Biden’s wife and daughter were killed. The sons lived—four-year-old Joseph, known in the family as Beau, was in traction for weeks. Two-year-old Hunt was hospitalized with a serious head injury.Biden was devastated. He wanted to resign. Majority Leader Mike Mansfield persuaded him to stay, promising him several prestigious committee assignments. The Senate passed a resolution allowing him to be sworn in at the hospital bedsides of his sons. That was more than a year ago, and at the time he wasn’t sure he’d be able to stay in the Senate through 1973. He said he would resign if his Senate duties took too much time away from his sons. “They can always get another Senator, but my boys cannot get another father.”Biden says he no longer allows himself the luxury of long-range planning, but he enjoys the prestige of being a Senator and seems committed to finishing his six-year term. In fact, he says he might consider running for President. “My wife always wanted me to be on the Supreme Court,” he says. “But while I know I can be a good Senator, and I know I can be a good President, I do know that I could never be another Oliver Wendell Holmes. I know I could have easily made the White House with Neilia. And my family still expects me to be there one of these days. With them behind me anything can happen.”***Neilia, the beautiful blonde he met during a college vacation in Nassau and married during law school at the Universityof Syracuse, still dominates his life.His Senate suite looks like a shrine. A large photograph of Neilia’s tombstone hangs in the inner office; her pictures cover every wall. A framed copy of Milton’s sonnet, “On His Deceased Wife,” stands next to a print of Byron’s “She Walks in Beauty.”In his office in the New Senate Office Building surrounded by more than 35 pictures of his late wife, Biden launched into a three-hour reminiscence. It wasn’t maudlin—he seemed to enjoy remembering aloud. He was the handsome football hero. She was the beautiful homecoming queen. Their marriage was perfect. Their children were beautiful. And they almost lived happily ever after. “Neilia was my very best friend, my greatest ally, my sensuous lover. The longer we lived together the more we enjoyed everything from sex to sports. Most guys don’t really know what I lost because they never knew what I had. Our marriage was sensational. It was exceptional, and now that I look around at my friends and my colleagues, I know more than ever how phenomenal it really was. When you lose something like that, you lose a part of yourself that you never get back again.“My wife was the brains behind my campaign. I would never have made it here without her. It’s hard to imagine ever going through another campaign without her. She was the most intelligent human being I have ever known. She was absolutely brilliant. I’m smart but Neilia was ten times smarter. And she had the best political sense of anybody in the world. She always knew the right thing to do.“Let me show you my favorite picture of her,” he says, holding up a snapshot of Neilia in a bikini. “She had the best body of any woman I ever saw. She looks better than a Playboy bunny, doesn’t she?“My beautiful millionaire wife was a conservative Republican before she met me. But she changed her registration. At first she didn’t want me to run for the Senate—we had such a beautiful thing going, and we knew all those stories about what politics can do to a marriage. She didn’t want that to happen. At first she stayed at home with the kids while I campaigned but that didn’t work out because I’d come back too tired to talk to her. I might satisfy her in bed but I didn’t have much time for anything else. That’s when she started campaigning with me and that’s when I started winning. You know, the people of Delaware really elected her,” he says, “but they got me.”Some detractors accuse him of shrouding himself in widower’s weeds, of dredging up his late wife in every speech. But Biden prides himself on being candid and honest—”That’s the only way I could be with the wife I had.” He understands the accusations: “I’m not the kind of guy everyone likes. My personality either grabs you or it doesn’t. My sister says I almost lost the campaign because ofmy personality, and my brother-in-law says you either love me or you hate me. I’m not an in-between type.Our most popular stories of the week, sent every Saturday.“I have no illusions about why I am such a hot commodity, either. I am the youngest man in the Senate and I am also the victim of a tragic fate which makes me very newsworthy. I’m sure that’s why I get so many invitations all the time. I don’t accept them and most people understand why. Rose Kennedy is always calling me to come to dinner. She has invited me at least ten times and I’ve only gone once. Most guys would kill to get invitations like that but I don’t accept them because I like to be with my children as much as possible. Whenever Ted and Joan Kennedy call me for dinner—and they call quite a bit—I usually say I have to go home. They are great because they understand why.”His 29-year-old sister Valerie and her husband Bruce have moved into the Senator’s house to take care of the children. He commutes from Wilmington every day to be with them when they wake up in the morning and go to bed at night. They like visiting him here, and it is not unusual to see two little blondes streaking through Biden’s reception room. Both seem adjusted to the loss. Beau, now five years old, explains the situation with simplicity: “My father works in his office with the Senators and my mother is in heaven.”Named one of the ten best-dressed men in the Senate, Joe Biden looks like Robert Redford’s Great Gatsby in natty pin-striped suits, elegant silk ties, and black tassled loafers. He dresses rich. “I’m a suit-and-tie kind of guy,” he says. “I’ve been this way all my life. I even wore a tie in college. My wife thought I dressed too conservatively and so she would buy a lot of my clothes which is probably the only reason I look so good.” He looks like a Senator—complete with receding hairline and gravelly voice. He has immense self-confidence. He doesn’t smoke and doesn’t drink. Although he makes deprecating noises about some senators and calls Congress an antiquated nineteenth-century institution, he still is proud of his position. He thoroughly enjoys being a politician. “I am proud to be a politician. There is no other walk of life which can do more good for mankind than politics. It influences every thing that happens to the American people. You might think I’m off the wall when I say this, but I believe what Plato said 2,000 years ago: ‘The penalty good men pay for not becoming involved in politics is being governed by men worse than themselves.”He defines politics as power. “And, whether you like it or not, young lady,” he says, leaning over his desk to shake a finger at me, “us cruddy politicians can take away that First Amendrnent of yours if we want to.” There’s no time to pursue the point—Biden is summoned to the floor for a vote. On the way over to the Capitol he channels the conversation away from politics, talking about his family: “This is really a big deal for them. I’m the only Senator any of us have ever known. We never even knew anyone who knew a Senator before. At first my dad tried to talk me into running for governor but I told him I didn’t want to be a damn old administrator. I wanted to come to Washington and get something accomplished. He calls me champ now. He and Mike Mansfield are probably the most decent men I’ve ever known. My dad never went to college [he’s an automobile sales manager in Wilmington] and he had never been involved in politics until I started campaigning. But he loves it.”We get to the Senate in time for him to vote. When he leaves the Senate chamber a young schoolteacher from Georgia grabs him. “Please come and say something to my students,” she begs. “You’re their Jack Kennedy.” One student asks him how he likes his job. He says, “Considering what Nixon has done to the employment situation in this country, I’m damn grateful to be employed.” The kids lap it up.In the “Senators Only” elevator he says hello to several colleagues. Senator William Proxmire pops the question: “Hi, Joe, how are you? I understand you’re going to be getting married soon.” The Wisconsin Senator obviously read the recent UPI story about Biden and Francine Barnard, a Capitol Hill reporter for the Fort Worth Star-Telegram. Since he has another reporter with him—me—Biden is flustered. He tries to make a joke out of it: Turning to Senator Thomas Eagleton, he says, “Be careful, Tom. Ms. Kelley’s with the press and she’s here to check out those rumors about your marriage bust-up.” Eagleton smoothly changes the subject as we walk back to the office. Biden tells him a joke with an antisemitic punchline and asks that it be off the record.Later he talks about remarriage. “I do indeed want to get married again. I hate the image of the gay, young bachelor about town. That’s just not my style. I am not a womanizer. I would like very much to fall in love and be married again because basically I am a family man. I want to find a woman to adore me again. “And I would like very much to fall in love and marry someone exactly like Francie Barnard. I think she is bright, pretty, and engaging. I like her quiet kind of style. She’s like my wife in that way. She does not come on strong. She is the only woman I have dated and I am with her every chance I can. We spend a lot of time in Delaware because I am more comfortable at home. The first time I took her to meet my family everyone started talking about heavy romance. They didn’t understand, I guess, that I would never take out anyone my mother didn’t meet first. That might sound weird but that’s the way I am. “In spite of all the rumors around town right now, I can look you straight in the eye and say that I have no present or future plans of getting married. Besides, why should someone like Francie marry a guy like me who is still in love with his wife, who has a political constituency and a readymade family. She deserves better than that.“We have been seeing each other steadily since Christmas but all this press speculation is making her very nervous. She is worried that her friendship with me will jeopardize her professional status as a reporter. And, I can tell you one thing for sure: She’s not as high on the press as she used to be as a result of all the questions she’s been getting lately.”Ms. Barnard, a pretty, 28-year-old version of Natalie Wood, admits as much in a telephone interview. She won’t talk about her romance. ‘It is an extremely personal matter,” she says. Once married, twice shy, she admits she is “very fond” of Senator Biden but says, “I don’t want to get married. I also don’t think it is good for this to get around and be talked about so much because it is not very professional for me as a journalist.”Nothing in the First Amendment prohibits a reporter from socializing with a Senator. It’s been going on for years, and no one seems to have suffered any professional embarrassment. In fact, it’s said that Nancy Dickerson never would have become a television star had it not been for her friendship with Senator Lyndon Johnson. Syndicated columnist Marianne Means might still he just another scrambling Hearst reporter if John F. Kennedy hadn’t insisted that she cover him in the White House. And CBS correspondent Lesley Stahl frequently sees Senator Robert Dole, while writer Barbara Howar credits Senator Birch Bayh with her inside view of politics.In spite of Ms. Barnard’s protests, romance rumors persist. Some of her friends say she is considering converting to Catholicism, and predict the couple will be married within the year. Others say she won’t consider marriage again. “Why should she?” says one woman. “She is pretty enough to attract any man she wants, smart enough to hold him, and rich enough not to need him.” Originally from Texas, where her grandfather once owned the El Paso Times, she worked for Sissy Farenthold’s first gubernatorial campaign before coming to Washington as a reporter. Here, she has worked for Jack Anderson and Sarah McClendon.Senator Biden’s friends say he is looking for more than a wife and mother. “He also needs to find a First Lady,” says one, “a woman who enjoys politics and will help him get to the White House. I don’t know if he’ll end up marrying Francie Barnard but I do know that the woman he marries will he as rich and as pretty as she is.”The Senator shows a healthy respect for money: “Politics is a damn expensive business. I had one hell of a time trying to raise money as a candidate. I had to put a second mortgage on roy house to get that campaign started, and I ended up spending over $300,000 to get elected. I believe that public financing of federal election campaigns is the only thing that will insure good candidates and save the two-party system. It is the most degrading thing in the world to go out with your hat in your hand and beg for money, but that’s what you have to do if you haven’t got your own resources.’He feels the indignity is compounded by the temptation to sell out to big business or big labor for financial help, and says it’s almost impossible for a candidate to remain true to his conscience in this situation. He admits that more than once he was tempted to compromise to get campaign money. “I probably would have if it hadn’t been for the ramrod character of my Scotch Presbyterian wife,” he say’s. “I am not a rich man. And my family does not have money. If I sold every thing I own, including my house and cars, I could probably’ scratch up S200,000, but that’s nothing compared to most of the guys in the Senate.”Unlike most other senators, Biden makes no bones about saving he is underpaid. Last September, when the Senate was debating a pay raise for itself, he said, “I dont know about the rest of you but I am worth a lot more than my salary of $42,500 a year in this body. It seems to me that we should flat out tell the American people we are worth our salt.” Before he finished his speech, the Associated Press was banging out a dispatch later picked up by William Loeb, the right-wing editor of the Manchester Union Leader. “Can you imagine the conceit and stupidity of a young man of 30 who would say that?” said Loeb in a front-page editorial. “The voters of Delaware who elected this stupid, conceited jackass to the Senate should kick him in the rear to knock some sense into him, and then kick themselves for voting for such an idiot.” Mr. Loeb ignored the rest of the speech, in which Biden said, “I believe we should strive to reach the point where members of Congress give up the right to all income but their annual salaries and we can come to that point only when our annual salaries fully reflect the magnitude of our duties and responsibilities.” Biden framed Loeb’s editorial and hung it in his office. “When you get a blast like that you really know you’re worth something,” he laughs. “I feel I’ve really paid my dues now. Some thing like that makes me know that I’ve finally arrived.”Getting there was not easy. Sitting in her parents’ modest white house in Delaware, his sister Valerie talks about Biden’s 1972 campaign against Senator Boggs. In many ways it resembled John F. Kennedy’s 1952 campaign against Senator Henry Cabot Lodge. Both looked like impossible dreams to everyone but the Irish Catholic families of the candidates. “We knew Joey could win, so everyone in the family worked seventeen hours a day for eighteen months to make sure he did. I was his campaign manager and Neilia was his chief political strategist. My husband was his financial manager, and my younger brother was his chief fundraiser. It was really a family operation.”When Joe Biden could afford professional campaign consultants they wanted to get rid of his wife and kid sister as campaign advisors and throw out the literature filled with family pictures. “They said that people don’t equate strength with a family man,” recalls Valerie, “and they said Joey needed to look strong in order to have a chance to win.” Joey didn’t agree. He listened to the pros, and said, “It’s been very nice talking to you and I’ll see that someone gets you to the airport in time to get a plane out of here this afternoon.” He refused to change his style. “I am a family man, and I’d rather lose with my family than win without them.” In spite of the endorsements Boggs received from President Nixon, Vice President Agnew, Governor Nelson Rockefeller, and Senator Charles Mathias, the family man still won by 2,300 votes.That Senate campaign may have been the most exemplary in the nation. It was free of personal attacks. The worst thing Joe Biden ever said about his opponent was, “He’s a nice guy but he’s just not an innovative Senator.” Months later when Biden attended a dinner for the defeated Senator, he said, “1 hope that I will live to have what Caleb Boggs has tonight—an unblemished reputation for integrity.”Joe Biden reeks of decency. But he is beginning to realize now how hard it is to be innovative. “My kids are going to talk about me fifteen years from now as being a member of the House of Lords if the Senate keeps on going the way it is today,” he says. “There used to be great Senators here who really made a difference, men like Patrick Henry, Daniel Webster, and Henry Clay. But the system is so totally warped now that I doubt if even they could change things. We don’t have any of those great men anymore. There are still a few guys you can trust and respect. But just a few. Guys like Senator Bill Proxmire are great. And Hubert Humphrey is no slouch. He’s a fine Senator—articulate, bright, and knowledgeable. So is Jacob Javits. I don’t agree with him on every issue but I respect him because he talks about the issues, And Alan Cranston is a bright guy. He does his homework. He feeds the cannon and lets someone else shoot the load and take the credit. As the kids say, ‘He’s heavy.’ And Senator James Buckley has a certain intellectual consistency I respect. I’m glad he’s in the Senate. But I’m dismayed that someone like Carl Curtis is a Senator. Someone like Adlai Stevenson is a good man but he’s much more liberal than I am.”Biden resents being called the bright young liberal of the New Left. “I hate that picture,” he says, “and I don’t care how that damn Americans for Democratic Action rates me. Those ADA ratings get us into so much trouble that a lot of us sit around thinking up ways to vote conservative just so we don’t come out with a liberal rating. When it comes to civil rights and civil liberties, I’m a liberal but that’s it. I’m really quite conservative on most other issues. My wife said I was the most socially conservative man she had ever known. I’m a screaming liberal when it comes to senior citizens because I really think they are getting screwed. I’m a liberal on health care because I believe it is a birth right of every human being—not just some damn privilege to be meted out to a few people. But when it comes to issues like abortion, amnesty, and acid, I’m about as liberal as your grandmother. I don’t like the Supreme Court decision on abortion. I think it went too far. I don’t think that a woman has the sole right to say what should happen to her body. I support a limited amnesty, and I don’t think marijuana should be legalized. Now, if you still think I’m a liberal, let me tell you that I support the draft. I’m scared to death of a professional army. I vote my own way and it is not always with the Democrats. I did vote for George McGovern, of course, but I would have voted for Mickey Mouse against Richard Nixon. I despise that man.”Senator Biden doesn’t believe issues make much difference in an election—personality and presentation are the key. He said as much the night he addressed the Democratic Forum, a small group of Washington liberals who meet with politicians on a regular basis. “I don’t think the issues mean a great deal in terms of whether you win or lose. I think the issues are merely a vehicle to portray your intellectual capacity to the voters . . . a vehicle by which the voters will determine your honesty and candor. The central issue of my campaign—and I used all the issues from busing to the war to the economy, crime, and prison reform—was to convince the people that I was intelligent and to convince them that I was honest.“Assuming for a moment that I was here like most of the other people you have in here who are candidates for President. If we assume I am a candidate for President and you are deciding whether or not to work for me, I could stay here all night answering your questions about how I stand on the issues. But the fact remains that you will not have raised the issues which will be the ones I will be dealing with in my last year as President.”The talk was theoretical, but no one in that audience doubted that Senator Biden would be coming back to them in a few years as a Presidential contender. “He really put on quite a show,” said one man after the speech. “He won the audience over by being so open. I’m not sure he doesn’t use candor as a calculated device. It’s probably more deliberate than spontaneous. But it works. His performance is so professionally orchestrated it seems natural and sincere. He knows he looks good and he knows he sounds good, and I must admit, compared to the rest of those tired old hacks on Capitol Hill, he is the best and brightest hope we have right now. I’d vote for him for President.”His sister Valerie says we will all get that chance one of these days. “Joey is going to be President someday. He was made to be in the White House. There is no one else who can lead the country. Just you wait and see.” She believes her brother is another John F. Kennedy, and she’s not alone. Even before his election Time magazine compared Joe Biden and his beautiful young family to the Kennedys and talked about Presidential possibilities some day. The Irish Catholic similarities were obvious. Both campaigned with glamor. Both were sexy. Both were elected to Congress before the age of 30. And both were struck by tragedy.Some veteran political reporters believe that Joe Biden is much more determined to be President than Jack Kennedy ever was at 31. “Biden knows what he’s doing and where he’s going,” said one. “Kennedy pussyfooted around at that age. I much prefer the Biden style to that JFK cat-and-mouse game.”Most journalists I talked with agreed that Joe Biden would run for President some day. One said, “There isn’t a Senator alive who doesn’t secretly believe he should be enthroned next to that little red phone in the Oval office, and Biden is no exception. But I think he might win someday.” A wire service reporter sizes up Biden’s chances as “better than 60-40.” He added, Can you imagine what they’ll be when he’s old enough to run and people know who he is?”Senator Biden does not dismiss the subject. “Let’s do wait and see,” he says. “Come back and talk to me in a few years. By then I’ll be old enough to run. Right now, I’m too young. I’m probably the only Senator you can really believe when he says he’s not planning on running for President, at least not in 1976.”When I damaged my vocal cords, I was forced to change the way I spoke – and discovered how much our voices reveal who we areLast modified on Mon 25 Jan 2021 06.39 ESTSome years ago, I was invited by my then boss, Jann Wenner, the owner of Rolling Stone, to be the lead singer in a band he was putting together from the magazine’s staff. I had just turned 41, and I jumped at the opportunity to sustain the delusion that I was not getting old. “Sign me up!” I said.My chief attributes as a singer included impressive volume and an ability to stay more or less in tune, but I was strictly a self-taught amateur. I had, for instance, never done a proper voice warmup, and had certainly never been informed that the delicate layers of vibratory tissue, muscle and mucus membrane that make up the vocal cords are as prone to injury as a middle-aged knee joint. So, on practice days, I simply rose from my desk (I was finishing a book on deadline and spent eight hours a day writing, in complete silence), rode the subway to our rehearsal space in downtown Manhattan, took my place behind the microphone and started wailing over my bandmates’ cranked-up guitars and drums.The folly of this approach became clear to me a few weeks into rehearsals when J Geils Band frontman Peter Wolf, whom Jann had enlisted to perform a song, pulled me aside. “You don’t have to sing full out in rehearsal, man,” he said. “Save something for the show.” I followed his advice, but by then my voice had taken on a pronounced rasp. I wasn’t concerned. I had suffered hoarseness in the past and it had cleared up. Plus, a little vocal raggedness is never out of place in rock’n’roll. Also, and perhaps most importantly, I felt no discomfort – so how could I have hurt my throat?I continued attending twice-weekly rehearsals and soon reverted to my old ways – actually singing harder, trying to put some of the old volume back into my voice, which was sounding weirdly dampened. I was also finding it difficult suddenly to hit high notes, like the F above middle C in the Stones’ song Miss You (“Ohhhhhh, why’d you have to wait so long?”). Reaching for it, my voice would break up into a toneless rattle, or vanish altogether. This began to concern me as the days ticked down to our gig – a holiday party at a downtown dance club, to which Jann had invited 2,000 of his closest friends, including a constellation of celebrities.Singing is as psychological as it is physical. Stress attacks the vocal apparatus, tightening muscles that should remain loose and pliable, restricting breathing, closing off the throat, paralysing the tongue and lips. I was experiencing all of these symptoms as I took my place, centre stage, in the glare of the lights, and began our opening number, the Beatles’ song I’ll Cry Instead, originally sung by John Lennon. It would seem a little on the nose to suggest that Yoko, along with her and John’s son, Sean, were looking up at me from the front row, except they were.Today, I can barely bring myself to listen to the CD of that concert, which Jann later presented to each band member as a memento. I wince at the tentative way I sing that “Ohhhhh” in Miss You, sneaking up on the note from below, sliding into it gingerly. I get there, sort of. But at what cost? By the end of the night, I was growling the lyrics to White Room like it was a Tom Waits number.A three-day bout of laryngitis followed. Then I began speaking in a parched whisper. This eventually “improved” to a torn-sounding rumble. Three months after the gig, I was still speaking as if my words were being stirred through gravel. But I was determined to believe the problem would clear up – until an alarming encounter in the building into which I had just moved with my wife and infant son. Holding open the elevator door for one of my new neighbours, a smiling blond woman, I pointed at the buttons and asked, “What floor?” Her smile vanished.“You’ve got a serious voice injury,” she said. I demurred, but she cut me off, saying that she was a voice coach who worked with Broadway singers and actors. And she said that she could see, in my neck, the compensatory muscle movements I was making as I spoke. I was, she told me, straining the tendons, pressing them in against my voice box (or larynx), in a bid to compress my vocal cords and help them create sound. “I bet your neck gets pretty sore,” she said.In fact, for weeks I’d been enduring a peculiar sensation in my neck, as if I had scalded the skin. “You’re no doubt straining other muscles, too,” she went on. “We use our whole body to sing, and also to talk. Abdominals. Hip flexors. Shoulders. Back. With an injury like yours, you’re working harder with all of them. You must be pretty tired by the end of the day.” I had been attributing the strange, bone-deep exhaustion that afflicted me every evening to the stresses of new parenthood and finishing my book. Not the muscular effort of speaking.She invited me to drop by her apartment, anytime. She could show me some simple relaxation exercises that would help with the immediate symptoms. I hate presuming on neighbours, and knew that I would never avail myself of this kind offer. My wife shrugged and said: “At the very least, you ought to see a laryngologist, just in case it’s … something else.”This caught my attention. I grew up in a medical family and was familiar with the euphemism “something else”. She meant a growth. A malignancy. This had never occurred to me. My rasp was so clearly the result of singing with Jann’s band – or was it?The next day, I arrived at Mount Sinai hospital. I had an appointment with Dr Peak Woo, chief of laryngology, a subspecialty of ear, nose and throat medicine that focuses on the vocal cords. Woo was a soft-spoken man in his late 40s with a kindly bedside manner. He guided down my throat a laryngoscope, a tool that looked like the curved spray attachment on a garden hose, with a small light affixed to the end. On a nearby computer screen, the live image of my throat was broadcast, a wet red tunnel at the bottom of which sat my vocal cords: two symmetrical, fleshy, pearly-pink membranes stretched like a pair of lips across the opening of my windpipe.Woo pointed to the screen, which held a photo of my vocal cords in the open position. It was not, he said, a malignancy. The edge of the left cord was ruler-straight. On the margin of the right cord was a small bump. A tumour would be lumpy, asymmetrical. My vocal mass was smooth and regular, as if a tiny pea had been inserted under the semitransparent mucus membrane: a textbook polyp, wholly consistent with my history of over-singing. I had broken a blood vessel in that vocal cord, and the unchecked bleeding had created the bump of scar tissue that was interfering with the vocal cord’s normal, fluid, rippling action. Sweet, pure singing voices are partly the result of vocal cords with clean straight edges that meet flush across the opening of the windpipe as they vibrate. Mine did not, and this is what produced the rasps and rattles and rumbles in my voice.I asked if he might just snip the offending polyp off in a quick outpatient procedure. Hardly. To have the thing removed, I would need to check into the hospital for several days to undergo surgery, which would require not only a general anaesthetic but a special paraly agent to render me completely immobile – a crucial consideration given the extreme fragility of the vocal cords and the permanent injury to the voice that can result from removing even a micrometer too much healthy tissue.I left his office with a prescription for a medication to take in the days before the operation. Scheduling the procedure was up to me. He told me to call when I was ready. I never called.Why? The usual excuses – no time, too expensive, too risky and six weeks of strict postoperative vocal silence. Who could afford to stop talking for six weeks? Like most people, I took for granted the sounds that emerged from between my lips, thinking, as long as I’m getting the words out and being understood, my voice is fine. Which is not to say that I wasn’t self-conscious about my rasp.Speaking on the phone, which always heightened my awareness of my damaged voice, I often worried that I was conjuring in the brain of my invisible interlocutor the image of a thuggish underworld heavy – a particular concern if I was trying to get a potentially delicate journalistic source to trust me. There was also the inconvenience of disabusing friends who mistook my rattle as a symptom of the flu. But for all these annoyances and discomforts, I was not (I told myself) disabled. I could converse. I could work. By these lights, the surgery was not necessary.I did, however, take certain measures to preserve what remained of my voice. I concentrated on relaxing my neck, stopped pushing my voice out with an extra effort of my abdominals. This tended to reduce my volume – or “projection” – but it also eliminated the scalding neck pain and overall exhaustion. I also learned, by unconscious trial and error, to lower my pitch, which seemed to smooth my tone a little.Over time, I was even able to convince myself that the problem had cleared up – a state of denial I sustained for over a decade, until one day in late 2012, when I started working on a new article for the New Yorker magazine.It was about a vocal surgeon, Steven Zeitels, who worked at Massachusetts general hospital in Boston. Since the mid-90s, Zeitels had ministered to an array of popular singers – Steven Tyler, Cher, James Taylor – as well as famous TV and radio broadcasters, opera stars, Broadway belters and actors. A few months earlier, he had successfully operated on the British singer-songwriter Adele, removing a vocal polyp that had threatened to end her career. She had thanked him from the stage when collecting several Grammy awards.When I called Zeitels to ask if he might be willing to cooperate with a story, I hadn’t even finished my pitch before he interrupted me, saying: “It sounds like you’re dealing with a pretty significant vocal issue yourself.”Brought up short, I stammered something about having experienced “a little vocal strain” some time ago, and changed the subject. But I could not staunch his clinical curiosity. When I visited Zeitels for our first set of interviews, he insisted on “looking at” my throat.Like Woo, Zeitels peered into my throat with a laryngoscope; he, too, left an image of my vocal cords up on his computer screen. Even to my untrained eye, the mass looked far bigger than in the photo taken more than a decade earlier by Dr Woo. Zeitels was certainly impressed. “You couldn’t possibly sing with something this big,” he said. “It’s mechanically impossible.” He was right about that.The few times I’d tried, my voice shut down, went off-pitch – and the extra exertion of driving air past my burdened vocal cord would force me to reload my lungs at an abnormally fast rate, making my phrasing choppy (good singers time their intakes of breath around natural pauses in a song’s lyrics), causing me to hyperventilate and grow light-headed. Little wonder that I had not sung publicly since Jann’s party, and no longer sang even in private, around the house. Too exhausting. Too depressing.Zeitels let me know, however, that my singing was not the primary issue. There was also the question of my speaking voice. Yes, I could still talk, he said, but my altered voice was affecting my life in ways that I was not acknowledging. “Here’s the way to understand your speaking voice,” he said. “You’re grossly hoarse. People might say, ‘Well, his voice isn’t that bad.’ No. Your voice is actually pretty bad. Your right vocal cord – the one with the polyp – has a severely impaired elastic dynamic capability. You’re working at 3 or 4% of normal.”Consequently, he said, I had done what many people with my injury do: I had developed strategies for, as he put it, “speaking around the problem” – retraining my recurrent laryngeal nerve (the nerve that, among other things, controls the tension on the vocal cords) to drop the pitch of my voice, slackening my freighted vocal membrane so that the 3 or 4% that was still pliable would vibrate. This reduced the rattle in my voice, but at a cost. It was robbing me of the natural variation in pitch and volume that people use to give colour, animation, expression and personality to their utterances – what linguists call prosody, the melody of everyday speech.Through prosody, we express tenderness, or anger, or enthusiasm, or any number of other nuanced emotional states that give the human voice its peculiar power to woo, persuade, threaten, cajole and mollify. Prosody makes the difference between the affectless utterances of HAL, the computer in 2001, and the rich and expressive instrument of Morgan Freeman or Meryl Streep – or even just the lilting, songlike way you say “Hello” when you answer the phone, so your caller doesn’t think you’re a machine. The term comes from the ancient Greek: pros, meaning “toward”, and ody, meaning “song”. We speak toward song. Except I didn’t any more, according to Zeitels.“You’re behaving through a veil of monotone,” he went on. “When you talk, you can’t express emotion properly. You can’t change pitch, can’t get loud, can’t do the normal things that a voice does to express how you feel.”This hit me hard. I had not been consciously aware of these changes; but now that he pointed them out, I had to acknowledge that my range of expression had indeed diminished. Though I could still drive my voice through the basic melodic shifts necessary to make my emotional state more or less known, it had become burdensome to do so – too much expressive talking still left me pretty wiped out at the end of a day – and my voice was by no means the precision instrument it had once been. More cudgel than scalpel, it would, when imbuing a word or syllable with special emphasis (“He said what?”), often break up, or cut out, altogether.But that wasn’t the worst of it. For Zeitels now added: “You are not being transmitted by your voice.”That the voice is a vital clue to character and personality – to fundamental identity – was not news to me. I had always known that the voice is a kind of aural fingerprint, something unique to every individual and from which listeners draw strong inferences. But in “speaking around” that injury, I was apparently projecting a new personality into the world: a more monotone, less enthusiastic, less engaged personality.But my polyp wasn’t just changing how others perceived me; it was actually changing my behaviour. “People with your type of injury withdraw from scenarios intuitively,” Zeitels said.“You might have been brewing this polyp for decades before you sang in Jann’s band,” he added. “Wallflowers and introverts don’t get this injury.”Feeling shaken, I said: “So – this changes my life, in a way?”“Totally,” he said.The voice is a deceptively simple-seeming subject (you sing, you talk – big deal) that actually touches on some of the deepest mysteries in the natural world: namely, how we communicate thoughts, emotions, personality, upbringing and a lot of other personal data, on tiny ripples of air that we beam into other people’s brains by moving our lips and tongue while exhaling. An alien species watching us perform this bio-lingual-psycho-acoustical feat would no doubt think: “This is unreal!”And it is. But how to get your hands around so big and diffuse a subject? There’s a difficulty in even saying what the voice is. Is the voice singing? Talking? Is a cough voice? A laugh? “Indeed, it seems we know exactly what we mean by the word voice as long as we don’t try to define it!” as Johan Sundberg, the world’s foremost authority on the physiology of singing, put it in the introduction to his classic textbook The Science of the Singing Voice.Aristotle, who defined the voice as “the sound produced by a creature possessing a soul”, explicitly ruled out coughing as voice because a cough does not call up a “mental image” – that is, words. Unfortunately, that definition also rules out the high, clear sustained note that an opera tenor hits, and which sends shivers through us, despite the isolated vowel’s calling up no specific “mental image” (especially if we don’t understand Italian). To say nothing of the fact that, in the 50s, a branch of speech science called paralinguistics emerged, which convincingly showed that all manner of vocal noises (coughs, sighs, gasps, ums and ers) can be highly revealing of a person’s inner state of mind and heart – and as such have a communicative salience that, even by Aristotle’s definition, qualify them as voice.Add to these confusions the epistemological conundrum that the voice is, conceptually, impossible to “locate”. It is “in” the speaker’s body as an act of breathing and articulation, but doesn’t exist until it is manifest in the air as a sound wave. Arguably, the voice comes into existence, as voice, only when someone is around to process that sound wave in the brain’s auditory cortex. (In voice science, the answer to the philosophical riddle: “Does a tree that falls in a forest make a sound if there’s no one to hear it?” is “No!”) A final complication arises from the fact that what science calls the voice – everything from the buzzing sound source in our throats, to the way we sculpt that buzz into speech sounds with movements of our mouths, to the rhythm and melody of spoken language or song – results from the synchronised actions of many distinct body parts (lungs, vocal cords, tongue, lips, soft palate), all of them originally designed (by natural selection) for quite different tasks. Which of these is the voice – some, all, none?The key, I realised, was to think about what makes the human voice different from that of every other creature. All mammals and birds use vocal noises to communicate vital needs, through an array of oinks and squawks, chirps, barks and baahs. Parrots can even expertly mimic human speech – but without any idea what they’re saying. We are the only animal that can perform the miraculous feat of making the link between a specific vocal sound and an object that exists in the world.I call it a miraculous feat, but that understates the case considerably. It is the reason that we, as a species, rocketed to the top of the food chain. If you’ve read Yuval Noah Harari’s Sapiens, you know that scientists usually attribute our ascent to language, a faculty that allows us to refer to events in the past or future, to allude to people and things not immediately present, to elucidate abstract philosophical concepts, and to make complicated plans and goals that we share with others of our species. No other animal can come close to doing this. Birds, dogs, chimps, dolphins – you name it – use their voices to make in-the-now proclamations about immediate survival and reproductive concerns, including expressions of fear, anger, hunger and mating urges. Our unique ability for language has thus been described as the great dividing line, the “unbridgeable Rubicon”, between us and every other living creature.More than that, Harari says, it is the key to how we came to rule the Earth, since it enabled early humans – a relatively slow-running, physically weak, easily preyed-upon animal – to plan and cooperate and strategise with each other to outsmart bigger, faster, more lethal predators, to organise into groups (or tribes) of a greater size than any other animal (chimpanzees, our closest animal relation and the next closest in terms of cooperation, can manage about 100 members per group), and eventually to build the villages, towns, cities and nations that have given us primacy over the planet and everything on it. Written language eventually speeded this process up, but that only came along about 5,000 years ago, a blink of the eye in terms of human history. Up until then all verbal communication in our species was achieved via speech.So, I’m not disputing the grand claims for language made by Hariri and others. I just think we need to refine the concept, to emphasise that we owe our planetary dominion not to language alone, but to our special talent for turning that awesome attribute into sound. The voice.Our career and romantic prospects, social status and reproductive success depend to an amazing degree on how we sound. This is a question not only of our vocal timbre, which is partly passed down by our parents (in the size, density and viscosity of our vocal cords, and the internal geometry of the resonance chambers of our neck and head), or our accent, but also our volume, pace and vocal attack. These elements of our speech betray dispositions toward extroversion or introversion, confidence or shyness, aggression or passivity – aspects of temperament that are, science tells us, partly innate, but also a result of how we respond to life’s challenges, in the innumerable environmental influences that mould personality and character and, consequently, our voice.In listeners’ ears, our voice is us, as instantly “identifying” as our face. Indeed, researchers in 2018 discovered that voices are processed in a part of the auditory cortex cabled directly to the brain region that recognises facial features. Together, these linked brain areas make up a person-differentiating system highly valuable for ascertaining, in an instant, who we know and who’s a stranger.The voice recognition region can hold hundreds if not thousands of voices in long-term memory, which is why you can tell, within a syllable (“Hi … ”), that it is your sister on the phone and not a telemarketer, and that an impressionist is attempting to “do” Bill Clinton and not Ronald Reagan (both of whose voices you can conjure in your auditory cortex as readily as you can call up their faces in your mind’s eye).That we do, sometimes, mistake family members for one another over the phone shows that not only are immutable anatomical attributes of voice (vocal cords and resonance chambers) as heritable as the facial features that make parent and child (or siblings) resemble each other, but that families often share a style of speaking, in terms of prosody, pace and pronunciation. But the voice of every person is sufficiently unique, in its tiniest details, that such misidentifications are usually caught within seconds.Indeed, it is a philosophical irony of cosmic proportions that the only voice on Earth that we do not know is our own. This is because it reaches us not solely through the air, but in vibrations that pass through the hard and soft tissues of our head and neck, and which create, in our auditory cortex, a sound completely different to what everyone else hears when we talk. The stark difference is clear the first time we listen to a recording of own voice. (“Is that really what I sound like? Turn it off!”) The distaste with which so many of us greet the sound of our actual voice is not purely a matter of acoustics, I suspect. A recording disembodies the voice, holds it at a distance from us, so that we can hear with pitiless objectivity all aspects of how we speak, including the unconscious ways we manipulate prosody, pace and pronunciation to create the voice we wish we had.When I mentioned this to a friend, he grimaced at the memory of hearing his recorded voice for the first time. “God!” he cried. “The insincerity!” He was reacting to the mismatch between who he knows himself (privately and inwardly) to be, and the person that he seeks to project into the world. All of us do this, quite unconsciously, and until we hear ourselves on tape, we remain mercifully deaf to how we perform this ideal self, in a bid to “put ourselves across”, to make an impression.The enterprise of being human is to carve out a congenial place to occupy in the world, an achievement that we know intuitively depends to a frightening extent on how our voices sound in the ears of others. To alter your voice in ways that conform better to the person you feel yourself to be, or that you wish you were, means changing, fundamentally, who you are. • This is an edited extract from This Is the Voice by John Colapinto, published by Simon & Schuster and available at guardianbookshop.com• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, and sign up to the long read weekly email hereTo revist this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories.To revist this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories.Gregory BarberTo revist this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories.To revist this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories.One afternoon this summer, Catherine Olsson was relaxing with a friend in San Francisco’s Mission Dolores Park when she had an idea, a little spontaneous flicker from pre-pandemic life. Why not grab dinner? She called in an order for two veggie burritos at a nearby taqueria. Olsson popped over to the restaurant and, as she waited for her order number to be called, she looked around. She counted 10 workers standing along the open prep station assembling tacos and burritos behind a plexiglass barrier. Each worker wore a mask, but some wore them hanging off their chins or noses. Also, they were standing shoulder to shoulder. What were the odds that any of those workers had the virus that causes Covid-19, she wondered? The prevalence in San Francisco, she knew, was something like one in 300 people, but a recent antibody survey in this very neighborhood suggested frontline workers were about six times as likely to be infected as those who could stay home, which was awful to consider. And what about the five other customers shifting impatiently in the small enclosed space? At least their masks fit. She considered the steam rising from the beans and beef and wished she could crack a window and let in some air.Listen to the full story here or on the Curio app.Olsson was beginning to regret this adventure, which was unusual because her decisionmaking process is exquisitely calculated to avoid regret. Olsson thinks about risk for a living—she works for a Silicon Valley foundation on projects that seek to mitigate the potentially catastrophic effects of advanced AI—and is in the habit of assessing her daily life with data and models. A few years ago, after a close friend told her about a scare she’d had while cycling, Olsson decided to reevaluate her own bike commute. Was her life span more likely to be cut short by a fatal crash biking to work or by the increased chance of heart disease from sitting idly on the train? She was happier riding her bike than squeezing in with fellow passengers, but sometimes feelings need a fact check. She did the math and was pleased that it validated her choice to cycle.Olsson had begun applying this approach to living with the new coronavirus. The task was far more comprehensive. Unlike the risk of a bike accident, the risks posed by the virus radiated off of everything, turning the littlest things—a burrito!—into a gamble. At first, managing those risks was easy, if unpleasant. When the pandemic arrived in March, lockdowns constrained life and therefore made decisions simple. It was all of us together, in the interest of keeping hospitals from becoming overrun. But then, gradually, the world reopened, and life got more confusing. Perhaps tired, perhaps led astray by a government that wanted to believe the pandemic did not exist, much of the country fell into a collective delusion. If it was OK to play frisbee in the open air, then maybe sitting around inside, in a bar with those same frisbee-playing friends, wasn’t so bad, either. Or maybe the virus wasn’t that dangerous. Maybe it was even a hoax. So the number of daily cases kept rising: 150,000. 170,000. 200,000. As did the deaths.We have vaccines now, and an end is in sight. But even optimistic projections put us at least six months from widespread inoculation. In the meantime, the pandemic is as bad as ever, and people still need to make decisions about how to behave. Even the clearest advice—wear a mask, stay 6 feet apart, avoid indoor gatherings—doesn’t address many of the subtle situations in which we find ourselves. Olsson’s response was to calculate her way through our collective apathy and disillusionment, treating the virus not as an abstract and unknowable risk but one that could be measured and tamed until a vaccine eliminated it.Relentless tabulators often come off as zealous, maybe a little paranoid, and certainly no fun. Luckily, Olsson shares a house with fellow tabulators. She and her five housemates needed to find a way to live safely together. So they decided to adhere to a collective risk model of their own design. Any model is only as good as the data that goes into it, and the virus was too new for anyone, even experts, to have perfect information. Olsson and her housemates knew this, but they weren’t going to make the perfect the enemy of the good. They wanted to protect themselves, and by extension others, by making responsible choices. But they also wanted to be more free to actually live. Maybe math would make that possible.That day at the taqueria, as the minutes ticked by and her risk tally rose, Olsson abandoned her burritos.Olsson’s friends call her Catherio, after the email address she was given while studying computational neuroscience at MIT. Two and a half  years ago, at 28, she was living with her partner but missing the days when she could step out of her bedroom and instantly encounter a variety
of other minds. It so happened that a friend from college, Stephanie Bachar, was in the process of “forking,” like incompatible software, from a communal living situation that no longer felt homey. So one June day, they and four friends decided to join forces and move into a beige, hacienda-style townhouse in San Francisco’s Mission District. Their new home, they decided, would strike a better balance. It would be like a bash’—a type of chosen family described in Ada Palmer’s science fiction novel  Too Like the Lightning as a radical “haven for discourse.” They named it Ibasho, the Japanese word from which bash’ is derived, which means “a place where you can feel like yourself.”“Being yourself” in Ibasho meant being “slightly alternative, but professional,” says Rhys Lindmark, one of the residents. He had founded an online school for “world-class systems thinkers” after a stint researching blockchain ethics. The household was “high IQ, high EQ,” as Sarah Dobro, a primary care doctor who wears a septum ring and fauxhawk, describes it. Nerds, proudly, but socially aware nerds. They were well networked within a larger community of similar group houses around the Bay Area. It was like belonging to a more grown-up version of MIT dorms. Everyone seemed to know everyone from some salon or startup or quirky coding project. The social graph was dense.Read all of our coronavirus coverage here.From the start, the friends had choreographed a sense of independent togetherness. They had a communal fridge and a private one. Everyone had a different diet: paleo, vegan, gluten-free, bread lover. Every two weeks they gathered for a house meeting around a big wood-slab table, made by one of Olsson’s friends, in the room they called “the hearth.” They made decisions by consensus, following a detailed agenda with minutes and a time limit, lest the debate wear on too long. When things got a little raw—say, after two housemates moved Dobro’s pottery and Olsson’s trinkets from the fireplace mantel into a box and texted the two about the “clutter”—the group would move over to a big couch and bean bag chairs, where they could better speak with feelings, rather than logic.Logic, however, usually ruled the day. The residents of the house were all, to varying degrees, adherents to rationalist modes of thinking and sought to reduce human biases in their day-to-day lives. As Olsson put it, the emotions they discussed on the couch provided important data, but they would return to the table to make any final decisions.Residents of Ibasho at "the hearth": Catherine Olsson, Josh Oreman, and Sarah Dobro.They were certainly people who could easily grasp the implications of exponential growth. So last winter, as the novel coronavirus hit far-off places, the residents of Ibasho girded themselves. In late February, at their biweekly Tuesday night open house called Macwac (milk and cookies/wine and cheese), visitors cycled through a sanitizing station by the front door, and Olsson’s party trick was a roving demonstration of proper handwashing technique, using ultraviolet gel. After that, Ibasho hunkered down. The following week, so did the rest of San Francisco.Living was simple at first. The government had ordered everyone to stay home, so the housemates stayed home. Macwac made a brief online appearance on experimental software that took the form of a virtual living room, where people could gather in separate corners to chat. (“It was sufficiently weird and depressing that we never did it again,” Dobro says.)Then the world started to open back up. This was accompanied by the reemergence of a thing called “desire.” In its wake came strain. Olsson describes what happened next as the “everyone-needing-exceptions problem.” The underlying issue was that any one person’s desires affected everyone else in the household. That wasn’t an unfamiliar concept. A similar principle applied to the matter of the ceramics, and they had resolved that by compromising on the number and prominence of the pots. But the prospect of one person’s actions exposing the others to the virus was more harrowing, and the questions were more intimate, more fundamental to their happiness. Questions, primarily, of love. Could Rhys kiss that girl? The committee would hear the matter next week. Polyamorous relationships made for dilemmas: Could Dobro’s partner’s spouse’s partner go on a bike ride with a friend? The answer was yes. What about visits to Mom? Well, they couldn’t veto that, they thought—unless maybe, actually, they could.A breaking point came during the Black Lives Matter protests in late spring. Could a few of them join? The pod convened an emergency meeting and decided that waving signs from a distance of 30 feet with a mask was fine, but if anyone entered the crowd, they would have to wear a mask around the house for 11 days to reduce the risk to the others. “Some people thought we were discouraging civic participation,” Olsson says. But as she saw it, they were issuing cautious public health guidance to their pod based on the little data they had.Catherine Olsson thinks about risk for a living and suggested a mathematical model for managing Covid-19 living in her group house.The meetings were growing tiresome, the decisions more contentious. “We were watching group houses fall apart around us,” Dobro says. What was the point of living as a chosen family in your thirties if doing so meant doing less? “At some point, they’re just like, ‘I can’t.’”It was a minor universe to be concerned with in a moment of global sickness and death. But then again, for most of us, our own small daily choices are all we have. To be free is to pursue your own choices. But freedom also means being responsible to the wider community; it is freeing to know that the people around you are not a threat to your health and well-being, and that you are not a harm to them. As the housemates tried to decide on the correct amount of freedom, they were in agreement that they could not rely on the government to delineate it. After all, in some places, indoor dining opened before playgrounds, and basic guidance about masks and disinfection had been bungled. And governments did not seem interested in questions of love and friendship. Olsson had started tweeting at San Francisco mayor London Breed. Where was the data to justify reopening this and not that? What was the city’s guidance on hugging a friend? If Ibasho was going to survive the pandemic intact, its members would have to figure out a better way to evaluate risk. They couldn’t convene the house parliament every time Rhys wanted to kiss a girl.In the late 1970s, a Stanford engineering professor named Ronald Howard became preoccupied with the risks of life. Every activity, he wrote in a  research brief for the US military in 1979, involves hazards:Even the least consequential risks could be quantified with enough data, but often they were so small that they were hard to grasp. So Howard proposed a subunit that he called a micromort: a one-in-a-million chance of death. The advantage of this measure was that it could be used to compare the dangers of apparently dissimilar activities. The risk of a scuba dive, 5 micromorts, could be shown as roughly equivalent to the risk of driving a car from New York City to Cincinnati and back. In this way, Olsson might evaluate the risks of her bicycle commute versus a train ride, or a person might ease the dread of an upcoming surgery by comparing it to something they like to do, like downhill skiing. Howard’s belief was that we willingly invite the possibility of death all the time in order to live our lives more fully. So why not optimize the benefits we get out of this gamble?Howard’s work was part of a wave of research interested in righting human wrongness. Previous orthodoxy had held that human decisionmaking—whether in the stock market or war—could be described by rational models. So why do humans sometimes make decisions that don’t bring them maximal benefit? Psychologists like Daniel Kahneman proposed that the mind takes shortcuts—heuristics, he called them—which are beset by biases. It’s perfectly human, for example, to fear a plane crash more than a car crash—plane crashes are out of your control and kill many people at once. But a car crash is more likely to kill you, mile for mile. Sometimes these shortcuts lead us straight to perfectly good outcomes. Often they do not. Even giving people clear evidence that they are acting against their own interest doesn’t help them change course. The biases seem to be hardwired in our brains.By Eve SneiderHoward’s answer to such irrationality was “installing a new operating system on your brain,” as he wrote. He had first started thinking about the complexities of decisionmaking in the 1960s, when he was called in from academia to help General Electric ponder installing a new component on its nuclear reactors—a question that involved minute uncertainties as well as dire risks and great expenses. The process took eight months. His method, which he called decision analysis, involved reducing a decision to a series of inputs: probabilities in place of uncertainties, using the best possible data to properly weigh each cost and benefit. Essentially, he wanted to clear away the biases and red herrings and get to what actually mattered to the final outcome. It was an iterative process, designed to consider the range of all possible outcomes and inputs. It didn’t erase the risk of a nuclear meltdown. But if one happened, the company could look back and know that it had made a sound decision.Ibasho had engaged in a similar process each time the residents sat down to discuss exceptions. But since this was becoming agonizing to do over and over again for each little thing, Olsson wondered if they could find a way to agree on the costs of everything in a more systematic fashion. That way, they could budget their risk until there was a vaccine. It would be a little like counting calories. Like consuming a sliver of chocolate cake, it was easy to rationalize a single risky decision. Soon enough you’ll consume the whole thing. But if you have to record that sliver and put its calories on display, you’ll think about each bite. The decision about how to spend your budget would be yours—not chosen by the committee—but it would require weighing today’s indulgence against any future snacks.When she proposed this idea, a few of her housemates thought it sounded wonderful. They also happened to be the ones asking for the most exceptions. They had romantic partners living outside the house or they were looking for someone new. Or else, like Olsson, they were numerical enthusiasts. But to Bachar, the housemate Olsson knew from college, it sounded overwhelming. “Thinking about Covid on a daily basis freaked me out,” she says. As the world opened up again, she had chosen to live with minimal exceptions. She wanted life to be settled and safe, not optimized. More data wasn’t going to make her life any easier. It was going to make her crazy. So she and her like-minded fiancé, Nick Breen, asked to be excused from the virus talk. This wasn’t normal house procedure, but the others agreed that they would keep Bachar and her partner looped in. Then, when it was ready, they would all stick to the budget.“Thinking about Covid on a daily basis freaked me out,” says Stephanie Bacher. With her fiancé, Nick Breen, they agreed to follow the Microcovid budget, but not get involved in its design.Beginning in May, the four members of Ibasho’s new Covid subcommittee began to develop a system for weighing and budgeting viral risk. Olsson called their risk points microcovids, in a tip of the hat to Howard, and one microcovid equaled a one-in-a-million chance of catching the virus. They pulled epidemiology papers from Google Scholar and gathered around the table in the hearth to go through the data. The first step was to impose a top-line risk budget that would anchor all of their calculations. They debated this question at length. Olsson floated the idea of 10,000 microcovids per person per year—the equivalent of a 1 percent chance of catching Covid. But what was the actual cost of 10,000 microcovids? By their estimations, for people their age, a 1 percent chance of getting sick was about as risky as driving, which was something they did without thinking. And besides, they figured, if other people who could stay home kept to a similar budget, the hospitals would not overflow. The virus might even disappear. It was clear from the start that the evidence they were looking for did not exist. Unlike the risk of dying in a scuba accident, it was not well understood how people exposed to the virus in specific situations actually catch Covid-19. You couldn’t attach a number to the risk of visiting a grocery store or taking the bus. “The data is not designed for people doing math to make their lives better,” Olsson says.But there was another way to approach the exercise. Any situation could be broken down into two parts: the risk that the people around you were infected and the risk that any infected person would give you the virus. There might not be data on the spread of the virus inside a particular restaurant, or even restaurants generally, but you could attempt to calculate the risk of being in a room with, say, 10 masked workers and 20 unmasked diners for one hour. And then you could tweak the calculation depending on whether there was ventilation or loud talking or the tables were distanced 12 feet apart. Such a model would be a Frankenstein’s monster hodge-podge of estimations. But it would be a place to start comparing one disparate situation to another.So, first, the risk of the people. One metric that Ibasho could determine with some accuracy was the local prevalence of the virus—a function of the number of cases reported and the rate of positive Covid-19 tests.The second part was trickier: the likelihood of an infected person spreading the virus to you. At first, like everyone, the residents of Ibasho had freaked out about contaminated surfaces; hence the sanitizing  at Macwac. But then experts they trusted began to believe that the virus was spread in the air. As they scoured the rapidly expanding canon of Covid research, they found the factors that made a situation more or less risky came down to mask quality, ventilation, distance from other people, and—a particular surprise to them—the volume at which people spoke, because loud talking meant spewing more virus. The complication was determining how much weight to give each factor.One of the researchers Olsson followed on Twitter was Jose-Luis Jimenez, an aerosol scientist at the University of Colorado Boulder who had made an attempt at modeling the rate of transmission between  people within a closed space for a given duration of time. His calculations took into account humidity and airflow and breathing rates, and he sourced them from dozens of papers on masks and ventilation. But much of the evidence had been gathered in studies of flu and other viruses, not the new coronavirus, and the true rate of spread would depend largely on the specifics of any given space. “We don’t know this disease very well,” Jimenez says. Still, the Ibasho residents raided the cupboard, supplementing his sources with other studies they found.There were also special situations to consider. They added in the risks of housemates and partners based on contact-tracing studies that estimated how likely the virus spread within homes and at work. If new data on airplane filtration or infection rates from indoor dining became available, they would revisit the evidence and update accordingly. They would never be exact, Olsson knew. Every data point they had was uncertain, and the evidence for everything from masks to ventilation was under intense public litigation. The numbers they came up with were not any an epidemiologist or government entity would endorse. But as they checked their intuitions, the numbers were starting to feel right.For Olsson, estimating risk points was like tying her shoes or putting on a jacket before stepping outside.In July, after a few weeks of testing and demos with the more apprehensive housemates, the house met and agreed that the Microcovid system was ready for use. The risk assessment tool was really just a Google spreadsheet. Each person had a tab, and they established protocols. The Microcovid creators had allocated each house member 10,000 points for the year, but they had only 3,000 points to spend. Because they lived in a house of six people plus two quasi-live-in partners, just being at home would cost them each about two-thirds of their points. Ideally, before stepping out the door, they would hop on their laptops and enter estimations for things like the number of people, the quality of the ventilation, and the rate of mask-wearing for whatever activity they planned to do. The calculator would spit out a number of points based on these factors, and they would enter it in the sheet—they could update the numbers later, if reality turned out to be different. The first thing Olsson noticed as she stepped into a new world of calculated freedom was that certain things mattered more than she had believed. By summer, going to the grocery store had started to feel normal again. But it involved spending time indoors with lots of people, some of whom inevitably wore ill-fitting masks, and it was eating up their points. The solution: communal shopping for the house with P100 masks, the kind you wear when using paint thinner, with the valve covered by a surgical mask. “It’s a strange fashion choice in Berkeley Bowl,” Olsson says, “but it’s good to know the PPE has got your back.”For Olsson, the point estimation was more like tying her shoes or putting on a jacket before stepping outside. “I don’t find it overwhelming at all,” she says. She could meet up with a friend outdoors, and the combination of fresh air, masks, and distance would whittle the interaction down to just a few points—a blip in the budget. Dobro could take a Lyft to her office downtown and it wasn’t such a big deal, the calculations suggested—provided both she and the driver wore masks and kept the windows open.Though the budget was set for a year, the housemates apportioned the points weekly, so that one person wouldn’t hoard their points and blow them on a 150-person unmasked indoor wedding. Sometimes the constraint produced challenges: A rare high-risk event, like a flight, might exceed an individual person’s budget. This was OK once in a while, provided the person wore a mask around the house and then got a Covid test.Some activities were trickier to translate into points. First dates, in particular, would trigger a reversion to what Olsson calls a “one-off person-risk estimate.” The fact-finding missions these estimates required were a little strange and intrusive. The housemates wanted to know how often a new person shopped for groceries, who they lived with. Were they a gym rat? An ER doctor? Bachar found these interrogations uncomfortable. It felt as if she was implying that her friends were behaving badly. But others felt the questions were a reasonable concession to the pandemic. Dobro says that polyamory had prepared her for these awkward conversations around trade-offs. “We’re used to having conversations that are linked to risk,” she says. If you choose to be indoors with someone, the roommates agreed, make it count. Make it a deep conversation. Make it sex.Microcovid told Sarah Dobro that she could take a Lyft to work with masks and open windows and it wouldn't be a big deal.What if society had a budget for risk? In some ways, it does. This was the initial premise of shutdowns and social distancing and sheltering in place. Our common infection budget was tied to hospital capacity—the number of ICU beds and respirators and medical staff able to respond. For those who could work from home, the task was to contribute as little as possible to the overall sum. This left more points for those who couldn’t. Then, as the first infection curve began to flatten, the foundation of the societal budget seemed to shift. Yes, we still had to worry about public health, but that concern was being stretched by other considerations: business closures, job losses, some ideal of liberty, the desire to eat burritos. As word spread through San Francisco’s group-house scene about Ibasho’s odd calculator, some people thought that, yes, budgeting seemed a little over the top, and the relentless data entry anxious-making. But people in that community tend to be quantifiers themselves. And for group houses, where each person depended on everyone else for their safety, it also looked like a solution to their own precarity.Josh OremanThose group-house friends then started to send the tool to their own friends and family and coworkers. Those second-order contacts responded with gratitude. No official source had produced a tool that answered tangled questions with apparently clear answers. And so new questions were finding their way back to Ibasho: How about the gym? What about kids? Josh Oreman, who had done much of the epidemiological research with Olsson, was concerned about others adopting their model. What if Microcovid inadvertently pushed people toward taking more risk, by giving them a budget that was either too small—and thus ignored—or too great? “What if we say the wrong thing?” he recalls asking. There was only so much that an online risk calculator built for a group of healthy, childless, possibly polyamorous people in their twenties and thirties who lived in a San Francisco group house could do for strangers in unknown situations. There were people who had far less control over their lives than they did—people who worked in an ER or shared a bed with a store clerk.Dobro felt that despite Microcovid’s limitations, people outside their pod would benefit from using it. As a doctor, she had noticed two extreme trends among her patients. Some had become agoraphobic. They were cleaning fastidiously and refusing to leave their houses even for necessities. Others were fed up with constraints and began taking too many risks. One of her patients, a man in his twenties, began coming in frequently for Covid tests. It turned out he had been bouncing between different groups of friends and jetting off on vacations, believing the tests a guarantee of safety. Dobro had started bringing up her own budgeting in these situations. She wanted to show him and anyone else how he could have some of the life he wanted while still being safe.Olsson could see Dobro’s logic. Plenty of people still did not seem to understand how Covid-19 spread, and a tool like this might help them. She wasn’t thinking of the anti-maskers with beliefs diametrically opposed to her own—she couldn’t touch that situation. But she was thinking of the people still scrubbing their hands raw or living in fear of outdoor masked gatherings. Seeing how various activities compared, or how things like masks helped reduce the point totals, might help them find balance. Experts like Jimenez, who took a look at the tool, agreed. Communicating these beliefs was useful.Still, Olsson hadn’t intended to step in as a public health authority. It was one thing to pass a spreadsheet around to like-minded friends. They knew how to approach the numbers, and they would happily do battle with her biases and assumptions. But risk communication wasn’t her expertise. There were abundant caveats. She believed in the numbers—or, at least, she believed in the things they had decided were important for their equations. But with more strangers using the tool, she couldn’t help but wonder if perhaps they had oversimplified. What if they had dismissed important routes of transmission, or included a spurious data point that threw everything out of whack?One of those strangers was Bob Wachter, the chair of internal medicine at UC San Francisco and a frequent public commentator on all matters Covid-19. As a doctor, Wachter was used to probabilistic thinking—working through a range of uncertain pros and cons and arriving at the least worst decision. But in September, he found himself stymied. He was considering a trip to Florida to visit his father, who was 90 and ailing, possibly for the last time. A colleague who happened to know about Ibasho’s budgeting heard about his predicament. Soon Wachter was on Microcovid, inputting the details of his flight.According to Microcovid, the risk of this flight was 200 microcovids, equivalent to a one in 5,000 chance of infection. The estimate was rough, he knew; for that matter, it was hard to judge what he thought of that level of risk. But he found it grounding, if intangible. “Everyone has to make about 50 risk decisions a day, and they really do need more practical guidance,” he says. “The CDC isn’t offering that.” He wouldn’t act on Microcovid’s points alone, but it was an input into another cost-benefit question: “If this goes badly and I get infected, and if I infect my parents, will I look back and say that I felt like this was a bad decision?” Wachter says. He decided he wouldn’t regret this visit. The decision would be sound, even if the outcome turned out badly. So he flew.In October, I visited Ibasho. We gathered in the backyard. The space was cramped, but the housemates had recently undertaken projects to make it more homey: sprucing up the plants, redoing the masonry. We sat under a lemon tree drooping with fruit, masked and distanced, and I was the only stranger. They weren’t using many points. Much of the time,  freedom was simple and involved just stepping outdoors or putting on a better mask. Living with Covid-19 was just living. The calculator had achieved what Olsson had set out to do. They had returned to harmony, in which everyone could exercise their own independence around a common set of beliefs. From left to right, Stephanie Bachar, Nick Breen, Josh Oreman, Sarah Dobro, and Catherine Olsson in front of their home in the Mission District.Beyond this Eden, cases of Covid-19 were spiking again. Society was blowing its budget. The housemates had continued modifying Microcovid. The calculator, gussied up with a website and an interface, now also offered a color-coded risk category based on how much an activity contributed, relatively, to a 10,000-microcovid budget. There was an option to calculate risk using a tenth of Ibasho’s budget, for people who felt they were at higher risk, and preset scenarios for things people were asking about, like flights and one-night stands. They had started sorting out what to do about kids. There was always more to do.A few weeks later, as the winter surge reached San Francisco, I checked back in. Lives at Ibasho were getting more complicated. The housemates felt they knew how to live, and yet the rising infection rate meant their summer habits were putting them over budget in winter. There were new questions too, like whether a new variant believed to spread faster would mess with their calculations, and how to figure in the risks of people around them who had received a vaccine.Bachar had initially found the points frustrating. When the rate of infection had been lower, it had been both overwhelming to keep track of everything—who else was in the line at Walgreens that day, what kinds of masks they wore—and also a little futile, because she never hit her limit anyway. The tabulations didn’t come naturally to her as they did to Olsson. But now she found the process oddly comforting. She could see how being around  friends who did not budget their risk was getting more expensive. It was odd to think of her friends as “expensive.” She did not like the sound of it, and she would have to see them less. Still, the points gave her a structure. It was a way of coping, however imperfectly, with this strange new life she was living. It was, she had calculated, the best she could do.WIRED is where tomorrow is realized. It is the essential source of information and ideas that make sense of a world in constant transformation. The WIRED conversation illuminates how technology is changing every aspect of our lives—from culture to business, science to design. The breakthroughs and innovations that we uncover lead to new ways of thinking, new connections, and new industries.More From WIREDContact© 2021 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes acceptance of our User Agreement (updated as of 1/1/21) and Privacy Policy and Cookie Statement (updated as of 1/1/21) and Your California Privacy Rights. Wired may earn a portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast. Ad ChoicesSubscribe to our newsletters to stay up-to-date on the latest outdoor news.Help fund our award-winning journalism with a contribution today.David Kushner is a contributing editor at Outside, as well as author of The Players Ball: a Genius, a Con Man, and the Secret History of the Internet’s Rise.For nearly half a century, legends of a giant cave in the Andes—holding artifacts that could rewrite human history—have beckoned adventurers and tantalized fans of the occult. Now the daughter of a legendary explorer is on a new kind of quest: to tell the truth about the cave in order to save it.The world’s most mysterious cave is difficult to reach. To get to Cueva de los Tayos—Cave of the Oilbirds—drive east out of Ecuador’s capital city of Quito for eight hours along narrow, potholed roads that twist through cloudforest above the Amazon Basin. Pull over outside the small town of Mendez, and walk a path to the bank of the muddy Santiago River, where you’ll see locals hauling 150-pound bushels of bananas on their shoulders. Lower yourself into a long wooden canoe and glide past cascading waterfalls to the start of a dirt trail. Hike five hours in the humidity, over Puntilla de Coangos mountain, then up to the summit of Bocana de Coangos. The trail ends at a clearing with three thatch huts, home to a dozen Shuar, the ancient tribe that guards the cave.The Shuar are the Indigenous people of the region, legendary warriors known for shamanism and for shrinking the heads of their enemies. Tayos beckons from deep inside territory that is managed and protected by the tribe, and visitors must take great care when navigating the local politics and customs. Theo Toulkaridis, a geology professor and researcher at the University of the Armed Forces in Ecuador, who is a leading expert on Tayos, learned this the hard way in 2014. After a few days exploring the cave, he climbed out to find 20 angry Shuar waiting for him. Toulkaridis had hired local guides, but other Shuar were upset that they had not been hired as well. “My guide hugged me close and whispered, ‘Don’t resist,’” Toulkaridis recalls. Then a Shuar woman whipped him with a belt.Tayos is named for the brown-feathered, hook-billed nocturnal birds that dwell inside the cave alongside thousands of bats. The birds act a lot like bats, spending their days in darkness and heading out at night to forage for fruit. They’re called oilbirds ­because of their fatty chicks, which the Shuar capture and reduce to oil. The cave is also rumored to contain artifacts of a lost civilization. A 1972 bestselling book by Swiss author Erich von Däniken, called The Gold of the Gods, claimed that Tayos held carved passageways and a “metal library” of tablets written in an unknown language. Von Däniken has long believed that aliens once inhabited the earth, and the tablets fit his theory that extraterrestrials helped ancient people evolve. The notion has been criticized as pseudoscientific and racist, attributing the achievements of now marginalized earthlings to ­interlopers from space. Yet it spawned a cottage industry of books, conventions, and TV shows, ­including the History Channel’s Ancient Aliens, which premiered in 2010 and is one of the network’s most popular programs.A couple of years after The Gold of the Gods was published, the late Scottish explorer Stan Hall assembled a team of 100 scientists, cavers, British and Ecuadorean military personnel, and, remarkably, astronaut Neil Armstrong, who served as a figurehead, and led them into Tayos to unravel the mystery. What they found astonished them. Deep inside, in spots where it would have been impossible to lug machinery, there were stone passageways that appeared to have been cut at right angles and then polished. They also discovered a burial site dating back to 1500 B.C. “The cadaver, as if surprised by the sudden intrusion after so many lonely centuries, crumbled to dust when touched,” Hall writes in Tayos Gold, his book about the expedition. Though the team didn’t find the metal library, Armstrong put the adventure “up there with the moon landing.”Beyond that, only a small number of intrepid hikers, wide-eyed UFO believers, and even a team of researchers from Brigham Young University—who believed that the metal tablets might be linked to the Mormon faith—have made it inside. The cave has also attracted interest from geologists and archaeologists, who have mapped portions using 3D technology to better understand its scope. (Roughly four miles of the cave have been mapped so far, but an estimated three miles remain.) Toulkaridis calls it “a natural laboratory which is fundamentally untouched.” To enter Tayos, you need more than the permission of the Shuar. You also need a blessing from the cave itself. I learn this late one starry night in August of 2019, in Kuankus, the tiny Shuar settlement, which is located about one mile uphill from Tayos. Getting here has been a brutal ten-hour slog in sweltering heat. The trek included crossing a rickety rope bridge high above the rapids and trudging in mud through thick jungle loaded with giant black bullet ants, so named because being bit by one feels like being shot. The plan is to stay in Kuankus for the night, then enter the cave with our Shuar guides the next morning.I’m here with a small team led by Eileen Hall, Stan Hall’s 34-year-old half-Scottish, half-Ecuadoran daughter, who continued her father’s quest to understand the true history and power of the cave after he died of prostate cancer in 2008. Eileen, who lives in London, is artistic and spiritual, a former architect who now conducts what she calls energy-healing work with private clients. Along with another architect, Tamsin Cunningham, she is also a cofounder of Tayos, a company that explores the cave through writing, music, and meditation. Today, with her long brown hair in a ponytail, she’s dressed in a black Ecuadorean shirt, long gray hiking pants, and blue rubber boots caked in mud. This is her fourth expedition to the cave. When I ask her what I should expect, she tells me that Tayos is “a psychedelic experience.” After sipping from a wooden bowl of chicha, a chalky, alcoholic drink made from fermented yuca (prepared by women who chew it and then spit into the bowl), we gather with the Shuar around a campfire. A shaman—a stout, middle-aged woman with long, dark hair—leads us through the permission ceremony. We hold hands while in Spanish she thanks the stars, the moon, the earth. She removes a smoldering log from the fire, waving its smoke behind each of us in a blessing. Finally, we take turns asking for permission from Arutam, the all-powerful force in the Shuar religion, to enter Tayos. After a few moments of silence, the shaman tells us that the spirit has allowed us inside what she calls “the womb of the earth.”David Kushner is a contributing editor at Outside, as well as author of The Players Ball: a Genius, a Con Man, and the Secret History of the Internet’s Rise.“Morder la cabeza”—bite off the head—the street vendor says as he hands me a chontacuro, a plump white grubworm fresh from a sizzling grill. As I struggle to distinguish the head from the body, Eileen says, in her Scottish brogue, “It’s that little black thing right there.”It’s a few days before our descent into Tayos, and we’ve stopped for a break in Mera, a small gateway town to the Andes. A band plays drums and trumpets just off the town square where local merchants sell crafts and food. Eileen sways to the festive music and compliments a local craftswoman on her butterfly earrings. Though Eileen has been living in the UK since she was a young girl, she was born in Ecuador and feels deeply connected to the country. If it wasn’t for Tayos, which drew her father here decades before, she wouldn’t even exist.Eileen’s father never dreamed of becoming a famous explorer. As a young married man in Dunbar, a seaside town near Edinburgh, he was a mild-mannered civil engineer with a bookish interest in science, history, and travel. “He got interested in explorers,” ­Eileen says. “People like Lawrence of Arabia who would go off into the unknown.” Reading about Tayos in The Gold of the Gods captured his imagination like nothing before. Von Däniken claimed that an Argentine-Hungarian explorer, Juan Moricz, had taken him to the cave, where they found the tablets that, he wrote, “might contain a synopsis of the history of humanity, as well as an account of the origin of mankind on earth and information of a vanished civilization.”The fantastical account gripped Hall, who on a whim decided to write to Neil Armstrong and invite him to take a trip to the cave in 1976. Armstrong, recently world-famous from his moon walk, could draw enormous attention to the venture, and as Hall had learned, the astronaut had Scottish roots, so he just might consider the idea. To Hall’s shock, Armstrong wrote back saying he was interested. With that letter in hand, Hall approached both the British and Ecuadorean governments, which agreed to provide funding and helicopter transportation to the site. Within a year, Hall had organized one of the largest cave expeditions of his time.Stan Hall assembled a team of scientists, cavers, military personnel, and, remarkably, astronaut Neil Armstrong, and led them into Tayos.Stan Hall assembled a team of scientists, cavers, military personnel, and, remarkably, astronaut Neil Armstrong, and led them into Tayos.Hall’s journey made him famous, inspiring him to quit his day job and move to ­Ecuador to keep exploring the cave. But it also ended his first marriage, which couldn’t endure the strain. In Quito, he met and married an Ecuadoran woman, Janeth Muñoz, who shared his passion for Ecuador’s history, and in 1986 she gave birth to their daughter. For Eileen, growing up as the child of a celebrated explorer felt like a fairy tale. But Muñoz, who still lives near Edinburgh, says that Hall struggled to get support for his research. He was consumed by his search for the legendary library, and the only money they had came from his occasional consulting jobs. When he wasn’t strategizing with treasure hunters over beers, he was off with the Shuar, who made him a blood brother of the tribe. “Dad became obsessed, he called it the fever,” Eileen recalls. With Hall so caught up in his work while Ecuador was on the verge of a deep financial crisis, they were often unable to pay their rent.Hall and Muñoz had a second daughter, and in the mid-1990s Muñoz insisted on moving the family to Scotland to have a safer and more stable existence. For ten-year-old Eileen, the relocation—in the middle of the Scottish winter—was devastating. She was the only brown-skinned, Spanish-speaking child in her class. Bullied by other students, she became depressed and at times suicidal. As she matured into adulthood, Eileen took steps to find meaning in her life. She traveled around Europe and earned a degree in architecture. Meanwhile, her father continued to return to Ecuador, where his fruitless searches for the metal library grew increasingly frustrating. He was also, Eileen learned, dying of cancer.Late one night in 2008, while holding vigil at his bedside in Scotland, she was struck with a new sense of purpose: she would keep his work alive. For her, Tayos was about more than the mysteries of the Shuar—it was also a connection to her origins. She would go back to Ecuador, she promised him, and continue the journey he had begun. “I’m going to follow your spirit,” she said just before he died.Eileen’s decision left her mother with mixed emotions. “I feel proud of her,” Muñoz says, “but I suppose she is going to encounter the same kind of problems that he did,” with trying to protect the cave.After 2010, the Shuar began guiding small groups of tourists into Tayos. Then, in 2015, Eileen made her first trip into the cave with an Ecuadoran documentary filmmaker. She was excited, but the realities of the journey felt treacherous. It was the rainy season, which meant flooding streams and water coursing down muddy slopes along the approach hike. Entering Tayos begins with a rappel along a series of ropes, and on the descent Eileen was frightened by the screaming oilbirds lurking in the blackness. Once on the ground, she found the cave so overwhelmingly dusty and dark that she jumped at the first chance to leave before nightfall. “It was all too much,” she says.Two years later, in 2017, she was invited to return for an episode of Expedition Unknown, a Travel Channel program. Though she had grown up with what she calls “the treasure story” of Tayos, she was no longer convinced that a metal library existed, and even if it did, she didn’t think it would be the work of little green men. Now she felt like a prop in an overwrought reality show. She couldn’t stomach the host’s perfunctory treatment of the Shuar and his blustery mugging for the camera: as he entered one shadowy chamber, he proclaimed, “This just got real!”Eileen felt a growing sense of alienation in a male-dominated adventure narrative. Explorer stories—from Columbus to Shackleton to Neil Armstrong—are predominantly about white men seeking the edges of the known world. Where did she fit in? “Men went off and discovered new lands, and that’s why our history is that women have to stay at home,” she told me. “For me this journey has been about finding my voice as a woman.”In August 2018, she led her first expedition to Tayos, a trip with both artistic and scientific goals. She didn’t want to just investigate the cave; she wanted to find new ways of experiencing it. To do this, she brought along a small group of artists, including Jon Hopkins, an electronic musician from England, and neuroscientist ­Mendel Kaelen, who would measure how listening to music in the cave impacted the brain. Once inside, Eileen and the artists made their way into the shadows, meditating, playing music, and listening to ways that the cave walls sculpted the sound. “It was a gentler way of exploring, instead of this gung-ho way,” she says. She emerged four days later with a new sense of the place, and of herself. “In shamanic work, you go into the darkness and the shadow, but the moment you run away from it is when you get into trouble,” she says. “For me the cave is this idea of facing the unknown and befriending it to receive a more complete wisdom about life.”For our trip, Eileen had a vision, a project that would bring together creativity and activism. The plan is to record musical performances inside the cave for a multimedia installa­tion in London. Publicity from that will generate support for Unesco World Heritage site designation, protecting the area around Tayos from mining and other threats. The musicians are an Ecuadoran multi-­instrumentalist named David Villa­gomez and British producer Henry “Hoffy” Hoffman. We’ll set up camp an hour’s hike into the cave and spend two days and nights there, recording and exploring under the guidance of the Shuar. Eileen admits that skeptics would probably label her New Agey, but Toulkaridis told me that, after initially being resistant to her idea of playing music in the cave, he has no objections to the esoteric nature of the enterprise. To him, anything that helps spread the word about the fragility of the region’s landscape and the Shuar people is worthwhile. “Scientists have no outreach to the mass media,” he says. “You need someone who can help get the message heard.”A seminomadic, polygynous tribe spread across the forests of Ecuador and Peru, the Shuar have been fighting against colonization and missionization since the Spaniards invaded their territory in the 16th century. To the Europeans, they were subjects of fascination: a warrior culture known for shrinking the heads of their victims as a way of capturing souls. In battle they believed that their shaman could conjure invisible darts to destroy their foes. They were so feared that in 1995 the Ecuadorean army developed elite units of Shuar soldiers for territorial battles with Peru.Since the 1960s, the Shuar have maintained jurisdiction over portions of their land, and they’ve become a powerful force in protecting the country’s natural resources. In 2008, they helped persuade the Ecuadorean legislature to pass the world’s first law granting the kinds of legal rights to forests and rivers that are ordinarily reserved for people. Still, the Shuar are vulnerable to development. In 2012, the government entered into a contract with Ecuacorriente S.A. in which the Chinese-owned mining company would invest $1.4 billion to build a copper and gold mine in the heart of Shuar territory. The move defied Ecuadorean law and international agreements on the rights of Indigenous people, according to the ­International Federation of Human Rights and the United Nations. Called the Mirador Mine, it’s the first large-scale mining operation in the country and will occupy some 22,000 acres of forest. Since construction began, the Shuar have staged numerous protests. There have been violent confrontations with police and military forces, and at least two anti-mining activists have been murdered. Eileen told me that her father earned the respect of the Shuar and that the tribe was instrumental in helping him gain access to the cave. “They were very welcoming,” she says. After three past trips to Tayos, she’s developed her own familial connection with Kuankus villagers, who dress in modern clothing but still mostly live off the land. When we first arrived, a middle-aged Shuar woman named Susana Wamputsar and her husband, Don Bosco Tiwiram, presented ­Eileen with handmade jewelry. After the ceremony giving us permission to enter the cave, we sit with the couple—along with one of their sons, Jaime, who will be our primary guide and translator—on a small wooden bench outside a thatch hut. As Susana speaks, Jaime translates her words into Spanish, then Eileen translates them into English so I can follow along. Susana, who was around 12 when Hall’s expedition came through the area, recalls the dramatic sight of the helicopters landing. She says the elders in her community wouldn’t dare go near the cave while the foreigners were there. According to folklore, the men left with “a thigh bone,” she says, as well as boxes of ceramics. She recounts another well-known story, about a time decades earlier when an Italian monk named Father Carlos Crespi left the cave with “tablets wrapped in newspaper.” After a few moments of silence, the shaman tells us that the spirit has allowed us inside what she calls “the womb of the earth.”After a few moments of silence, the shaman tells us that the spirit has allowed us inside what she calls “the womb of the earth.”Ecuador banned expeditions to Tayos soon after Hall’s expedition, so that the Shuar could “come back to their place and just be with the cave,” Susana explains. It remained closed to foreigners until the Shuar began offering tours a decade ago. When I ask her what the Shuar believe is inside Tayos, she tells me that there is a tall stone that contains salt, as well as a “double spirit.” One is Nunkui, a female entity who protects and cultivates the plants of the area. The other is Weh, who makes healing salts. For centuries, the Shuar would descend into Tayos to retrieve Weh’s magic salts. But since others began traipsing through the cave, says Jaime, Weh has receded into the shadows. Now he believes Weh is ready to return. Earlier in the year, Jaime was in the cave with a group of tourists when he heard a loud noise coming from a high cranny of a cavern. “It sounded like footsteps,” he says. Jaime, who is intense and wiry, with thick black hair and bangs, flipped on his ­headlamp and, along with another guide, shimmied over fallen rocks toward the sound. At a narrow passageway, the footsteps grew louder and louder, spooking the other guide so much that he retreated, but Jaime crawled inside. He was alone when everything suddenly went silent. Then he looked down and saw a giant footprint.“A footprint?” I ask, skeptical.“I have a picture,” he replies, matter-of-factly. He swipes at his phone, then hands it to me. The photo indeed shows a fat, wide footprint in brown mud that, by my count, has seven toes. His account would feel like a hoax if Jaime wasn’t so stoic and his words weren’t so heartfelt. The Shuar consider dreams to be visions, and for weeks, Jaime says, he has been seeing Weh in his sleep. The spirit, appearing in the form of a Shuar man, told Jaime that he wants to return. Jaime says he also had been having dreams of Eileen coming back to Tayos, bringing others with her. Together with Jaime, they would sit deep inside the cave in total silence, and if they waited long enough, Weh would emerge. Turning to Eileen, Jaime tells her that, physically, she may live in London, but her true spirit is in Tayos. “I feel that you live in the cave,” he says.Oh, and the group from his dreams who would conjure Weh with her? That would be us.This just got real!The mouth of Tayos opens at the end of a steep path in the rainforest. As we walk toward it on the morning of our descent, butterflies flutter between the leaves. A four-inch caterpillar, with black and yellow stripes and spiky green hairs, navigates a sodden log. There are also things that look like aliens. Near the entrance of the cave, we see a triangular gray rock that resembles the head of an ET, with impressions for eyes. Then there’s the entrance itself, which looks a lot like the outline of an extraterrestrial’s face. Perhaps the psychedelic experience Eileen spoke of begins here. One by one, we take turns stepping down toward the mouth and slipping into our harnesses, while Jaime and a half-dozen other Shuar connect rappelling devices to ropes secured to the side of the entrance. The 200-foot descent along jagged wet shale lasts about five minutes but feels like an eternity, and I sense that I’m entering another world. About midway down, with the sunlight receding, I hear, for the first time, the distant screams of the cave’s namesake birds. And by screams I mean screams: like Linda-Blair-with-her-head-backwards-in-The-Exorcist screams. Capable of hitting 100 decibels—greater than a snowmobile engine—they are among the loudest birds on the planet. When they’re not screaming, they’re clicking, using echolocation to navigate the darkness. They spend their days perched on rock shelves throughout the cave, heading out at night to forage. Once inside Tayos, it’s difficult to get a true sense of scale. For the most part, this isn’t a claustrophobic maze of narrow passageways; it’s a series of massive chambers, some hundreds of feet tall. With our headlamps illuminating the darkness, we clamber away from the entrance over several dozen yards of massive fallen boulders, then rappel down a 15-foot precipice. This takes us to a famous landmark, the Juan Moricz arch, named after the explorer who purportedly led Von Däniken into the cave. Separating two chambers, it appears to have been precisely cut and smoothed. In The Gold of the Gods, Von Däniken writes: “I’d like to see the archaeologist with the nerve to tell me that this work was done with hand-axes!”He should talk to Florencio Delgado, an archaeologist at San Francisco de Quito University who has studied the cave during multiple visits. “It’s a made-up story,” he says. Toulkaridis, the geologist, agrees. “I call myself the assassin of ignorance,” he tells me with a laugh. The cave is something like 25,000 to 30,000 years old, he says, and is composed of sandstone and carbonate. The polished walls were created by geodynamic pressure grinding the rock into layers, which were then carved by the water that flowed around them.The deeper we go into Tayos, the more spectacular it becomes. We step into a giant cavern, which I nickname King Kong’s Palace. Boulders cover the ground like fallen ruins, and the cave’s ceiling looms at least a couple hundred feet overhead. In the distance, there’s another passageway with perfectly smooth walls that rise and meet at close to a right angle.Around the corner, we come to the gargantuan Main Chamber. It could hold a 20-story building lying on its side, and it’s just as tall. The light from our headlamps fades before it reaches the far side. The ground is rocky, lunar, and black, but unlike the moon it’s teeming with life. Giant brown tarantulas stroll between stones. I catch the glimmer of the silvery back of a three-inch beetle before it scurries into the shadows. On a small boulder, we spy what looks like a steampunk insect, part flesh, part machine. It’s an Amblypygi, or whip spider, and as we get closer, we see that it has a beetle in its mandibles.After pitching our tents and filling up on lentils and rice, we fall asleep to the cries of the oilbirds, which gradually fade to silence.The only way to tell that it’s morning in Tayos is by the Altar of Light. Located at the far end of our encampment, the towering chamber is the one spot other than the entrance where sunlight makes it inside. The light streams in through two openings some 200 feet above, along with a shower of rain. Shoots of tall green grass rise from the mound of rich black soil below. It’s a remarkable setting, and Eileen and the musicians decide to do some recording. Hoffy sets up his equipment, while Villagomez perches on a rock with his flute. But then something overcomes Villagomez, who bursts into tears. Until now he’s been a jovial, good-humored part of the troupe, but he’s sobbing heavily. When he recovers some 15 minutes later, after being comforted by the group, I ask him what happened. He cites the overwhelming energy in the Altar of Light chamber and says, “I felt something inside me die.” That sounds far-out, but in this spot it’s understandable, and it’s hard not to be moved when Villagomez begins to play.After the session, we take turns standing in the rays of sunlight slashing down to the chamber floor. As the sun arcs higher, they slowly merge into a single beam, shooting down between two towering pillars of rock. If this was an Indiana Jones movie, the light would be pointing to some secret burial site—which, actually, it might have been.As Stan Hall claims in Tayos Gold: “20th July 1976, 11:25 A.M., seven years to the day since Neil Armstrong’s left foot made that ‘first small step for man’ on the Moon,” a scientist on Hall’s team “was kneeling on a pile of guano molesting a scuttling beetle with a twig when he scraped across a shard of pottery.” The shard led to others, and eventually a cadaver. The location: the spot where the light points when it splits the rocks.“I’m 100 percent sure that if rituals have been done, they’ve been done there,” Toulkaridis tells me. “The Indigenous people before the Shuar wouldn’t care about flat surfaces but about how the sun shines inside that area.” That afternoon, Jaime guides us deeper into the cave. The terrain transforms from large caverns to smaller passageways, and we shimmy and bend around sharp stalactites. Eventually, we come to an area where the ceiling is only about five feet off the ground, a spot that Jaime says is dark and still enough for Weh. We shut off our headlamps and wait in silence. The only sound I hear is a bat’s flapping wings, which sends an occasional breeze at my face. After 20 minutes or so, Jaime announces that he feels the presence of a being. Hoffman tentatively asks, “Which being is it? Is it, um, the one with salt?”In fact, Jaime says it’s another one, a guardian who’s watching out for the cave, and for us. According to Jaime, the spirit is saying, “This is a very sacred place, very few people have been through here.” The spirit says we shouldn’t have used the complicated route through the stalactites, and that we should go around them on the way out. The spirit of Stan Hall is with us, too. “I can feel it,” Jaime says.The group is quiet for a beat. The others say they don’t sense anything. I say I felt only a cold breeze that blew for a few seconds. A change in temperature, Jaime notes, is what happens when a spirit comes and goes.Our journey inside Tayos culminates at a crystal-clear waterfall pouring over a 15-foot rock wall into a shallow pool. After our trek through the jungle and two days in the cave, it’s a welcome shower that we savor before heading back to our camp.That wouldn’t be our last opportunity to get wet. When we wake up the next morning, rain is pouring into the Altar of Light. By the time we pack our gear and make it past the Juan Moricz arch, the water is pouring over the walls and rising at our feet, drowning out our voices and forcing us to shout. It’s a harrowing moment, especially when Jaime and the other Shuar disappear inexplicably into the shadows before suddenly emerging to help us make our exit.One by one, we pull ourselves up against the current and over a small wall, but the downpour into the mouth of the cave is so intense that ascending the ropes is impossible. If it doesn’t let up, we’ll have to camp another night, then try again tomorrow. After a couple of hours, though, the rain settles and we begin our climb. The Shuar outside the cave yank us up in fits and starts, which sends me hurtling into the wall. Emerging from the mouth into the misty daylight has me thinking that Eileen was right after all: spending three days inside this mystical underworld was a total trip.“For me the cave is this idea of facing the unknown,” Eileen Hall says, “and befriending it to receive a more complete wisdom about life.”“For me the cave is this idea of facing the unknown,” Eileen Hall says, “and befriending it to receive a more complete wisdom about life.”As a new generation seeks out Tayos, the elder Western mythmakers of the cave are losing their hold on the legend. Last spring I drove past the golf courses and palm trees of Indian Wells, California, to watch Erich von Däniken, now gray haired and hard of hearing, address his minions at Contact in the Desert, one of the largest UFO conventions in the world. Hundreds of fans in alien T-shirts and glow-stick hats packed the hall to hear his revisionist history of how, among other things, the biblical Abraham “was on a spaceship in orbit.” When I speak with him afterward, Von Däniken is greatly interested to hear that Stan Hall’s daughter is continuing to explore Tayos. But he admits that he’s no longer certain aliens visited the cave. Now he has a new theory: “I think a metallic library does exist,” he says, “but it belongs to the Mormons.”Back in Ecuador, Eileen reflects on our journey over a lunch of chicken and rice. The trip has deepened her resolve to tell a new chapter of Tayos to the world, she says. She’s eager to craft the multimedia installation in London and online. (The installation would be delayed indefinitely by the coronavirus pandemic, but the digital version, called the Liminal Compass, was set to launch this fall at Tayos.org, where she was accepting donations for the project.) When international travel is viable again, she hopes to partner with big-mountain skier turned mindset coach Kristen Ulmer to lead a workshop in which participants will “face their fears” inside the cave. And she and Toulkaridis are planning another expedition to conduct further research as part of their campaign to convince Unesco to protect the site.  “Every time I come back,” she says, “there’s a deeper connection with the Shuar, with the space, and with the story.”Outside Online aims to deliver readers the world, dispatching our writers and photographers to the ends of the earth to report the one-of-a-kind stories that have inspired and informed generations of readers. We hear from our audience every day about how much they love our long-form journalism. But it’s no longer sustainable for us to give it away for free. Making a financial contribution to Outside is not tax-deductible, but it will help pay for the writers, editors, fact-checkers, designers, and photographers that stories like these demand—and will ensure we can keep publishing them for years to come. Please support Outside Online today.To inspire active participation in the world outside through award-winning coverage of the sports, people, places, adventure, discoveries, health and fitness, gear and apparel, trends and events that make up an active lifestyle.
            Subscribe to our What You Missed newsletter for the top headlines from the outdoor world, in your inbox six days a week. Looking for something else? Check out             our entire suite of free newsletters here.You’ve read the 3 complimentary stories available to you. Get unlimited access to The Atavist Magazine and enjoy any story from our award-winning catalog.Support great writing by joining the Atavist today. At noon on October 9, 1948, a group of political correspondents gathered at the Ecuadorean embassy in Washington, D.C. They were greeted by the ambassador, Augusto Dillon, a short man with slicked-back hair and a disarming smile. He led them into an elegant salon, where they were seated in chairs embroidered with gold thread. At the front of the room, the reporters noticed a six-foot-long wooden pole, an outfit made of shells and tree bark, clumps of leaves wrapped in cellophane, and eight round, leathery objects topped with what appeared to be human hair. Behind the reporters, a few balloons bobbed in the air, like leftovers from a birthday party. Once everyone was settled, Ambassador Dillon—he went by Gus in diplomatic circles—said a few words. Then another man stood up. He wore a dark suit and rimless glasses. His name was Wilburn Ferguson, and he was the chief anesthesiologist of the San Juan de Dios Hospital, in Quito. Ferguson looked “young (40 or so),” one reporter judged, and “big, blondish.” Ferguson was an American who had lived in South America for most of the previous 17 years, studying indigenous medicine in hopes of finding new treatments for chronic diseases. Officially, he was in the United States to raise money for a new teaching hospital in Ecuador. But as one journalist noted, Ferguson had “more than a single mission in mind.”After introducing himself, Ferguson picked up the wooden pole at the front of the room, raised it to his lips, and blew. A dart shot across the room, exploding a balloon. In the Amazon, Ferguson told the startled reporters, an indigenous hunter with a chonta blowgun like the one he held could drop a hummingbird from the highest branches of a tree. If the hunter was aiming for bigger prey, he dipped the dart in curare, a poison that could paralyze a large creature within minutes, causing death by asphyxiation.Ferguson passed around a packet of leaves. These were the source of curare, he said, which in very small doses could control spasms. Then he distributed bark from the cinchona tree. This was used to make quinine, which revolutionized Western medicine after a Spanish missionary observed a healer use it to treat malaria. Another cellophane packet held coca leaves, used to make cocaine, one of the first local anesthetics. A tribe called the Jivaro, Ferguson said, understood the benefits of these substances long before Americans or Europeans had ever heard of them.Finally, he turned to the round, leathery objects. “The doctor,” a reporter wrote, “began passing around human heads shrunken to baseball size.” They appeared “amazingly real,” a Canadian journalist reported. “[We] found it a grisly task, handling those long, black-haired and strikingly human, doll-like heads.” The reporters “gingerly handled them, squirmed, and passed them along.”Ferguson thought the group might like to know how a head was shrunk. The skull and brain were removed straightaway, he explained; an incision was made from the crown to the nape of a severed head, and the face and scalp were then slipped off “like a sock.” The skull was discarded, while the husk was scraped clean, boiled in a liquid made from a mix of ingredients, and reshaped around hot sand and pebbles until it looked just as it had before death, only smaller. “The head-shrinking rite is the most mystic and secret formula among all Jivaro religious and medical practices,” Ferguson said. The plants used in the process—the leaves and barks boiled in the liquid—had uncanny powers. Somehow, he said, they could shrink tissue “to any desired dimensions” and preserve it from decay.At this point, Ferguson picked up what one reporter called “perhaps the most important of all his exhibits”: a glass vial containing about three ounces of head-shrinking fluid. “As far as I know,” Ferguson said, “I am the first and only white man ever to lay my hands on this.” It had taken him over a decade to find a healer who would give him a sample. To Ferguson it was more than a curiosity. The solution, he said, once it was refined and stabilized by modern science, might produce a treatment for cancer.Someone in the audience interrupted. Could he explain that point, the one about cancer? “It’s strictly speculation, but it’s an idea I’ve had for a long time,” Ferguson said, according to a story in The Washington Post two days later. “You see, pathologists say it’s impossible to shrink cartilaginous tissue, but headhunters have been doing it for centuries. This brew apparently holds the answer to such shrinking. Now, everyone knows cancer is unrestrained growth of tissue cells. If this fluid can shrink cartilage, perhaps it can also hold back cancer growth.”  At this point, the reporters must have expressed some skepticism. Ambassador Dillon stood up. “I don’t know about the rest of you,” he said, “but I feel like a drink.” Trays of champagne and caviar appeared. The shrunken heads were whisked away. No one will be surprised to learn that Wilburn Ferguson never cured cancer. There have been significant advances in oncology since his press conference at the Ecuadorean embassy, from combination chemotherapy to minimally invasive surgeries to gene therapy. But shrunken heads haven’t figured into any serious efforts to treat or eliminate the disease. You won’t find Ferguson’s name on any groundbreaking medical studies.To say that his story is one of failure, though, would be a mistake. It’s a family saga in which an unlikely theory drove a quest that spanned generations. It looped in outsiders—my own family played a minor role. For a few years in the 1960s, Ferguson and his family lived in a spare apartment behind my step-grandfather’s dental office in El Centro, California, while Ferguson looked for Hollywood millionaires to support his research. We have family photos of my stepdad, John, who was 11 years old then, wearing a feather headdress with a tail made of beetle shells which Ferguson brought back from the jungle. In his hands, he holds a pair of shrunken heads. John doesn’t look happy; in some of the images he’s practically wincing. The shells hanging down from the headdress, he explained to me, felt like they were wriggling to life every time he moved. But John loved science as much as any kid growing up during the space race. For him, the chance to be part of “a real science project with a real scientist” was the height of happiness. He and his parents believed Ferguson’s ideas were worth pursuing. My step-grandfather, an oral surgeon, organized a committee of Ferguson supporters who gathered at the house every week, often beneath a cloud of cigarette smoke, to discuss fundraising. John borrowed his father’s camera to shoot portraits of Ferguson’s grandchildren. He made reproductions of before and after slides showing what Ferguson said was evidence that a compound he’d derived from the head-shrinking formula could reduce the size of cancerous cells. Before long, John said, Ferguson was “almost like a member of the family.” He had a friendly, straightforward way of explaining big ideas that made John think of Mr. Wizard, the popular TV scientist who taught children how to perform experiments. The fundraising never materialized in any substantial way, and the Fergusons eventually left the California desert. But that wasn’t the end of the story. Ferguson kept pursuing his dream. He inspired others—friends, benefactors, unlikely strangers—to support him. More than two decades after his death, he still has followers. The notion that he was on the brink of curing cancer is so alluring that the Ferguson faithful are willing to overlook a few things. For one, Ferguson wasn’t a doctor. What’s more, many details of his early years in the Amazon are impossible to verify; the only sources are his own writings, a recording of a lecture he gave in the late 1970s, scattered letters, his stories as other people remember them, and news articles in which he was sometimes the only person quoted. And his approach to the indigenous people his work depended on was deeply problematic. He exoticized their traditions even as he believed in the power those traditions held. He accepted  the advantages that came with being white and American in parts of the world that had endured centuries of exploitation by outsiders who looked like him. At least once, by his own account, Ferguson used unproven treatments on vulnerable patients without their knowledge, a violation of basic medical ethics.  For all his faults, though, Ferguson wasn’t a snake-oil salesman or a con artist. Outlandish though some of his stories still seem, the details contained within them were consistent. The people I spoke to who knew Ferguson were struck by his sincerity. He could be stubborn and impractical, but as my stepdad recalled, Ferguson was always careful to point out that he hadn’t discovered a silver bullet, merely a promising treatment that needed more study. What he wanted most of all was a real scientific shot.Ferguson was an outsider his whole life. Like a modern-day Don Quixote, he chased an impossible dream based more on faith than evidence. He wandered the wilderness seeking a miracle. The doctors and scientists who doubted him had every reason to. But what if they missed a bark or root of medical importance? What if Ferguson saw something they couldn’t? What if he was right? Ferguson was born in 1905 in Shawnee, Oklahoma, but grew up farther west, in National City, California, where his parents leased a farm, raised cows, and grew fruit trees. When he was little, his mother and father often found him stuck on rooftops or buried in piles of corn; he had, as he later wrote, “an inborn urge to explore everything, everywhere.” He loved stories about adventurers and missionaries—Dr. David Livingstone, Roald Amundsen, Martin Frobisher—and felt called to follow in their footsteps. In seventh grade, he joined the Seventh-day Adventist Church, which sent missionaries all over the world. The church was founded in 1863 in Michigan; by 1900, there were congregations as far afield as Japan. In Ferguson’s time there were already more Adventists abroad than in the United States. Adventist publications exhorted believers to carry the message of salvation across the globe. “Thousands of Indians along the banks of the Amazon and its tributaries have never heard the name of Jesus,” observed a church magazine in 1920. The same publication once asked, “Will you help answer the prayer of those faithful missionaries down there in the great Amazon? Will you help provide more workers for these benighted territories, where now thousands fall into Christless graves?”Given his young age, Ferguson couldn’t travel abroad immediately after converting, so he got a job at a church-run hospital in California. Working nights, carrying trays through the wards for seven cents an hour, Ferguson watched patients sick with cancer and other diseases struggle and then die. “I was appalled at the almost total lack of adequate medication that we had at our disposal,” he wrote in 1973, in the self-published autobiography The Son of Fergus. The hospital was stocked with the best equipment and medicines available at the time—it was science that had fallen short. Ferguson once summoned a priest to administer last rites to several children, then an undertaker to collect their bodies. “Morphine and futile words of comfort,” he later wrote, “did not relieve the abysmal terror and unmitigated agony caused by chronic disease.”Ferguson was impressed by how many drugs had their origins in tropical jungles—quinine, for instance. What else was out there? Perhaps every disease had a cure and the trick was merely finding it. Ferguson came up with a plan: He would befriend and live with “Primitive Medicine Men,” as he referred to them, learn about their remedies, and transform what he discovered into revolutionary medicines.Ferguson attended Adventist colleges in California, first in Napa Valley, then in Riverside. He needed tuition money, so he convinced a friend who worked at a medical school to let him pick up overnight orderly shifts typically reserved for doctors in training. When work was slow, he asked physicians to teach him basic medical skills—how to set bones, pull teeth, diagnose anemia—that might help him win respect in communities without access to doctors. He improved his Spanish with the help of Mexican-American patients. And he corresponded with a nursing student named Ruth whom he’d met during his freshman year, when he was admitted with a fever to the hospital where she worked. (After his fever broke, he held hot water in his mouth to make it seem like he still had a temperature when Ruth came by with a thermometer—he didn’t want to leave her.) According to Ferguson, they “had a great deal in common,” and Ruth “was intensely interested” in his dream of finding medical cures in faraway jungles.The two were married in May 1930, in a double wedding with Ferguson’s sister, in the chapel of an Adventist hospital. Ruth was 21. She had just graduated from nursing school. Wilburn, 25, was two credits short of an associate’s degree and $262.50 in debt. The couple moved to Calexico, on the border with Mexico, to teach Spanish-language Bible classes. Ferguson’s sights were set farther south. Before the wedding, he’d applied to the Adventist General Conference for an overseas missionary posting, mentioning his future wife. (The church preferred to send married couples over single men, although wives weren’t considered employees.) Ferguson made clear where they wanted to go. “South America mission work has always been our choice,” he wrote, “and especially since we have learned to work in the Spanish language, it would be easier for us to start right in and begin working for the people than it would be if we had to learn another language.” A local Adventist elder endorsed them, writing that he believed Ferguson “would make good in a foreign field.” Another elder described Ferguson as “very good in giving treatments and helping these poor people.”   In 1931, Ferguson received a letter offering him a job as superintendent of a small Adventist mission in Sandia, Peru, “located about eight or nine thousand feet above sea level, which means you will have to have good health.” Ferguson wrote back the next day accepting the post. He added a request: He and Ruth wanted more medical training and some dentistry tools. “I had read quite a lot about Dr. Livingstone and all the other people who had accomplished things in primitive countries,” he later explained, “and most of their results came after they tended people medically.” The Adventists advanced the couple $75 and agreed to sign up Wilburn—but not Ruth—for a six-week clinical course at an Adventist hospital. (This pattern would repeat: Ruth was overlooked, though she and Wilburn did everything together.)When Ferguson’s clinical training was complete and an Adventist doctor had pronounced his family’s health “vigorous,” he and Ruth gathered up their wedding china, cooking pots, saddles, bedding, typewriter, surgical instruments, medical supplies, rifles and shotguns, and cache of cloth diapers. By then they had a son, Eugene, whom they called Gene. They packed everything in suitcases, plywood boxes, and barrels. With the baby in tow, they made their way to the Port of Los Angeles, where a ship was waiting to take them to Peru. Soon, Ferguson was sure, he would be making discoveries that would change the world. “I guess it was a pretty wild venture,” he said decades later. “We thought it would take no more than a year or two—and, like a lot of young persons, we wanted to do big things in a hurry.”On November 15, 1931, the ship dropped anchor in Mollendo, Peru. The family rode inland on a train that Ferguson described as snaking “along deep gorges and across bridges suspended a mile above raging rivers, through tunnels and along the crest of great cliffs.” They watched through the windows as haciendas set in fields of sugarcane went by. In Arequipa, “a beautiful city with cobble-stone streets at 7,550 feet above sea level,” the couple disembarked. Before the Fergusons continued on to Sandia, the church wanted them to help expand and modernize its network of local schools. In early 1932, the couple reported to Adventist missionary offices in Puno, on the shores of Lake Titicaca, 12,500 feet above sea level. On market days, Ferguson found himself mesmerized by the fleet of balsa rafts that crossed the water. “It is a never-to-be-forgotten sight to see these hundreds of balsas with their sails full of wind sail out into the indescribable color of the Sunset,” he wrote. “It is difficult to decide whether the balsas fade from view over the horizon of the lake or whether oncoming night blots them from view.” Ferguson helped build dozens of school buildings, funded partly by gold dust that he and indigenous church members panned from rivers. He traveled over llama trails on a second-hand motorcycle, a shotgun strapped to his medical bag, to assess educational needs in remote areas. He offered medical assistance to locals and pulled rotting teeth at no charge. “I never thought that there were so many bad teeth in all the whole world before,” he wrote.By the time the Fergusons were dispatched to Sandia, about 170 miles north of Puno, in the foothills at the edge of the Amazon, rumors were circulating among Adventists that the couple had more in mind than saving souls. Ruth had told friends that she and Wilburn would stay in missionary work only until they had enough money to fund his special plans. A fellow missionary observed that “Brother Ferguson” didn’t seem “very spiritually minded.” According to archival documents, church leaders reprimanded Ferguson. “We have not sent our missionaries to these fields just to work for gold,” one official wrote. Ferguson was indignant. “If the mission doesn’t want me here any longer, be frank about it,” he wrote. “But whatever you do, don’t allow the work to be torn down just to make me fizzle and then kick me out in disgrace.” Shocked by Ferguson’s tone, the president of the church’s South American division wondered if altitude was the problem. Perhaps, the president wrote, Ferguson “might have a change of heart and spirit and throw himself into the work and forget his little troubles” if transferred to a post closer to sea level. Others were less optimistic. “Brother Ferguson came to us with a good recommendation,” one missionary lamented, “but I feel sure that a mistake was made in selecting him.” In early 1934, Ferguson staked a claim on an abandoned gold mine and started spending much of his time there. As his priorities crystallized, the church’s patience ran thin. “I feel that Brother Ferguson has for many months violated the very basic principles of a missionary’s life,” a church official commented in a letter. A Peruvian mission worker reported that Ferguson worked on the Sabbath, forced him to labor in the mine, and kicked him when he protested. “His work as a missionary has been a failure,” the church’s superintendent in Peru concluded. To make matters worse, he seemed to be hiding something. “Brother Ferguson,” the superintendent wrote, “has always, for many months at least, had secrets that he has not been free to reveal to anyone but his own confidential friends.” The minutes for the 570th Meeting of the Seventh-day Adventist General Conference Committee, held on July 16, 1934, contain the following entry: “Ferguson, W.H., released from mission employ.” Church policy was to provide passage home for failed missionaries and their families. But instead of steamship tickets, Ferguson persuaded a church official to give him, as another Adventist remarked in disbelief, “a lump sum of $500 to cover the transportation of the family home and to leave him a little money in hand.” Instead of returning to America, the Fergusons pocketed the money and stayed in Peru.For Ferguson, missionary work had served its purpose—it had brought him to South America, where he believed his destiny lay. He became even more certain when an indigenous man offered to sell him a shrunken head. “It was ugly, primitive, and spine-chilling,” Ferguson later told a reporter. He bought it anyway. The head had blond hair and a beard, indicating that it once belonged to a man of European descent. Ferguson wrote that he felt “a profound interest” in the head and the change it had undergone. Despite its “unbelievably small size,” the face “maintained the exact proportion that previously existed between the ears, eyelids, nose, and the skin so that all facial and character lines remained exactly as they were previous to death.” Ferguson wanted to meet the people responsible for the head, and he believed he knew who they were: a tribe called the Shuar, referred to by Westerners as the Jivaro. Among outsiders the Shuar inspired fascination and fear. Citing their “inclination to make cruel and ferocious war on their fellow creatures,” a 19th-century explorer called them “the most cruel infidels in this part of America.” Anthropologist Rafael Karsten, writing in 1923, said the Shuar were “the most warlike of all Indian tribes in South America.” A Shuar warrior’s “reputation increases,” the chief of the Smithsonian’s Bureau of American Ethnology noted, “in proportion to the number of heads he has succeeded in securing during his career.” These descriptions were dehumanizing, to put it lightly. The Shuar did fight, but out of necessity. According to Steven Rubenstein, a modern anthropologist, “every documented instance of Shuar violence is a response to state aggression.” For centuries they resisted invasions, preserving their independence against overwhelming odds. By Ferguson’s time, as one ethnologist observed, Shuar communities had overcome “the conquering might of the Inca, the greed of the gold-hungry conquistador, and the passionate zeal of the missionary.” Shrunken heads helped. Soldiers who fought the Shuar, according to stories Ferguson heard, might wake up one morning to find a stack of them in their camp, shriveled but still recognizable as those of fallen comrades. It was powerful propaganda, a warning to steer clear. Head shrinking was “the most effective national defense ever devised,” Ferguson wrote. He suspected that it might be much more than that. One afternoon, while he and Ruth were inspecting the tiny features of the head he’d purchased, they made a connection. “The thought occurred to me,” Ferguson recalled, “that perhaps the active ingredients of this process could be in some way adapted to shrink, or at least check, the wild growth of cancer cells.” By that time, as Siddhartha Mukherjee explains in his 2010 book The Emperor of All Maladies: A Biography of Cancer, scourges like smallpox and tuberculosis were yielding to medical advances. “But of all diseases,” Mukherjee writes, “cancer had refused to fall into step in this march of progress.” Cancer is out-of-control division and growth of abnormal cells that can destroy healthy tissue and spread through the body. As Americans escaped other ailments and lived longer, more of them developed the disease. By 1926, it had become the nation’s second leading cause of death. Long stigmatized and little understood, cancer now drew widespread attention. One senator proposed a $5 million reward for “information leading to the arrest of human cancer.” Americans dreamed of finding what Fortune called a “new principle of treatment.” The Fergusons were caught up in the zeitgeist. The thought inspired by the shriveled head was simple enough: If cancer killed by growing, shrinking was a way to fight it. For the Fergusons to test their theory, they needed access to whatever the Shuar were using on their enemies’ heads. That was easier said than done. The Shuar were hard to find; Ferguson had read that their territory was mostly in the highland jungles of eastern Ecuador and northern Peru, though their canoes were sometimes spotted on rivers southeast of there. Moreover, he and Ruth were busy. Ruth now had two children to care for; Ralph was born in 1935, after the couple’s second son, Donald, died of whooping cough. She also volunteered as a nurse, delivering babies and injecting Novocain when Wilburn pulled teeth. Still, the more Ferguson thought about the “wild idea” that the shrunken head could be vital to cancer research, “the more obsessed” he became.The expedition started out simply enough: In 1936, Ferguson left home with a 12-year-old boy named Antonio who would help him cook and carry provisions. Antonio had worked for the family for “nearly two years,” Ferguson wrote, “and was treated as our son.” They caught a ride to a larger town, where they boarded a train to Marcapata, just east of Cusco and Peru’s most famous archaeological site, Machu Picchu. Ferguson hoped he’d be able to make contact with the Shuar in the surrounding jungle. He bought supplies and hired several indigenous men to accompany him and Antonio into the forest. One of the men claimed to speak the Shuar’s language. The group walked for several days before they came to a cable bridge strung between two cliffs, manned by a guard who collected taxes and took down the names of everyone who crossed. This was the divide between 20th-century Peru and the Amazon. The men paid the fee and walked across. After a few days’ travel along a river, they met a group of gold miners who said they’d seen “strange Indians” going downstream in a pair of canoes the day before. Ferguson’s group made camp, and while most of the men set to work building a canoe, cutting down a tree and hollowing out the trunk with adzes, Ferguson went scouting. He brought the man who said he spoke Shuar. Antonio “begged very hard to go with me,” Ferguson wrote afterward, “but I felt that if an encounter with the Jivaros became possible I should be alone with the interpreter. I didn’t want him hurt in case trouble developed.” For two days, Ferguson and the interpreter hacked their way through dense jungle with machetes but encountered no one. On the third day, they came upon another group of miners who said they’d seen canoes on the river, but they didn’t know where the people in them had come from or where they’d gone. Ferguson and the interpreter returned to camp, only to find it empty. “There was not a soul,” Ferguson wrote. Nothing was missing or out of place—“the dishes [were] clean, pots and pans were where they should be; ready for the next meal.” The men’s ponchos had been neatly folded. Their food was tied up out of reach of wild animals. The newly completed canoe sat moored to a tree. Ferguson wondered if the group had hiked somewhere. Perhaps they’d become bored while waiting and decided to go fishing. Hours passed. Ferguson began to worry about young Antonio. Night fell with no sign of the group. Another day passed, then another night. “Clearly,” Ferguson wrote, “something was very wrong.”He and the interpreter made their way to a trading post a few miles away. No one had seen the missing men. They returned to the cable bridge and asked the guard if anyone had crossed back over. No one had. “There were tremendous cliffs here and it was extremely difficult, if not impossible to go around this check point,” Ferguson wrote. “My men clearly had not been there.” “Dead or alive,” he concluded, “they were still in the jungle somewhere.” Ferguson went to the regional capital and told the chief of police what had happened. The chief already knew—he’d received a telegram from mounted officers in the jungle. Officially, Ferguson learned, “the Government was making out the report that my men had become impatient at my absence and had tried to swim the river where all of them had drowned.” But that may have been a cover story. “Unofficially,” the police chief told Ferguson, “the evidence indicated that they were ambushed by the Jivaros.”Decades later, Ferguson recalled the chief’s blunt assessment: “The Jivaros killed all your men, cut their heads off, and dumped their bodies in the river.” Ferguson was told to flee. Several men and a child—Antonio—had died; their relatives would blame him. Ferguson took a train to the coast to meet Ruth and their sons. They boarded a ship that carried them to Panama, and then another headed to California. Some years later, when Ferguson told a Peruvian general about his attempt to track down the Shuar, the man was horrified. “You’d better thank God you never found them,” he said. But Ferguson wasn’t done looking. While Ruth and the boys stayed in Los Angeles, Wilburn returned to Peru, where he scoured museums, libraries, and pre-Inca graves in search of lost medical secrets. In 1939, he caught a “a little wood-burning steamer” that went down the Amazon, traversing Brazil. The trip took almost two months. Ferguson discussed history and religion with an old Jesuit priest on the boat, bought dried fish in river towns, and photographed men standing up in canoes to shoot long arrows. When the steamer reached the Atlantic coast, Ferguson convinced the captain of a Norwegian freighter heading to America to take him on as a crew member. He was back in California in time to hear the news about Pearl Harbor. As World War II raged, the Fergusons ran a pair of small nursing homes, first in Glendale, California, and then in Idaho. (Ferguson had become a registered nurse after his first excursion to South America.) In 1943, Ruth gave birth to a daughter, Eileen Patricia, whom they called by her middle name. According to his autobiography, Ferguson commuted by overnight bus to Chicago to study anesthesiology with Dr. Ben Morgan, a pioneer in the field, but he never completed a degree. By early 1945, Ferguson was desperate to get back to the jungle. He went to Washington, D.C., to obtain travel documents. While there he somehow met Ecuador’s ambassador to the United States. His name was Galo Plaza, and he was practically Ecuadoran royalty. Plaza’s mother, Avelina Lasso de la Vega y Ascazúbi, belonged to one of her country’s oldest landowning families. His father, General Leónidas Plaza Gutiérrez, had twice been the country’s president. Plaza was born between those stints, while his parents were living in Greenwich Village and his father was a diplomat to the United States.Plaza was not yet 40 when Ferguson met him. He was rich and handsome, a cattle rancher who’d played football as an undergraduate at Berkeley and later studied at Georgetown. He’d already been the mayor of Quito and Ecuador’s minister of national defense. The two men hit it off, and Plaza offered him a job in Ecuador’s new public hospital system. In July 1945, Ferguson went to Quito. He planned to get settled and then send for his family. At the time, Ecuador was one of the western hemisphere’s poorest countries, but the capital’s rich neighborhoods boasted tree-lined avenues and Spanish-style mansions. Thanks to Plaza, Ferguson was welcomed by Quito’s elite.After Ruth and the kids arrived, the Fergusons moved into a house across the street from Plaza’s family. Ruth began working as the head nurse for the public hospital system. Meanwhile, despite the fact that he wasn’t a doctor, Wilburn treated patients in Quito and flew to Guayaquil and Cuenca to see others. Plaza soon ran for president. While conservatives and socialists attacked one another, he positioned himself as an independent and won. The New York Times, reminding readers of his Manhattan birthplace, called Plaza “a local boy who made good.” Once in office, Plaza named Ferguson “senior consulting anesthetist” to the public health service and the armed forces. Plaza gave Ferguson a pass to ride military planes into Shuar territory. And he persuaded the faculty at the University of Cuenca to hire Ferguson as a professor of anesthesiology, despite their misgivings when they learned that he didn’t have a medical degree. The university’s solution, according to Ferguson, was to award him an honorary doctorate.As Ferguson once joked, “the combined salaries of all these posts would hardly be considered cigarette money in the States.” But in Ecuador it was more than enough. On weekends, Ferguson began taking camping trips with a doctor’s bag, setting up his tent in areas where he believed the Shuar lived. “When the people became curious,” he wrote in The Son of Fergus, “I told them that I was merely resting, but if there were any sick or that needed badly decayed teeth extracted, I would be glad to help them in exchange for a little fruit or vegetables I could cook for my meals.” He set fractures, pulled teeth, and supplied patients with modern drugs or home remedies of his own invention. “I was always careful to treat them the best I knew,” he wrote, “and then told them to go back to their medicine man for further treatment.” On one trip, Ferguson heard that a Shuar healer wanted to see him. The man was ill. Through an interpreter, the man described his symptoms, and Ferguson diagnosed a kidney infection. He gave the man medicine and checked on him each time he returned to the jungle. Eventually, the man asked what he owed. There was only one way to compensate him, Ferguson replied: “My fee for saving your life is simply a pot of the complete plant extract” used to make shrunken heads. The healer protested. Such secrets weren’t shared with outsiders. However, as Ferguson told a group of supporters many years later, “The medicine men, and anybody in that area, if they think somebody actually saved their life, they’re duty bound to come up with payment.”What happened next, if true, was a scene straight from the adventure stories Ferguson read as a child: One night, there was a knock on the front door of his family’s house in Quito. According to Ferguson’s autobiography, he put on a bathrobe and went outside, thinking he might find a runner with news of an emergency at a hospital. No one was there. Ferguson was about to go back inside when he spotted something on the ground—“a typical Jivaro gallon clay pot with a leaf cover, tightly tied to the top with a jungle vine.” He woke Ruth. Together, they opened the pot and found that it contained a dark liquid. They poured the fluid into a Pyrex jar to examine it. “There were little globules of fat and human hair,” Ferguson later recalled, “so I had the real thing, I knew that.” Wilburn and Ruth had no idea what was in the head-shrinking fluid, so they decided to test it for toxicity. They injected samples into guinea pigs and soaked human tissue in the liquid. (Ferguson wrote about bringing the latter home from a Quito hospital.) Even the largest dose wasn’t fatal to the guinea pigs. The human tissue shrank but, according to Ferguson, showed no signs of damage or decay. When he looked at it through a microscope, he saw intact cell membranes and nuclei.Next, Ferguson took some of the fluid to a hospital “to run a few private tests.” He doubted it was poisonous, but his real concern was whether it could be used to treat cancer. He mixed the fluid with lanolin and made an ointment, then chose a few patients in the cancer ward whose tumors broke their skin—in his autobiography, Ferguson wrote that the growths resembled heads of cauliflower. While changing the patients’ bandages, he rubbed the ointment on the tumors. He didn’t tell them what he was doing. Over several days, he watched for changes. Soon, according to Ferguson, lesions “began to disintegrate,” and diseased skin seemed to “slough off of the tumor[s], leaving a clean base that appeared to be normal tissue.” Ferguson continued: “Even more interesting, spontaneous tiny islands of new tissue” developed where the malignancy had been. These would spread “until the entire area was covered with new skin.” There is no way to corroborate any of this. It’s possible that it happened, but so is Ferguson imagining the results he wanted to see or inventing a narrative of success to advance his agenda. Whatever the case, he was convinced he was onto something. “Ruth’s and my wild hunch had now developed into a definite potential therapeutic active drug principal for the possible control of cancer,” he recalled. As the pot left on his doorstep ran dry, Ferguson flew into the jungle as often as possible, looking for more Shuar healers. He also contacted powerful acquaintances in the capital to obtain funding for his research. In 1948, the British Council in Quito helped him organize a lecture tour at medical schools in England and Scotland. That October, with Plaza’s blessing, Ferguson traveled to the United States to campaign for donations for a new teaching hospital—and to find sponsors for his work. That’s how he wound up at the Ecuadorean embassy, popping a balloon with a blow dart and passing around human heads.The reporters who witnessed Ferguson’s demonstration didn’t know what to make of it. “It was the weirdest press conference I’ve covered in many a day,” one wrote, “and I’ve covered some zanies.” Journalists joked about “big heads” that could use some shrinking. The best doctors in the world hadn’t cracked cancer’s code. It seemed unlikely that this dreamer would.But one reporter, Milt Dean Hill, who was friendly with Plaza, wrote letters of introduction to prominent New Yorkers who might be able to help. According to Ferguson, he and Dillon, the Ecuadoran ambassador, met with Dwight D. Eisenhower, recently named president of Columbia University. Ferguson also tried to meet with Nelson Rockefeller, grandson of John D. Rockefeller and another friend of Plaza’s, but he was only able to talk to two employees. No money materialized from either encounter. (Rockefeller later commented that his staff’s appraisals of Ferguson were “not very enthusiastic.” One of them had concluded, “This is strictly between us, but he impressed me as being far from a balanced individual.”) After New York, Ferguson flew to Texas, where the response was more encouraging. He presented a general hypothesis—that there were undiscovered plant remedies for various ailments waiting for the right people to come along and find them. Professors at the University of Texas at Austin found the notion intriguing. After an aide to Governor Beauford Jester suggested that Ferguson’s proposal held both scientific and commercial promise, the governor wrote an introductory letter for Ferguson indicating that he hoped the project would “bring worldwide recognition and distinction to Texas.” Jester’s staff arranged a press conference in the state capitol on November 4, 1948. Ferguson displayed his shrunken heads, explained his cancer theory, and held up his precious vial of Shuar fluid. Theophilus S. Painter, the president of UT, and Henry Burlage, the dean of the university’s pharmacy school, told reporters that they looked forward to working with him. Another wave of stories about Ferguson rippled across the middle pages of America’s newspapers. Buoyed by the reception, Ferguson proposed a research center at UT, to be named after Pedro de la Gasca, a 16th-century Spanish bishop who once governed Peru. The center would be a joint venture between UT’s colleges of pharmacy and medicine, with its purpose “to collect, classify, purify, test, and clinically prove the value of new drugs from natural sources.” Ferguson wanted to be the director. He asked for 10 percent of the royalties from any drugs the center developed, an $8,000 salary, a $31,000 budget for general expenses and travel, and a one-time allotment of $11,000 for camping equipment, cameras, medical supplies, a boat, and a “four-wheel drive Dodge Power Wagon equipped with refrigeration, generator, drying equipment and all other … equipment necessary to get to difficult places and collect unstable drugs … and plants with high moisture content.” Burlage’s pharmacy school was on board with the idea, but Chauncey Leake, the executive vice president of UT’s medical school, shot it down. Ferguson had been signing letters and telegrams “Doctor Wilburn Ferguson” and “Wilburn Ferguson, M.D.,” despite having neither a medical degree nor a doctorate. On top of that, Leake said, Ferguson’s chances of finding an undiscovered miracle drug were basically zero. Pharmaceutical companies had scoured the world’s jungles. If there was a plant that cured cancer, it would have been found already. “The well-known principle of diminishing returns,” Leake said, “has been cumulatively operative in these efforts for the past century.” Burlage and Ferguson persisted with the idea of opening the center, but other people’s enthusiasm dwindled. Whenever pharmacy professors followed up with Painter about the proposal, the university president kept repeating, “Where will we find the money?” They never did. Governor Jester, who had encouraged Ferguson, died in office, and the pharmacy school couldn’t afford to create the foundation alone. “There is very little of an encouraging nature to report to you,” a professor wrote to Ferguson. “All I can say is that you have my best wishes and that some form of help and interest will ultimately reward your perseverance and unstinting efforts.” Ferguson returned to Ecuador empty-handed.When Ferguson heard about the deadly outbreak, he was visiting a Shuar group he knew as the Kenguimi just outside Sucúa, a small village in the jungle with a military airstrip. It was early 1949. “Word came of a wave of fever that spread like wild fire,” he wrote in his autobiography. A warning from the country’s public health service confirmed his fears: It was typhoid. “I had always had a particular phobia against typhoid fever,” Ferguson recalled. As a boy, he’d lost two cousins to the disease. He asked Ruth to catch a plane to Sucúa to help him. They built shelters out of palm leaves for sick Kenguimi, put buckets of disinfectant outside each one, and instructed people who touched the patients to wash their hands in them. “We dug holes where everything used by the sick Jivaro was dumped,” Ferguson wrote. “Each morning kerosene was poured over everything in the holes and set on fire.” They treated the patients with Aureomycin, an antibiotic developed a few years before. One day a Shuar man brought his sick daughter to the makeshift hospital. According to Ferguson, the man arrived carrying a spear with a tip that had been dipped in poison. “With spear point at my back,” Ferguson later said, “I administered the drug and waited. The Jivaro girl responded to the treatment, and her father responded by introducing himself as Tangamasha, chief medicine man of the Kenguimis.”Ferguson and Tangamasha became friends. They were about the same age, they were both fathers, and they had dedicated their lives to healing the sick. Ferguson took Tangamasha’s expertise seriously, and Tangamasha returned the courtesy. They exchanged information about remedies and methods—Tangamasha showed Ferguson which plants might help his son Ralph’s asthma, while Ferguson showed Tangamasha how to use a stethoscope and make casts for broken bones. Tangamasha was Ferguson’s best hope for finding out how to make the head-shrinking liquid. As he wrote in The Son of Fergus, his new friend “was the key to the project.” But when Ferguson made his request, Tangamasha “was quite horrified.” He explained that his tribe’s council of elders and medicine men had to approve any new apprentice of its healing methods. It was a request Tangamasha was not eager to make. What if Shuar medicine could help the wider world, Ferguson asked. Tangamasha “pleaded, cajoled, and even threatened me,” Ferguson recalled, “but in the end, agreed to ask the council for a decision.” About two weeks later, the Kenguimi elders and medicine men informed him that his petition was conditionally approved. According to Ferguson, they’d consulted Wakani, the Shuar god of healing, and decided that Ferguson’s medical knowledge made him a worthy candidate for the healing apprenticeship. But there was another entity they hadn’t heard from yet. In Ferguson’s understanding, it was a god of evil spirits named Pangi, who lived in a volcano called Sangay. The mountain, which had been in active eruption since 1934, was sacred to the tribe. According to his autobiography, Ferguson and the Kenguimi elders and healers trekked toward the cone-shaped volcano floating high above the jungle. At the base of the peak they built an altar and sacrificed a pig. As Ferguson watched, Tangamasha bent down to collect the pig’s blood in a clay jar. “He dipped his finger in the blood and spread it onto my shin,” Ferguson wrote. “I then dipped my finger in the blood and spread it on his shin.” The other men repeated the gesture. Then they roasted the pig and served it “with all the vegetables and fruits of their plantations, in the special feast this ceremony required.” The Shuar watched the volcano for omens. When the pig’s throat was cut, Ferguson recalled, “Sangay quit smoking for quite a little while, and then gave three great big puffs of smoke, threw out tons of molten rock and stuff, and they said, ‘Well, that’s it. That’s approved.’” (Ferguson appears to have made some errors in his account. For instance, according to anthropologist H. Clark Barrett, pangi is the Shuar word for “anaconda.” Also, the Shuar don’t worship a god called Wakani, but they do use the word wakan, which translates as “soul” or “spirit” and is associated with ayahuasca.)Only one test remained: Ferguson had to shrink a head. Traditionally, this would require killing an enemy, but the elders agreed to let Ferguson kill a monkey instead. Tangamasha supervised the process of removing the scalp and face and boiling it in the secret solution. When the elders inspected Ferguson’s work, they approved. They gave him several batches of the precious fluid and described the steps that went into making it. “I learned that there was a variation in the number of plants used,” Ferguson later wrote, “that ranged from 26 to 34.” Tangamasha’s personal recipe called for 30. Each ingredient had to be extracted from a different vine, flower, leaf, or bark. The ayahuasca vine, which the Shuar believed allowed them to see the future and learn hidden truths, went into the mixture. So did cinchona, the source of quinine, and rabo de mono (monkey’s tail), a vine with fibrous roots used by Shuar healers to treat dysentery. When Tangamasha explained each plant’s properties, Ferguson “was awed at the unbelievable enormity” of what was in the fluid. The recipe involved the whole Shuar medicine cabinet, “the ultra-secret pharmacopeia of … ancient medical knowledge.” But were all the ingredients really necessary to shrink a head? Back home, with supplies he’d gathered in the jungle, Ferguson removed plants from the formula one by one, verifying with each omission that the brew could still reduce an animal’s head. “If the resulting shrinkage factor remained the same, [the ingredients] were permanently left out of the projected chemo-therapeutic compound,” he wrote. “If the shrinkage factor was lessened, that plant was restored to the formula.” Ferguson whittled the mixture down to eight plants, amassing a collection of shrunken monkey, sloth, and cow heads in the process.Ferguson was eager to test the compound on cancer patients. Plaza’s government arranged a “preliminary clinical test” at the University of Cuenca’s hospital. Ferguson hadn’t settled on a reduced formula yet, so he figured he’d use batches of solution that the Kenguimi had given him. “I was ready,” he wrote, “to proceed with advanced research.”The Cuenca doctors selected seven terminal patients with tumors that they judged were inoperable. All seven were impoverished, and the six mentioned by name in Ferguson’s reports were women. The plan was to treat the tumors topically. In the first few days, Ferguson believed that he saw progress; just like in his unsanctioned experiments in Quito, the tumors seemed to shrink, and the skin around them seemed to be healing. The fluid’s “powerful killing power,” Ferguson noted, appeared “to affect only malignant growth without the least damage to normal tissue or even the new growing normal cells.” When the mixture the Kenguimi had given him ran out, Ferguson prepared a new solution from the eight plants he believed caused tissue to shrink. But the effect wasn’t the same. His patients’ tumors seemed to grow back. Years later, Ferguson would describe this as “the most serious crisis of our entire research project.” He left the patients in Ruth’s care and took a train to Quito, where he caught an air force plane to Sucúa. He told Tangamasha what had happened and asked him to walk through the process of preparing the fluid again. According to Ferguson, Tangamasha immediately identified the issue: The mixture the Kenguimi elders gave Ferguson had been used to shrink a number of heads. Ferguson’s mixture couldn’t compete. The missing ingredient, he reasoned, must have been some kind of “glandular, hormonal, or enzymic substances from the fresh head.” Ferguson decided that he’d have to “temper” each new batch before using it. Back in Cuenca, he bought a calf’s head from a butcher and soaked it in the fluid. Once the head shrank, he brought the solution to the hospital and resumed his experiments.Ferguson’s writings don’t say whether he explained the treatment to the patients. If he felt ethically conflicted, he never mentioned it. He was focused on whether his project would succeed. “No one ever knew the sheer agony Ruth and I went through during the week of crisis,” he wrote. “But somehow, out of all this mess, the solution I made, tempered by shrinking a calf head, works even better.” Better, that is, than the original solution.Only three of the seven patients stayed for the entire course of treatment; the others left for home as soon as they began to feel better. According to Ferguson, the three who stayed recovered completely. After 100 days of treatment, he wrote, Tránsito López Orellano—a middle-aged cook who entered the study with epithelioma of the cervix and uterus, or growths on the lining of those organs—had no sign of cancer. The doctors performed a hysterectomy and declared her “completely free of her former cancer symptoms.” Four weeks after her surgery, on October 31, 1949, she was discharged. Jesus Vázquez Córdova, a 70-year-old housewife who’d been admitted with a cancerous growth on her nose and cheek, also went home symptom-free, Ferguson recorded, after the doctors operated on her shrunken tumor. Josefa Carpi Cabrera’s case left the deepest impression on Ferguson: The tumor on her nose disappeared without surgery. On November 16, the hospital staff decided she could go home, too. “There was no doubt whatsoever,” Ferguson wrote, “that our own crude, eight-plant research drug compound effectively destroyed malignant tumor[s] in human patients.” He realized, however, that the Cuenca experiments wouldn’t stand up to peer review. He wanted to run tests with more scientific legitimacy. Ferguson wrote to J.E.M. Carvell, the British ambassador to Ecuador, explaining that his “Scottish descent and a longstanding desire to take the British Medical Examinations” made him “especially interested” in working in the United Kingdom. “My most urgent need now,” Ferguson wrote, “is a connection with the best Scientists available to advise me in the Laboratory and later in a completely controlled series of clinical trials, that will leave no doubt whether or not I have something worthwhile in the treatment of Cancer.” He attached a report summarizing the Cuenca trials and enclosed before and after photographs, diagrams, and authenticated copies of his patients’ medical records.If anyone in the UK was interested, Ferguson wrote, “I will furnish all the plant material required both for laboratory and clinical work.” He would cover the costs of collecting and shipping the plants and pay for his own travel. “However,” he added, “due to the many years of costly preliminary research which has already been done, all at my own expense, it will be necessary for as liberal a grant as possible to enable me to maintain my family with me in the United Kingdom.”Carvell reviewed Ferguson’s report and, satisfied with what he read, forwarded it to the Foreign Office in London, which sent it to a government committee on medical research. The committee was skeptical. For one thing, it said, the treatments were too recent to be described as cures. “Moreover,” one doctor wrote, “ulcerated growths, such as Mr. Ferguson describes, are usually associated with a secondary infection.” There were probably natural antiseptics in the plants he was using, which “would be quite likely to cause even striking temporary improvement in the appearance of superficial cancers without, however, necessarily influencing in any way the ultimate course of the growth.” In other words, the committee thought Ferguson was looking at infections caused by cancer and seeing tumors. When the infections improved, he thought he was curing the disease. “In the view of the Council and their advisers,” the British experts concluded, “no useful purpose would be served at present by Mr. Ferguson’s being brought to this country, as he proposes.”It took several months for Ferguson to find a powerful new believer. In August 1950, he heard that there was interest in California, where he’d sent samples of his fluid. Paul Kotin, a pathologist at Los Angeles County General Hospital and a professor at the University of Southern California, tested the mixture on several strains of disease-causing bacteria. In laboratory conditions, Kotin wrote, the head-shrinking solution killed “pneumococcus, the organism which causes lobar pneumonia, the beta strep, the organism responsible for diseases like strep throat, childhood fever and the like, the staphylococcus, the organism which causes boils and abscesses, and certain organisms producing severe dysentery and diarrhea.” Kotin and his colleagues wanted more samples—and to meet Ferguson in person.Ferguson asked for a fellowship. He wouldn’t need a paycheck, he said, just access to lab facilities and animals for testing. Kotin suggested that Ferguson join “the cancer research section at both the hospital and university here” for one year; he would “be provided with adequate space and such animals and equipment as might be necessary to further your investigations.” After that, Kotin wrote, the hospital’s doctors would help him apply for longer-term funding.Ferguson and his family left Ecuador and moved to an apartment in Los Angeles, across the street from the hospital. Ruth got a nursing job to support the family. Gene went off to college. Ralph, a teenager, worked in his father’s laboratory on weekends and holidays. Patricia was young enough to need supervision, so after school she stayed in the lab with her father, often late into the night. To keep her entertained, Wilburn bought Patricia a miniature chemistry set.The Los Angeles doctors began studying the exotic mixture they called “head-shrinking compound 101-A,” which Ferguson had transported in substantial quantities from Ecuador. The solution was distilled into 50 fractions—groups of chemicals separated from the overall extract by boiling them out bit by bit, in an effort to isolate active ingredients—and given code names like “101-A4/A” and “101-A4/C3.” But the doctors could only learn so much, because Ferguson was secretive. He wouldn’t tell them the names of the plants he used or how he’d processed them to prepare his solution.On weekends, Ferguson raised money. Thanks to a wealthy cotton farmer who sent regular checks, he could afford to hire graduate and postgraduate students to assist him with the research. They spent long hours at the hospital, supervised by Kotin and his staff, who were impressed with many of the results. “The range of susceptible organisms to solution 101-A in the laboratory is wider than that of any other antibiotic or other form of bacteria-killing medication available today,” Kotin wrote. Ian MacDonald, a professor of surgery who reviewed Ferguson’s experiments, said that the solution showed “antibiotic activities which seem to exceed greatly those of such agents as penicillin.” Ferguson later wrote that the doctors were also “intensely interested in my empirical concept regarding the shrinkage factor of the crude plant extract as a potential tumor reducing therapeutic.” Some fractions, Ferguson wrote, eliminated tumors in mice and left the creatures unharmed. Other fractions had the same results with leukemia, he claimed. “As in most scientific research, more questions were discovered than positive answers found,” he wrote, “but the research project was enormously advanced during the year’s work.” The hospital applied for a grant from the National Cancer Institute to help Ferguson continue his work. As the chair of the hospital’s tumor board wrote, the doctors and USC professors had “confidence” in the research and were “inclined to believe that this project has great potential possibilities.” But the grant application was rejected. According to Ferguson, the reason offered by the NCI was that “the concept of the research did not coincide with the current scientific cancer knowledge.”Without money to continue his work in California, Ferguson returned to Ecuador. He enlisted Tangamasha to collect more plants. In a Guayaquil hospital, he treated patients suffering from terminal cancer using IV drips, creams, and injections of the fractions he’d developed in Los Angeles. Local newspapers began trumpeting Ferguson’s research. The Associated Press picked up the story, wiring it to newsrooms across America. A cure for cancer, one article suggested, might be only “four or five years” away. Thanks to the media coverage, the pendulum of Ferguson’s luck was about to swing yet again.Drew Pearson was one of America’s most prominent journalists. The radio host and newspaper columnist was known for a trademark blend of news, gossip, and something he called “predictions of things to come”—all informed by supposedly well-placed, confidential sources. His column, the Washington Merry-Go-Round, had 50 million daily readers. His radio shows were piped into living rooms nationwide. His speaking voice was high, fast, and insistent. He could be combative, especially when he thought powerful people were acting hypocritically. Joseph McCarthy once jumped Pearson in a cloakroom after the host made a remark he didn’t like. (A young Richard Nixon had to break them up.) Pearson was also an old friend of Galo Plaza’s—the two men had bred cattle together in the 1940s. On October 5, 1952, Pearson introduced Ferguson to his widest audience yet. It started that Sunday morning, with Pearson’s newspaper column. “For several years an American doctor has been living in Ecuador,” Pearson wrote, “experimenting with a fantastic, secret solution which may prove the answer to cancer. The doctor is Wilburn Ferguson.” He continued: “The solution he is working on is that used by the Jibaro Indians to shrink human heads. Dr. Ferguson emphasizes that he has not found a cure for cancer, that he has only found a ‘promising treatment.’ Nevertheless his clinical records have shown some miraculous recoveries.”In his column and on his radio show that same week, Pearson cast Ferguson’s theory as the insight of a genius. He invited his audience to picture Ruth and Wilburn working by night in a foreign land, “grinding herbs and preparing their solutions for the next day’s work.” He recounted Ferguson’s time in Los Angeles and urged the public to open their pocketbooks. “Dr. Ferguson unquestionably could have made a fortune with his new cancer formula,” Pearson wrote. Instead, he was broke.  After the broadcast, people wrote letters to their local radio stations, hoping Pearson could put them in touch with Ferguson. Some sent money. Others sent advice. Mostly, though, people wanted him to treat their loved ones. “I am willing to go to any length to get Mrs. Daugherty to him if at all possible,” one I.J. Daugherty wrote from Ohio. “She is able to travel at this time, as the cancer is in the early stage.” “We love our Dad, Mr. Pearson,” Louis Bence wrote from Illinois, “and would try and do anything to try and get him well.”“We want to give her every possible chance,” wrote Jack Epstein, of Pennsylvania, referring to his wife’s 31-year-old sister, “so won’t you please let us hear from you as soon as possible?”Pearson’s portrayal of Ferguson—an optimist in exile, poised to return home with a miracle drug if only he had more support—resonated with a vulnerable subset of postwar Americans. Who could blame them? Medicine had never felt more modern, yet their loved ones were dying of a disease known to afflict humans since antiquity. They wanted someone to have the cure—they needed someone to have it. Letters and phone calls flooded Los Angeles County General Hospital, too. “Since the Drew Pearson talk, the situation has gotten out of hand,” a doctor there complained to a colleague, “and we are being bothered by inquiries from all over the United States.” John and Bernice Ptak, a working-class couple from Wilmington, Delaware, went further than anyone else. Their five-year-old son, Johnny, had been sick for months. Initially, their physician diagnosed him with rheumatic fever, then polio. After an operation in Philadelphia, doctors identified Johnny’s condition as neuroblastoma—cancer of the nerves. On October 1, just before the Ptaks heard Pearson’s show, Johnny was given three weeks to live. The cancer had spread to his lymph nodes and pelvis.In Guayaquil, on October 15, Ferguson received an urgent telegram, transmitted by radio from a Pan American flight. The message asked him to meet the plane at the airport with an ambulance. The Ptaks had emptied their savings account to bring their son to Ferguson. When the plane landed in Guayaquil, Johnny was unconscious. Ferguson and an Ecuadoran doctor checked him into the hospital and administered the head-shrinking fluid through an IV drip. On the second day, according to Ferguson, Johnny woke up briefly and recognized his father. Gradually, over several days, he seemed to improve. Ferguson and the doctors removed the IV and twice a day gave Johnny drinking water with the Shuar solution mixed in. He seemed to be responding. Three weeks into the treatment, Ferguson wrote, “The patient was considerably improved and has a good appetite.” By November, Johnny was sitting up, talking, and playing with toys. Soon he was well enough for his parents to take him on day trips. According to Ferguson, Johnny insisted on climbing trees and playing with other children in a park across the street from the hospital. His parents were thrilled. But something wasn’t right. Johnny’s pulse was too high, and he couldn’t sit still. His heartbeat was irregular, Ferguson observed, “and was impossible to count when he played hard.” Ferguson wondered if something in the fluid had “acted too fast for this particular patient’s cardiac condition.”On Tuesday, December 9, 1952, Ferguson wrote a brief note: “Patient collapsed while playing.” The next day, Johnny died.Ferguson claimed that a postmortem examination showed Johnny’s tumors had shrunk to “approximately 1/5 of their pre-treated size.” True or not, Johnny’s parents had seen his mood, appetite, and energy improve. Exactly two months after arriving in Ecuador, the Ptaks returned to Delaware with their son’s body. The press was waiting for them. “Christmas Hopes Die with Boy of 5,” one headline read. Mr. Ptak said they had no regrets about the trip to Ecuador. “We knew it was a desperate mission,” he said. “Our hopes weren’t high. We knew it was only a long shot.” Of his son, Ptak said, “He enjoyed his last days, and he passed away happily.” As for Ferguson’s compound, “If it doesn’t cure, it does relieve the pain.”“I still have faith in Dr. Ferguson,” Ptak told a reporter. “I think we got Johnny there too late. If we had heard about him sooner, he might have saved our boy.” Ferguson was getting more attention than ever, and not just from the media. “About a month ago news of my work leaked out,” he wrote to a doctor in Los Angeles in the fall of 1952, “and the representatives of Merck, Abbott, and a couple other drug firms called on me. This was followed up by a week’s visit from the Vice President of Merck.” Merck’s associate director of therapeutic research “took 25 liters of concentrate solution back with him for an all out evaluation.”In late November, the U.S. government sent an NCI pathologist to Ecuador to examine Ferguson’s patients and collect biopsies. According to the pathologist’s report, Ferguson showed him “rather convincing” evidence that the head-shrinking solution reduced cancerous tumors in humans. “All of his treated patients still have cancer,” the pathologist added. But the ones he saw displayed remarkable improvement. Not so long before, the NCI had rejected Ferguson’s grant application to continue his research in Los Angeles. What had changed? Certainly the press attention might have affected perception of Ferguson’s project, but oncology was also evolving. For decades, surgery and radiation were the only forms of cancer treatment, but recently a new approach had emerged. One proponent described it as “penicillin for cancer.” Others used terms like “selective poison.” The one that stuck was chemotherapy. By 1952, as Mukherjee recounts in The Emperor of All Maladies, experiments at Yale and Boston Children’s Hospital had established the basic idea behind chemotherapy: Find a toxic chemical that kills cancer cells faster than it does healthy cells, and if a patient can survive the dose it takes to wipe out the disease, a cure is possible—at least in theory. The truly lifesaving breakthroughs in chemotherapy were still years away. For all their promise, early trials typically bought patients only a few months before the disease came raging back. Still, evidence that chemicals could stop tumor growth and prolong life shook the medical world.If tumors could be reduced by compounds derived from mustard gas and periwinkles—early sources for chemotherapy regimens—why not a mixture made from jungle plants? Shortly after Johnny Ptak died, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center brought Ferguson to New York City for a meeting. The research staff arranged a deal with Merck to evaluate Ferguson’s formula together. The idea, as Ferguson described it, was that he would provide the solution, while Sloan Kettering would handle the animal testing on Merck’s behalf and, if warranted, set up clinical trials with human patients. Ferguson recalled signing a contract with Merck on February 6, 1953. A Merck representative told me that its archivists couldn’t find any record of Ferguson—possibly because the company didn’t retain contracts, meeting minutes, or correspondence from the people and departments he interacted with. Letters in Nelson Rockefeller’s papers, however, corroborate the broad strokes of Ferguson’s deal with Merck and Sloan Kettering, to which the Rockefeller family has long had strong philanthropic ties—it even donated the land where the hospital is located.The cancer center’s scientists began testing the head-shrinking mixture on tumors. “The first survey tests,” Ferguson wrote, “covering the entire spectrum of 20 animal tumors … showed our extract active against sixteen.” But when the team repeated the experiments, “the results were not borne out.” Perhaps, Ferguson suggested, the solution had become contaminated between tests. He telegrammed Ruth in Ecuador and asked her to send six liters of extract to New York by airmail.But Merck wanted more than six liters. According to Ferguson, the contract called for him to produce 400 gallons of the solution. He offered to make sufficient quantities from dried plants he’d put in storage in Los Angeles, “in case of revolutions” or other catastrophes that might deny him access to the jungle. In the past he’d used only fresh ingredients, so he told Merck that he wasn’t sure the stored plant material would work. Still, the company advanced him $2,000, and Ferguson flew to California. When he returned to the East Coast with the dried plants, he prepared his formula under Merck’s supervision.Soon after, Merck’s scientists announced that they were having trouble getting a consistent, stable assay from the new solution—that is, they couldn’t determine or analyze its chemical components. If they weren’t able to correct the issue soon, they warned, it would be hard to justify additional funding for the project. Ferguson wrote to Nelson Rockefeller asking for help, but while waiting for a response, he received word that Sloan Kettering and Merck were shuttering the project. “Feeble activity was irregularly demonstrated,” one doctor explained to the Rockefellers, “but so much less than that exerted by many other substances under study as to make further tests of the Ferguson material of low priority in our opinion.”Ferguson blamed the dried plants. He enlisted Plaza, whose presidency had recently ended, to ask the Rockefellers for a $25,000 loan. On the advice of Sloan Kettering’s doctors, the family declined. Ferguson tried the NCI as well, according to The Son of Fergus, but the doctors there made clear that he would never get federal funding. His project, one cancer expert said, was “simply not scientific.”Ferguson flew back to Guayaquil, only to learn that the Ecuadorean cancer society—the Sociedad de Lucha Contra el Cáncer, or SOLCA—had turned against him, too. According to Ferguson, the society’s founder held a press conference dismissing “the so-called research which Dr. Ferguson and a few of his misguided medical friends have made,” and describing Ferguson’s apparent successes with cancer patients as “a series of spontaneous regressions that would have taken place anyway with any treatment.” (SOLCA didn’t reply to a request for records of the press conference.)Why SOLCA spoke out against Ferguson isn’t clear. Maybe, like the experts at NCI, SOLCA’s members had heard about Ferguson’s research failures and decided he was doing bad science. Perhaps the fact that Plaza, his benefactor, had left office in 1952 played a role. That mattered, certainly, as Ferguson sought to regain his footing in Ecuador; his contracts with hospitals, the military, and universities in Ecuador had dried up. A few months prior, the press had hailed him as a hero. Now, at least in medical circles, he was a pariah.Ferguson reminded himself that the great physician Paracelsus was ridiculed in his lifetime. Louis Pasteur was attacked “until the day of his death.” If Merck and Sloan Kettering wouldn’t help him prove that the Shuar solution could save lives, he would find the evidence himself. With Ruth’s counsel, he decided that there was only one place to go. “We would move our entire family and all our scientific equipment,” Ferguson wrote, “into the Ecuadorian Eastern Amazon.”The family relocated to Sucúa, near the settlement where Tangamasha lived. The town didn’t offer much more than a pair of missionary outposts—one Catholic, one evangelical—and a few muddy, unpaved roads that didn’t lead far. “The only way in or out,” recalled Patricia, the Fergusons’ daughter, “was by plane.”The Fergusons landed on Sucúa’s grass runway on July 25, 1953. Their reputation in the area was still good from the assistance they provided during typhoid epidemic. Tangamasha’s friends and relatives “came from some forty miles in all directions to welcome us,” Ferguson wrote. With their help, the family built a huge oven from cement and brick and roasted a cow for a feast. Ferguson chose “a small hill about two hundred yards from the air strip” to construct his family’s compound. With dozens of local men and boys, he cut trees and gathered bamboo. The group staked out wooden frames for a house, a laboratory, and smaller buildings, including a clinic, a kitchen, and space for guests. They lashed together bamboo walls and thatched roofs with palm fronds. In a reflection of the family’s priorities, they poured a concrete floor for the lab, but not for the house.Ferguson resumed treating patients during the day and staring into test tubes and microscopes at night. He worked long hours, trying to improve and standardize the formula for the head-shrinking fluid. Eventually, he eliminated another plant from the solution. He also decided that tempering the solution by shrinking an animal head wasn’t necessary after all. Ruth helped in the lab while working as one of only two nurses in the area. When a baby was born, someone came running for Ruth. She stitched up cuts and set fractures when people fell or injured themselves. She administered injections—vaccines for children, vitamin boosts for pregnant women—and cared for those suffering from parasites or the flu. She gave out free antibiotics and other medications. “She was willing to help anybody, no matter what,” Patricia told me. Ruth often read Bible stories aloud to her patients. She once told a reporter that she wouldn’t trade her life in the jungle “for any other,” and defended Wilburn from critics who pointed out that he wasn’t really a doctor. “Who in science and medicine has made the great discoveries?” she asked. “Not the trained man, bound by rules, but the man who breaks them or has a lucky accident.”The Ferguson children had to pull their own weight. “It was work, work, work,” Patricia recalled. She raised chickens, grew papayas, and roasted the family’s coffee. As she got older, she noticed that none of her neighbors lived in bamboo houses. They had solid roofs that kept out precipitation. The buildings on the Fergusons’ property, as one visitor observed, leaked water during the area’s frequent hard rains. One of their neighbors was a teenager named Nicanor Sangurima—most people called him Nico. His father owned a cattle ranch. When the Fergusons came to Sucúa, Nico was about the same age as Ralph, and the two boys became friends. Patricia befriended Nico’s sisters. Nico remembers being impressed with her Spanish. Patricia spoke it perfectly, with an elegant accent. Sometimes Nico stopped by the lab to use Ferguson’s typewriter. The glass tubes and machines fascinated him. But he was even more interested in Ferguson, who would raise his head to greet Nico and keep working. Nico had never met anyone who affected others the way Ferguson did. “People would go out of their way to accommodate him,” Nico told me. Ferguson seemed to expect it. “He never stood in line,” Nico said. “If he saw a long line, he would go to the front.” To make money, Ferguson arranged with a travel agency to bring tourists to Sucúa. He asked Tangamasha and other Shuar to perform for visitors. “They sang their native poetic songs, danced all their exotic dances and if a tourist was a little slow or missed a shot they repeated it for them,” Ferguson later recalled. In 1956, the American ambassador to Ecuador brought Senator Bourke Hickenlooper to watch a Shuar ceremony and to tour Ferguson’s lab. Hickenlooper, a conservative Republican from Iowa, called it a “fascinating experience.” Hickenlooper and Ferguson kept up a correspondence. With the senator’s aid, Ferguson planned another fundraising mission to the States. While he was in Washington, D.C., Hickenlooper helped him incorporate a nonprofit—the Ferguson Research Foundation. Ferguson also screened a short film he’d made about his life in the jungle. From the Beltway, he traveled across the country. He showed his movie at high schools and churches. In San Diego, he appeared on television. In New York, Nelson Rockefeller’s secretary turned him away. In Chicago, a department store magnate politely declined his request for backing. Ferguson was a curiosity, but not an investment. By the end of the trip, he was penniless. He slept on buses and, once he’d made it back to Washington, scrounged enough cash to send a telegram to Ecuador asking for a plane ticket home. After the trip, Ferguson worked harder than ever in his lab but also turned inward. He began to see threats around him. In his autobiography, he wrote of “many enemies” who tried to undermine his project. He feuded with a local evangelical missionary, accusing him of a “rabid campaign against my research.” By decade’s end, tourists had stopped coming, and there was no money left to continue the work. Ferguson told his family that they were moving back to California. But Patricia, who was 16, said she wasn’t leaving. She and Nico were in love, Patricia said. It was a surprise to everyone except Patricia’s talking parrot, who always whistled when the couple were together. Nico wrote Ferguson a letter asking permission to be Patricia’s boyfriend. Ferguson went a step further: He invited Nico to come with them to the United States. The young couple were married in June 1960, and in August, the now slightly larger Ferguson family flew to Miami. Ferguson bought a Chevrolet station wagon, painted desert beige, and the clan set out for California, driving all day and sleeping in motels at night. Patricia’s parrot squawked in the back seat. Through the windows, she and Nico watched an unfamiliar country pass by. For a while, the family lived in Southern California’s Inland Empire, where Patricia and Nico spent their days grinding, boiling, and distilling jungle plants on Ferguson’s behalf at a place called the World Life Research Institute. It was the passion project of Bruce Halstead, a young doctor and ichthyologist (fish scientist) with a knack for winning government grants. The institute was on 520 acres in a canyon. It had a research library and laboratories where as many as a dozen scientists worked at a time. When Patricia and Nico’s first son was born, Halstead covered the hospital bills. One day, Ferguson abruptly announced that they had to leave the institute—it was going under. Nico later heard that Ferguson feared Halstead wanted to cut him out of the effort to turn the head-shrinking fluid into a marketable drug. But Halstead’s son, Larry, told me that couldn’t have been true—his father always spoke highly of Ferguson. About a year after World Life collapsed, when Halstead revived it on a smaller scale on his family’s property, he hung a photo of Ferguson on the wall.Ferguson’s dreams were further thwarted when federal law changed in 1962. For the first time, the government would require manufacturers to prove that drugs were safe and effective before marketing them to consumers. Qualified experts would have to conduct clinical studies in which subjects gave informed consent. The Food and Drug Administration would set manufacturing standards and inspect facilities. According to an FDA administrator, the agency “was no longer a helpless bystander while unproven medicines were streaming into pharmacies and onto patients’ bedside tables.” A doctor from Palm Springs had sometimes stopped by World Life to pick up bottles of the head-shrinking fluid. As far as Nico understood, he was using it on cancer patients. “He was having success with it,” Nico said. “He kept coming, asking for more.” Now, with stricter federal laws, the doctor stopped treating patients with the solution. After 1962, the Ferguson family wandered. Ruth and Wilburn went back to nursing. “I usually worked the twelve-hour night shift,” Ferguson wrote in his autobiography, “and spent every spare moment of my time over the research records, translating the Spanish documentation and arranging the reports for potential sponsors, should we again have that opportunity.”While Ferguson looked for donors, the younger generation looked for work. Ralph took classes at Loma Linda to become a histology technician. Gene was hired by a police department back east. Nico sold cars, then found a job as a machinist in aircraft factories near Los Angeles. For extra money, he sold cookware door-to-door. Patricia stayed home to raise their two sons. The generations remained close, living on the same street, and sometimes in the same house—like in El Centro, where almost everyone piled into my step-grandfather’s spare apartment.Every few years, when Ferguson thought he saw a new opportunity, the family moved. Each time, Ruth left her job to pursue their larger goal. “She traveled with him, no matter what,” Patricia told me, because she “never had any doubts.” Curing cancer was as much her dream—and was furthered as much by her labor—as it was Wilburn’s. One day in June 1969, Ferguson approached Nico with a $2,500 check in hand. He wanted his son-in-law to use the money to fly to Ecuador and get more plants. Ferguson’s research had been dormant for years. Nico and Patricia had their family, and a daughter on the way, and they were leading the normal life that being Ferguson’s daughter and son-in-law had once denied them. Why did Ferguson want to revive his experiments now? And where, Nico asked, had the money come from?Ferguson explained that he’d found a new group of investors who’d offered him a contract to produce a sample of the solution for lab testing. Nico read the document and found that it dictated that the head-shrinking formula be put in escrow, which meant identifying the plants and the procedure for distilling them. Ferguson didn’t have patents or other protections. The way Nico saw it, the family would be giving up its only asset.Ferguson told Nico that if he didn’t like the contract, he should come to a meeting with the investors and propose better terms. “We need somebody that can negotiate,” Nico replied. Someone, that is, who understood business. Nico reached out to an old friend: Ken Williams, a former paratrooper and school principal. Williams had also been Nico’s boss when he sold cookware. Now he was the dean of San Antonio Commercial College. Williams had spent time with Ferguson over the years and knew about the cancer project. He agreed to help. The negotiations with the investors eventually fell through, but Williams proposed another idea. The fifth floor of his college was empty. If they set up a lab there, Williams said, the school wouldn’t charge them rent or utilities.The Fergusons were up and running again, this time in Texas. Wilburn and Ruth quit their nursing jobs in California, and Nico, Patricia, and their two sons flew to Ecuador to visit family. While he was there, Nico gathered more plants. With donations from the college’s students and teachers, Ferguson sent away for mice and implantable cancerous tumors from a laboratory supply company. He kept the mice in coffee cans with holes drilled into them. Williams was appointed executive director of the Ferguson Research Foundation, the nonprofit Ferguson had incorporated with Senator Hickenlooper’s help. Williams brought a steady stream of donors to visit the fifth-floor laboratory. Money came in, enough to fly Nico to Ecuador on regular foraging missions. The Fergusons replaced the coffee cans with proper cages. They bought a centrifuge, glassware, refrigerators, compressors, a freeze dryer, and other equipment. Making the solution was time-consuming, and Nico wondered if it could be simplified—maybe by removing more ingredients. Ferguson believed that each of the formula’s components had unique qualities that, when combined, made the perfect drug: A certain tree bark prevented inflammation, another plant elevated the patient’s mood, another killed pain, and so on. Cutting out plants might prevent a necessary synthesis from taking place. “I’d rather use a shotgun than a bullet,” Ferguson reasoned. Eventually, he and Nico compromised—they would hire a chemist to analyze and isolate the active chemicals in the solution so the recipe could be standardized once and for all. The foundation hired a young postdoc named J. Rao Nulu, recommended by Burlage, Ferguson’s old friend from the UT pharmacy school. Nulu spent weekends at the lab with Nico. The foundation then brought on a local pharmacology professor named William Stavinoha to supervise animal testing part-time, and another postdoc, Arvind Modak, to assist him. The years in the jungle, the rejections and disappointments, the desperate fundraising missions—all of it had led Ferguson here. “This was the kind of research collaboration I had dreamed of,” he wrote, “but frankly did not expect to find.”Soon, the foundation outgrew its borrowed space at the college and moved to a location near San Antonio International Airport. Now it had to pay rent. When combined with Nulu’s salary—he’d come aboard full-time—the foundation’s bills outpaced donations. Williams proposed converting it into a for-profit corporation. Selling shares could bring in capital, he said, and would make it an easier pitch to donors, since they’d earn a profit from any drugs that proved marketable. Ferguson agreed. They named it Farma Corporation. By its articles of incorporation, Farma was authorized to issue 500,000 shares of stock. Williams gave a controlling stake to the Fergusons and himself and set out to sell the rest.One of the first people to buy stock, according to Nico, was the doctor who’d once come to the World Life Research Institute to pick up batches of the solution. His name was William P. Aikin. At the time, he was probably the only American doctor who had used the formula on patients—and he believed it worked. He joined Farma’s board of directors. “Dad said if it was good,” Aikin’s son told me, referring to Ferguson’s formula, “it was worth a fortune.”When Modak said he wanted to end his postdoc early so he could work with the foundation full-time too, Williams suggested they find more investors and really grow the operation. To do so, they needed proof that the treatment worked. Ferguson saw no reason to wait—he wanted to use it on patients. “The people are suffering now,” he used to say. But according to Nico, an FDA inspector visited the lab and made it clear that he would shut the facility down if the team treated any patients.“Can I take patients in Mexico?” Ferguson asked.“What you do in Mexico is not my business,” the inspector reportedly responded. One of Farma’s investors contacted a friend in Torreón, in the Mexican state of Coahuila, who was a doctor and a partner in a medical clinic. The doctor’s name was Mario Gutiérrez Cárdenas, and he had a nephew, Arturo Gutiérrez Santos, who had just finished medical school. The clinic’s other doctors agreed to let Arturo, Mario, and the Fergusons use the facilities, as long as they took on only terminal patients. Because these people were likely to be poor, Ferguson insisted that the treatment be free. Farma would pay for everything.Ruth and Wilburn moved to Torreón. Nico was tasked with driving batches of the extract down from the lab in San Antonio, where he and Patricia still lived. The trip took 12 hours, with inspections at the border, traffic stops, and plenty of mordidas (bribes). Later, Nico began flying the formula down by plane once or twice each week—he’d obtained his pilot’s license back in California. He used a twin-engine Cessna that Williams bought with a three-year mortgage, putting up the lab equipment as collateral. Nico began to have doubts about Williams. Farma still had no revenue or marketable product. All it had was capital, which Williams raised by selling stock. The corporation was burning through money, but somehow Williams kept finding enough investors to keep the lights on. (He was a gifted salesman, according to his stepdaughter, Lucy Rix. “Ken could sell snow to the Eskimos.”) Every few weeks, it seemed to Nico, Williams awarded Wilburn, Ruth, or Patricia several thousand shares in Farma, and assigned himself a few thousand as well. “We need to keep the family in control,” Williams explained when Nico asked. By family, Nico realized, Williams meant himself, too.Early in the summer of 1970, Julia Cedillo, a 68-year-old woman in Juárez, crossed the border into El Paso for an appointment with a neurologist. She had a troubling set of symptoms: dizziness, vomiting, confusion. Most frightening of all, she was losing her eyesight. Lately, her field of vision had been limited to “seeing like a kind of little window,” recalled her daughter, Carmen Darancou Muñoz. “A flat little square. This square was closing, little by little, until the point that it was almost shut.” The neurologist took a biopsy. When the anesthesia wore off and Cedillo woke up, she was told that she had an astrocytoma of the right parietal lobe—brain cancer. It was advancing, the doctor said, but the tumor was too large to remove without causing neurological damage. Cedillo was an aunt of Ferguson’s partners at the clinic in Torreón. They asked the woman they called Tía Julia if she’d like to try Ferguson’s remedy. Cedillo said yes, and Darancou Muñoz left her job to travel with her mother to Torreón. “When I first arrived,” Cedillo later wrote, “I was in a wheelchair and partially paralyzed on one side of my body.” She was nearly blind, and slipped in and out of a coma.Darancou Muñoz told me that during the first week at the clinic, Ferguson gave her mother “a little bottle.” It looked like it held cough syrup. The substance gave off an herbal smell and tasted bitter. But the very first dose her mother drank, Muñoz said, “started to open up that little window in her eyes for her.” By the fourth week of treatment, according to clinic reports, Cedillo was walking to mass every morning. Soon she could read the newspaper.As a Farma board member, William Aikin heard about Cedillo’s progress. He pleaded with Ferguson and the Mexican doctors to use the extract in conjunction with surgery; Aikin believed that it would shrink tumors but not make them disappear. Nico remembered him saying, “You have to remove the tumor and continue with extract afterwards.” They should use the extract like they would chemotherapy, Aikin said. Nico tried to convince his father-in-law to take Aikin’s advice, but Ferguson declined. Aikin grew annoyed. “You are trying to work miracles,” he reportedly said. Not performing surgery was naive—or worse.But to Ferguson, Cedillo’s case suggested that the formula was curative. After eight months of treatment, she had none of her former symptoms. She eventually returned home believing that Ferguson had saved her life. According to Darancou Muñoz, the El Paso neurologist was amazed when he examined Cedillo again. “If there wasn’t an operation,” Darancou Muñoz recalled him saying, “where is the tumor?” Cedillo lived for 23 more years, dying at the age of 91. For a long time, she sent Christmas cards to Ferguson, signed in elegant, old-fashioned cursive. To her mother, Darancou Muñoz told me, “he was like an angel.”In July 1972, Nico had just returned to San Antonio with a shipment of plants from Ecuador. It had been a long flight, with a layover in Mexico, and he was tired. But no sooner did he get home than Patricia told him to get ready to leave again. Something was wrong with the corporation. The investors were meeting in Reno, Nevada, the next day, and he needed to be there.Williams was so successful selling stock that the corporation had increased its total shares twice in three years. On both occasions, Williams issued most of the new shares to himself and the Fergusons, so they’d retain a controlling interest. But he’d failed to register over two million of those shares with the Texas State Securities Board, as required by law. Investors were worried that criminal charges could be filed against both Williams and Ferguson. A lawyer said that the best solution was to dissolve Farma and transfer its assets to a new organization. The company’s shareholders would have to consent. For good measure, the lawyer recommended incorporating the new entity in a different state. That’s why the meeting was called in Reno.Nico, Ralph, and Gene joined the other shareholders. Wilburn and Ruth stayed in Mexico. At the meeting, lawyers proposed dissolving Farma and reincorporating in Nevada as Pharma Capital Corporation. The laboratory equipment, the airplane, and the rights to the secret formula would belong to the new entity. Everyone who had bought stock in Farma would receive an equivalent number of shares in the new company. Everyone, that is, except the family. The Fergusons—and Williams—would get nothing. They would be removed from their positions at the firm.According to Farma’s articles of dissolution, investors representing 1,905,779 shares voted in favor of the lawyers’ plan. No one voted against it. Aikin abstained, Nico recalled, after trying to persuade others to change their minds. But even Williams and the Ferguson family voted yes. “We all had no choice,” Nico said. The attorneys placed an investor—an Iowa rancher with no scientific background—in charge of the new corporation’s research. In Torreón, Wilburn and Ruth, devastated, were forced to ask the patients they were treating to leave the clinic for good.In July 2019, I found myself in Texas looking at an open fireproof box. Inside was an object the size of a grapefruit that smelled like old leather. I saw thick hair and a hole where an eye should have been—a rat had picked it away some years prior. The other eye was closed, its bushy lashes sealed by time. It was one of Ferguson’s shrunken heads, stashed away for safekeeping by one of his remaining acolytes.I’d come to Texas to meet Charles Mazinter, a real estate entrepreneur and former car dealer with dreams of finally proving Ferguson right. Mazinter met Ferguson around 1997. By then, Ferguson was in his nineties. His hair had grown long, Mazinter said, giving him an “Albert Einstein look.” The previous 25 years had taken a toll. After Ferguson lost Farma in 1972, he spent much of the next year finishing his autobiography. The Son of Fergus was 423 pages long, and it combined his life story with lab results, photos of patients and their tumors, a history of the Shuar people, and copies of letters from his supporters. He mortgaged the Torreón house he shared with Ruth to print 100 copies bound in leather. He stamped the book as the property of the Fundación Incorporada de Investigaciones Ferguson de México and dedicated it “to my Sponsors Past, Present, and Future.” He mailed copies to Walter Cronkite, George H.W. Bush, and other powerful figures. The bank eventually repossessed the Fergusons’ house, and the couple returned to California. For a few years, Wilburn again worked as a nurse. In 1977 he retired. He was past 70; Ruth was nearing it. They moved to Texas, where Patricia and Nico still lived. For the rest of his life, the old man wrote letters, still looking for support. He found an ally in a Hollywood composer named Phillip Lambro, who bought the rights to The Son of Fergus and tried to get movie studios to develop it. Meanwhile, without a laboratory, Ferguson imagined ways to improve his formula, writing up new extraction and distillation techniques on the back of stray documents.In 1992, he was in the news again. Someone told him about Medicine Man, a movie in which Sean Connery plays an eccentric scientist searching for a cure for cancer in the Amazon. Connery and the film’s screenwriter, Tom Schulman, were both represented by Creative Artists Agency, and Phillip Lambro had sent an employee there a copy of Ferguson’s autobiography. Ferguson and Lambro believed they were being robbed. They decided to sue for copyright infringement—but it wasn’t a winning case. Lawyers representing Connery and Schulman produced documents showing that the movie was inspired by a different researcher in a different jungle: Daniel Janzen, a conservationist and evolutionary ecologist in Costa Rica. Schulman had known Janzen for years. The lawsuit went nowhere. Mazinter entered the Fergusons’ lives a few years later. An acquaintance of his, Ann Gaspari, had married Gene, the Fergusons’ eldest child. While Mazinter was visiting their house one day, he heard a noise in another room. Ann said it was Gene’s dad, who was living with them. “So they bring out Wilburn,” Mazinter recalled, “and he sits down, and we start talking.”Mazinter found Ferguson fascinating. He thought it was a shame that research into the head-shrinking formula had been cut short. After the visit, Mazinter started having odd experiences. Every time he turned on the radio or TV, the program seemed to be about cancer. One day at a mall in San Antonio, a woman he’d just met started crying while telling him about a relative who was dying of the disease. “I’m sitting here going, ‘Why are you telling me? What do I have to do with any of this?’” Mazinter said. “It became so ridiculous that I knew something was going on. Like it was God saying, ‘Do something with this.’”He went back to Ann and Gene’s and told them he believed he needed to be part of Ferguson’s project. According to Mazinter, they had already decided to ask for his help. Ferguson wasn’t looking for another scientist. What the old man needed was an entrepreneur.Ferguson, Gene, and Ann took Mazinter out for dinner at an oyster restaurant. Soon after, Ferguson gave Mazinter his files. “It was like the passing of the mantle,” Mazinter said. He took the gesture to mean that if anything was going to happen with the research, it was up to him.Mazinter tried several times to revive the project, taking it to drug companies and investors. In 2001, he spoke with Corey Levenson, a pharmaceutical chemist and the senior director of ILEX Oncology, a cancer-drug developer in San Antonio. Levenson told me that he found Mazinter’s pitch compelling. “I wanted to believe this stuff was going to work,” he said. “If you look at the drugs that we use now for treating cancer, a lot of them come from plants originally. So it’s not that far-fetched.” Levenson reviewed the files Mazinter had inherited from Ferguson and was disappointed to find mostly anecdotal accounts of cures and old reports based on “antiquated rat models that weren’t really considered very predictive.” There were no randomized controlled trials, no formal toxicity tests, not even enough chemistry to know if the extract’s active ingredients had already been isolated and put to use in other medical treatments.Still, Levenson was curious enough to ask for more information, and Mazinter produced what Levenson remembers as “a vial of brown goop.” It was the head-shrinking solution, prepared by Nico. Levenson and his colleagues ran a preliminary test on cancerous cells and found, as Levenson wrote to Mazinter at the time, “that the extract was able to kill the cells.” Promising, but not enough. According to Mazinter, Levenson proposed an arrangement: ILEX would put up the money to test the solution further. In return, ILEX would own 90 percent of any drug that came out of the research.Mazinter turned the offer down. He believed he could do better. “Looking back at it now,” he told me, “I should have taken the deal.” Levenson said that he didn’t remember offering Mazinter anything, though his boss at the time may have suggested a deal. “Given that there was no compelling animal data that was ‘fresh’ and the business opportunity was still pretty risky,” he wrote in an email, “I don’t imagine ILEX would’ve offered much for it.”The preliminary test was as far as the research went. I asked Levenson if Ferguson could have been right—if the brown goop might itself be, or perhaps contain, an effective cancer treatment. “We don’t know,” he responded. “Nobody ever took it to the point where you could say yes or no.”“It’s kind of a shame,” Levenson said, “because he might have had something.”Some legends are true, and others—perhaps most—only reveal truths about the people who tell them and the cultures in which they’re told. Tom Schulman, the screenwriter, pointed out that Ferguson’s quest shares themes with many popular stories, from Lost Horizon to Juan Ponce de León and the Fountain of Youth. They’re all tales of “explorers really looking for things of value.” Cities overflowing with gold. Life-giving waters in the Florida swamps. A cure for cancer from shrunken heads. It all connects to “this mystery of what goes on deep in the jungle,” Schulman said, “and this sense that there’s knowledge and wisdom out there.”Ferguson died in 1998, a year after Mazinter met him. Ruth had passed away four years prior. Gene and Ralph are gone now, too, along with Galo Plaza, Tangamasha, Ken Williams, and other people who supported Ferguson’s work. The widow of one of the doctors Ferguson worked with at the Torreón clinic keeps a little glass bottle of the head-shrinking extract. Her husband saved it as a souvenir. Julia Cedillo’s relatives remember the Ferguson family fondly, even if some of them questioned the business model of a corporation that treated patients for free.The streets in Sucúa are paved now, and one of them is named after Nico’s father. The local population has grown. The hill where Ferguson’s laboratory once stood is covered with houses. “You wouldn’t even recognize it anymore,” Patricia said. She and Nico maintain ties to family in Ecuador. Their kids have grown up, and Nico has retired. He visits Sucúa every few years; his last trip was just before the coronavirus pandemic exploded. He and Patricia say it’s harder than ever to locate the ingredients in the head-shrinking formula. Still, Nico told me, “The plants are there to be found.”One is of particular interest to him—a flowering vine that Nico believes is the key to the fluid’s power, based on the research he did in Texas decades ago. Mazinter is convinced of it, too, but neither he nor Nico would tell me much about the plant in question. “I can’t reveal exactly what it looks like,” Mazinter said, “but I can tell you the flower on it is phenomenal.” I asked if he could at least reveal the color of the flower. That would give too much away, Mazinter replied. “I don’t know what other plants would be so distinctive with this color,” he explained. “It’s just regal. Royal. Gorgeous. Breathtaking.”Nico referred to it as “Plant A.” At his father’s ranch in Sucúa, back when he was a boy, they considered it a weed. “It was all over,” Nico said.Nico and Mazinter are focusing the hope that Ferguson nurtured his entire life on a weed. Mazinter imagines a future in which the old man he met at his friends’ home is hailed as a visionary. To make that happen, he needs to raise money. A lot of it. “You need a million just to start,” Mazinter said. He’ll have to gather plant specimens, if he can find them. Then he’ll have to hire a chemist who can isolate and stabilize the active ingredients. If he gets that far, he can try to patent what he finds. He’ll have to conduct research on animals, convince the FDA to approve clinical trials, and prove that whatever’s in the vine with the incredible flower is both nontoxic to humans and more effective than other drugs already on the market. Failure awaits at every turn, just as it did for Ferguson. “If I could go back in time,” Mazinter told me, “I almost think I might push a button and say, ‘I wish I never heard about it.’ Because it has brought me nothing but hard work and grief. And it has drained my finances in a very bad way.”Nico favors a different path. He hopes to do just enough research to demonstrate the weed’s potential and convince a university, an investor, or someone else to carry the project forward. He said he trusts Mazinter and wants to make sure they work together, but he’s seen where the dream of money can lead. “My father-in-law spent a lifetime trying to raise a million dollars,” he said. Nico wants to start small. “If somebody says they’ll take a risk and donate $20,000, I’ll take it,” he told me. “Form a corporation, whatever. I’m 85 years old. I’m not going to see it through, but I’d like to start something.”Discover our first BESIDE destination in LanaudièreBack to natureEscaping a wilderness rehab and hitchhiking across a state, Simon fought hard against letting nature change him. Text—Simon Hudson
Illustrations—Mélanie MascléI did not go willingly. At 3 a.m. I got woken up by my parents struggling with the words to tell me I was going away. They had signed custody over to two ex-Marine types who were also in my room; they would be taking me on a plane to the woods of Montana.I knew my parents had been planning to send me to some kind of rehab soon, but I didn’t expect it to happen before the end of the school year. They had gotten a glimpse of the trouble I was getting into (weekend disappearances, a discovered shopping list of drugs, suspension from school for fighting, manipulative emotional breakdowns) and decided that overreacting was better than underreacting. The escorts were an addition because they rightly deemed me a flight risk.I lived up to their expectations when I made my first escape attempt at the Seattle Airport check-in counter. It was 4 a.m. and the airport check-in area was empty except for the stanchions and connecting straps set up to corral the travellers who would be arriving in just a couple of hours.As I stood behind my escorts at the ticket counter, I had a feeling that their attention had momentarily drifted from me to the agent. I saw my window and leapt for it.And I managed to get some good distance away from my kidnappers, too, until I ran into a slow-opening automatic sliding door. I turned around to look for another route and discovered that running away from people in an airport post-9/11 led to several government agencies being alerted. I tried to juke around them but was tackled to the ground and put in cuffs. After explaining to Homeland Security why they were transporting this minor, my escorts had me on my flight headed to my new summer camp without any further hiccups.When I arrived in Montana, I had to admit that, despite my protests, my parents had made a good choice of where to send me. I have always loved the outdoors, whether camping with my dad, school trips to go kayaking in Alaska, or hiking in Wyoming. But I couldn’t handle losing my self-determination; I was outraged.Three Rivers Montana was a program for troubled and/or bratty teens of all stripes based on the principle that “Nature cannot be manipulated, but instead demands good choices.”After a blindfolded drive to the camp to meet with the group, I was informed of what the general schedule of my life would be for the foreseeable future (they insisted the duration of my stay was entirely up to me). Each morning we would wake up, warm up with calisthenics, drink 1000 ml of water, eat breakfast, load up our external frame packs, and then hike. They would not tell us how long we would hike, but the average was seven hours and we weren’t allowed to talk. Much of the hiking was off-trail, keeping us from getting a sense of direction or running into other hikers, not that there were many in the Gallatin Mountain Range of southwestern Montana.Arriving at our camp for the night at the end of each trek, we would go into our survival work. Hooches—thick tarps draped over a line and the corners tied down with cord—were our main shelters: one “mama hooch” for the cooking area and one personal-sized for each of our sleeping spots. We then went on to dig our latrine and firepit, carving them out so they could be easily refilled and resodded the following morning.We each had our own food for the week: plain, dehydrated ingredients went a long way with a hungry imagination stimulated by the silent treks. The catch was that hot meals required building our own fires with wooden bow drills. If you couldn’t achieve the small cherry of a coal with a bow drill and build that into a fire, well, your dining options were significantly limited. Imagine being drenched in sweat, arms cramping out, just to see a trickle of smoke, and in the end your dinner is cold powdered mashed potatoes.At the end of each week, we would remain in one spot for two nights to resupply. A new set of counsellors would rotate in, bringing with them the new supply of food and letters from our parents. We used the downtime to meet with a psychologist and complete coursework on topics ranging from navigation, constellations, and botany to anger management and family conflict resolution.I joined the group on a resupply day, and so I had a chance to send a first letter to my parents. I listed everything wrong with their decision; I threatened to disappear if they didn’t bring me back.For dramatic effect, I signed it in blood from a cut I got when sawing a sapling for my bow drill (I didn’t know these letters were actually faxed in black and white).(Here’s a video of me reading the letter at the event Grownups Read Things They Wrote as Kids. Rereading the letters, the word “arrogant” comes to mind.)My botched escape attempt from the airport had put the counsellors on alert, so I decided I should lie low and give my parents a chance to change their minds and bring me home. I was also keen to learn how to make fire with only sticks and twine, which I thought would be handy if and when I needed to escape the backcountry.Without meaning to, I changed in that first week while waiting for my parents’ letter. Daily treks in silence are an effective way to get anyone to reflect on their lives and consider what’s really important. My mental fog lifted, and I saw clearly that the substances I had been using were blurring my days, weeks, and even hours into one chaotic haze. I knew then that while they may have “opened my mind” to new ways of seeing the world, they had long darkened my perspective by making me dysfunctional and anti-social.After learning to make fire with sticks and having my revelation about drugs, I decided I had gotten all I needed out of this camp and that it was time to go. When I received a letter from my parents rebuffing my proposal to bring me home, I made my second escape attempt. This time I got out.I saw my opportunity early the next morning while the counsellors were a hundred yards away at the campfire. I was ready with a couple of apples and full water bottles. I didn’t wait to second-guess it, I just went, leaving behind a letter that said, “If I do die on my path to freedom, it was completely worth it because I have the power to make a decision for myself and I am in control.”(I also wrote a list of confessions I carried with me in case I didn’t make it. Here’s the recording from another GRTTWK event of the letter I left behind at 29:06)My plan was to hitchhike to Missoula, where my dad had grown up and still had close friends living there. I had gotten a glimpse of a map from one of the counsellors and saw that Missoula was about 300 miles [483 km] away. I ran about 12 miles [19 km] before I made it to the highway, where I pulled out a piece of my sleeping pad into which I had carved “MISSOULA”.It took me only two rides to get all the way there. The first guy freaked me out at first; he looked like a cop because of a large antenna on his pickup, which turned out to be a car phone. He didn’t talk much and was skeptical of my story about how my camping group had agreed to not report in if we got separated from each other, but didn’t push the issue. He gave me a Gatorade and let me call friends back in Seattle.He didn’t point out that the voicemails I left for my friends seemed to conflict with the story I had told him—he just offered me beef jerky and told me how he bowhunted grizzlies, as well as that his daughter’s safety was the most important thing in the world to him.Along the way, he dropped me at a gas station while he ran some errands in town. Going into the gas station was the first time I realized how naked I was without any money or ID. I asked to borrow a cellphone to call my parents. Refusing to tell him where I was, I managed to get from my dad the number of his friends in Missoula. I hung up and went to get my second ride a little further up the way.My second ride was from a contractor who regularly travelled between Bozeman and Missoula. As soon as I got into his little blue pickup with bright yellow lightning bolts, he asked me to crack open a beer for him and then told me his life story. Much of it was about his sorrow for a friend who had won a huge insurance settlement and then proceeded to destroy his life with drinking and gambling. From his car I called my dad’s friends in Missoula, who by that time knew I was coming.When we got to the home I called my parents to let them know I had made it okay, and to ask them to fly me back to Seattle. They insisted instead on coming out and meeting me in Missoula the next morning, and driving back to Seattle together. That worked for me. At this point I felt like I had made my point, that my parents had heard it, and things were on their way to being back to normal. We still needed to discuss betraying each other’s trust, but we could get to that at some point on the road. I took a long shower and shaved the longest moustache I had ever grown.The next morning my parents arrived and we all went out for breakfast. After our families were finished catching up, we said our goodbyes and got in the car to head back.My parents looked back at me, and it was the first time we had really seen each other since they got there. They were looking at me like they didn’t know me. They asked me what I was thinking; they weren’t asking so much as expressing the confusion I saw on their faces. I couldn’t understand why they wanted to insist on having the tough conversation right then and there, until I looked around and saw the same escorts that had taken me to Montana walking up along either side of the car. I suddenly realized I was in the back of a two-door coupe, unable to lift the seat up to escape.I had thought I was free, and now I was trapped again. I was out of ideas and so I turned violent. I grabbed my parents and swore I wouldn’t let them out. I was ready to do more harm, but a part of me watched the situation unfold from outside the car. I could see that I was hurting people who were genuinely trying to help me and loved me and would always put everything aside when I was in trouble. I had hit a limit. I knew what I was doing wasn’t worth the control I was trying to win back, so I let my parents go and attacked the escorts. Thankfully, I was a scrawny 15-year-old kid, and so I couldn’t do much harm. My parents got out intact, and I again found myself handcuffed, headed for the woods.I eventually gave up cursing and kicking from the backseat, and the escorts and I made peace over McDonald’s.By the time I arrived back in the woods I had decided that my best way out was to finish the program in good faith. In fact, it was a relief to give up on trying to guess how long I would be there and make it go by as fast as possible. This time, instead of just one week to let the haze lift, I got six more weeks to really see.Montana is known as “big sky country.” On our long hikes through the mountains, the wide summer sky framed everything we saw: eagles perched on cliffs looked like giant boulders before swooping into the valley below; mountain lions took a path along the ridge that ominously intersected with our bearing. Beneath our feet the snow melted, edible glacier lilies and berries spread out, the colour of the rocks shifted from deep reds and blacks to translucent pinks and blues of quartzite and rare lightning glass.The vastness above our heads and below our feet provided the space for me to unwind all the unaddressed thoughts and intuitions I had numbed out.I remembered the things I wanted to do and create, the things that sparked my curiosity, but mostly the people that were important to me with whom I wanted to share those things. I understood how I had intentionally broken off relationships as a way to hide from my shame of being a terrible friend. I had such an outpouring of old, packed-away ideas to examine and process that the long walks were never boring.These intense moments of clarity persisted even in my sleep. Each night as I lay in a bivy sack under my tarp hooch, my thoughts morphed into dreams that were as vivid as real life—my subconscious working out what I couldn’t when I was awake. I once dreamt our group was trekking through a park back home in Seattle and we encountered some of my friends in a circle getting high. I left the trek to go join them and I sat down in the circle just in time for my turn in the rotation. One of the counsellors came up to me and asked, “What are you doing?” I was surprised at how I hadn’t even managed to muster a doubt about rejoining my old life. At the same time, I was also certain it wasn’t what I wanted to do. I got up and got back on the trail. Then I woke up.—Dive into Green Screen, a BESIDE Journal that investigates the tension in our modern lives between connection and disconnection, between nature and technologies. Montana was a pivotal moment in my life. From that experience, I learned a basic lesson: that I want to contribute something positive to the stream of life; that it will not come through anger and fighting, but through understanding of others and giving of myself. While I never did drugs again, I did try drinking a couple months after returning home to Seattle because I thought it connected me to others. I quickly relapsed into my old behaviours of burning up relationships, and within a month I was close to the same isolation I had created before I was sent away. I knew I had strayed from the principle I had learned in Montana and was close to ruining everything I had rebuilt. I also knew my life didn’t have to go that way, so instead of pretending I had things under control and numbing more, I asked for help from people I saw making a positive contribution in their lives. I followed their example, I gave up drinking for good, and I committed to putting this new principle of life first.I have been sober ever since; I have maintained some of my rebelliousness, but I fight far less (and never with my parents).As I learned the work of making a contribution (i.e. being an adult), for almost 10 years, I barely got back out into the wilderness—though I kept nature in my mind as a sacred place. I now live in Montréal, Canada, and a few years ago I started to explore the outdoors here with friends.This last summer, I was in the Québec backcountry with my partner on a small island on a lake. I was thinking about what made the Montana sky so big. We were lying on a boulder, looking up at the stars, hours away from any ambient city light. Without the light pollution of civilization to frame it, the starry sky dropped all the way back behind the silhouette of the surrounding mountains. At that moment I could see with my own eyes how the sky envelops the entirety of earth, and I felt awe at how relatively small me and my made-up problems were. I realized it was the same kind of awe I felt many times in Montana.Now, no matter where I am—even on a cloudy day in the city—I can look up and have that same experience of the “big sky.” There will never be any running away from it.Simon Hudson was born and raised in Seattle, WA where he grew up with easy access to the mountains and waterways around the Puget Sound, a thoroughly organic diet, and new agey idealism. In school, he discovered economics and was fascinated by the machinations of capitalism and business. He has been following his curiosity with business ever since, satisfying it with a career in editorial communications. He has been living in Montreal, QC for the last ten years and currently works at Element AI, a company building artificial intelligence solutions for enterprises, where every day he is reminded of just how human business really is.Two issues per year25% OFF previous issuesFree Shipping in CanadaTo receive the latest news and dispatches, subscribe to our newsletter.On the solstice of what seems destined to be a difficult winter, the words of Valérie Lefebvre-Faucher come as a healing balm.What we can learn from Inuttitut, a language shaped by humility, poetry, and the land.Shabana Ali on the unequal barriers faced by climbers of colour.Since 2016, our collaborator Juliette Leblanc is getting used to country life (and finding out what the little house on the prairie is really like).Bridging the gap between humans and nature.With leagues across the world undergoing cancellations for much of the year, 2020 has been an interesting one in the world of sports. Here are some stories that resonated with us. If you like these, you can sign up to receive our weekly Top 5 email every Friday.* * *Ahmaud “Maud” Arbery was a passionate young football fan and player, whose only crime was to attempt to jog while being Black in Brunswick, Georgia. At Runner’s World, Mitchell S. Jackson recounts Arbery’s murder in cold blood and interrogates a sport where participation is really only sanctioned and safe for privileged white people.And though the demographics of runners have become more diverse over the last 50 years, jogging, by and large, remains a sport and pastime pitched to privileged whites.Peoples, I invite you to ask yourself, just what is a runner’s world? Ask yourself who deserves to run? Who has the right? Ask who’s a runner? What’s their so-called race? Their gender? Their class? Ask yourself where do they live, where do they run? Where can’t they live and run? Ask what are the sanctions for asserting their right to live and run—shit—to exist in the world. Ask why? Ask why? Ask why?Ahmaud Arbery, by all accounts, loved to run but didn’t call himself a runner. That is a shortcoming of the culture of running. That Maud’s jogging made him the target of hegemonic white forces is a certain failure of America. Check the books—slave passes, vagrancy laws, Harvard’s Skip Gates arrested outside his own crib—Blacks ain’t never owned the same freedom of movement as whites.The buckshot blast hits Maud in the chest, puncturing his right lung, ribs, and sternum. And yet somehow, he wrestles with Travis McMichael for the shotgun, and yet somehow, he manages to punch at him. Gregory watches for a moment from his roost. Meanwhile, Bryan continues to film. Travis fires his shotgun again, a blast that occurs outside the view of Bryan’s phone, but sends a spray of dust billowing into the frame. Maud, an island of blood now staining his white t-shirt, continues to tussle with Travis McMichael, fighting now for what he must know is his life. In the midst of the scuffle, Travis McMichael blasts Maud again point blank, piercing him in his upper chest. Maud whiffs a weak swing, staggers a couple of steps, and falls face down near the traffic stripes. Travis, shotgun in hand, backs away, watches Maud collapse, and makes not the slightest effort to tend him. His father, still clutching his revolver, runs to where Maud lies facedown, blood leaking out of his wounds.Ahmaud Marquez Arbery was more than a viral video. He was more than a hashtag or a name on a list of tragic victims. He was more than an article or an essay or posthumous profile. He was more than a headline or an op-ed or a news package or the news cycle. He was more than a retweet or shared post. He, doubtless, was more than our likes or emoji tears or hearts or praying hands. He was more than an R.I.P. t-shirt or placard. He was more than an autopsy or a transcript or a police report or a live-streamed hearing. He, for damn sure, was more than the latest reason for your liberal white friend’s ephemeral outrage. He was more than a rally or a march. He was more than a symbol, more than a movement, more than a cause. He. Was. Loved.There is no question that American football is a punishing physical sport, one in which players can sustain permanent injury. Science is just beginning to understand the damage that occurs to the brain after repeated blows to the head on the field. A study mentioned in the New York Times in 2017 found that in a single game, one lineman took 62 hits, with G-forces similar to crashing a car into a wall at 30 miles per hour.At Sports Illustrated, Michael Rosenberg brings the consequences into sharp focus, starting his story on May 12, 2012, the day that famed linebacker Junior Seau committed suicide, ostensibly after suffering long-term brain damage playing football for the USC Trojans and over 19 NFL seasons. Rosenberg reports on a horrific pattern that has emerged among former members of the 1989 USC Trojans football team, where five of 12 linebackers have died before the age of 50.May 2, 2012
Matt Gee always says that “Junior does what Junior wants,” and what Junior Seau wants on this day is to die. Matt is out for breakfast when he gets the news, in the staccato notes of a breaking national story: Junior Seau . . . dead . . . gunshot wound to the chest . . . possible suicide.Matt is shocked. At 42, he is not yet used to watching his teammates die.Twelve names. Twelve dreams.Twelve linebackers on the Trojans’ depth chart in the fall of 1989, each with the strength of a man and the exuberance of a boy, swimming in everything USC has to offer: joy and higher education and adulation, endless adrenaline surges, alcohol, cocaine if they want it, steroids if they need them. Anything to feel fearless and reckless, wild and free.In 1989, tacklers are taught to lead with their heads. Drug tests are easy to beat. Pain is for the weak. Complaints are for the weaker. This is how the game is played.The linebackers form a team within a team, each player with his own role. Seau is the most talented. Alan Wilson is the quietest. Craig Hartsuyker is the heady technician. Scott Ross and Delmar Chesley serve as mentors to Matt, who will become a starter after they leave. David Webb is the team’s resident surfer dudeThe Trojans go 9-2-1 and then win the Rose Bowl that season, but football fools them. The linebackers think they are paying the game’s price in real time. Michael Williams takes a shot to the head tackling a running back in one game and he is slow to get up, but he stays on the field, even as his brain fogs up for the next few plays. Chesley collides with a teammate and feels the L.A. Coliseum spinning around him; he tries to stay in but falls to a knee and gets pulled. Ross, who says he would run through a brick wall for Rogge, breaks a hand and keeps playing. After several games he meets his parents outside the home locker room and can’t remember whether his team won or lost. Hartsuyker breaks a foot and stays on the field. Another time, he gets concussed on a kickoff, tells trainers he is fine, finishes the game and later shows up on fraternity row with no recollection of playing that day. Somebody sets him on the floor in front of a television, like a toddler.As Brendan I. Koerner reports in this fun story at Wired, when it comes to poker, “it’s sacrilege to accuse a peer of cheating without airtight proof.” When Texas Hold ‘Em player and “self-described analytics geek” Veronica Brill publicly aired her misgivings about Mike Postle’s unconventional yet highly successful poker play, the blowback landed on her, not him. At first. But was Brill right? Did Postle cheat? Read the story and decide for yourself.LIKE MANY OTHERS who spent huge chunks of time at Stones, Brill had long considered Postle a friend. A generous soul who exuded a puckish charm, Postle was the sort who’d pay for everyone’s drinks while regaling the bar with bawdy tales. (He was particularly fond of a story about getting banned from Caesars Palace over a misunderstanding involving a sex worker.) But up until the summer of 2018, few of the pro players at Stones thought much of his poker prowess. “He was playing well enough to support himself, it seemed,” says Jake Rosenstiel, a Sacramento pro. “But none of us thought Mike was this great poker player.”Everyone was thus surprised when Postle began to dominate the casino’s livestreamed Texas Hold ‘Em games starting in July 2018. The once middling Postle suddenly turned formidable, even taking thousands of dollars off some big-time players during their swings through Northern CaliforniaBrill, a self-described analytics geek whose day job is building medical software, was among those who got clobbered by Postle at the table, and she served as a livestream commentator during much of his streak too. By early 2019, she had seen enough to surmise that Postle’s success didn’t make mathematical sense. She thought he was winning far too often, particularly for a player whose strategy didn’t jibe with game theory optimal, or GTO, the prevailing strategy in Texas Hold ‘Em today.Tremendous effort is required to develop the ability to know which single move to make in the millions of possible betting situations. There are 2,598,960 possible hands in five-card poker, a figure that vastly understates the game’s intricacy. Players must also have a feel for how their opponents are likely to react to each gambit.In 2018, the state of Florida voted to ban greyhound racing because it was considered “archaic and inhumane.” But, what if they got it wrong? In this deeply reported Longreads feature, Ashley Stimpson introduces us to the sport of kings through Vesper, her retired racing greyhound. Tracing Vesper’s life from its start in liquid nitrogen, Stimpson learns that her beloved pet was conceived when “pellets of semen the size of a lentil” were collected from her brindle dad Lonesome Cry and implanted in her mom, a dam named Jossalyn. Stimpson discovers a world of breeders, veterinarians, and trainers dedicated not only to the sport but to the health and well-being of the dogs in their care. It’s been nearly a decade since the numbers were tattooed in her ears, but they remain remarkably legible. In the right one, dots of green ink spell out 129B: Vesper was born in the twelfth month of the decade’s ninth year and was the second in her litter. The National Greyhound Association (NGA) gave that litter a unique registration number (52507), which was stamped into her moss-soft left ear. If I type these figures into the online database for retired racing greyhounds, I can learn about her life before she was ours, before she was even Vesper.Smokin’ Josy was born to a breeder in Texas, trained in West Virginia, and raced in Florida. Over three years, she ran 70 races. She won four of them. In Naples on May 12, 2012, she “resisted late challenge inside,” to clinch victory, according to her stat sheet. In Daytona Beach on April 17, 2013, she “stumbled, fell early.” Five days later, after a fourth-place showing, she was retired.I don’t mourn for greyhound racing and its long-delayed reckoning. I do sympathize with working-class people who genuinely love their dogs and who feel overlooked and overpowered by the currents of political change. And selfishly I feel sad that I’ll probably never have another dog like Vesper; I so love the bony ridge of her spine, the way her teeth chatter when she gets excited, the skin that clings to the cartilage between her eyes, softened by so many hands like an ancient piece of pottery. I don’t know if she was happier in the starting block at the track or tucked into her monogrammed bed here with me, but I’m open to the possibility that it was the former.When you think of gambling in America, you don’t immediately think of Hot Springs, Arkansas, but at one time, “when Las Vegas was still a dusty smudge on the horizon,” Hot Springs was the place to be, where musicians, sports stars, and mobsters gathered to soothe their ills in the healing bubbly waters that emerged from deep inside the earth. In fact, “Some of the more popular ailments that patients came to treat were venereal diseases. Al Capone would ‘take the waters’ in the 1920s to treat his syphilis.”An excerpt from David Hill’s book The Vapors: A Southern Family, the New York Mob, and the Rise and Fall of Hot Springs, America’s Forgotten Capital of Vice, the piece is a rich profile of a sting operation at the Vapors Casino in the 1960s. What’s super fun about this story, one that is told in rich detail, is that one of the casino workers running the sting is the author’s grandmother.Hazel Hill was another good country person who loved to gamble. She was 42, an attractive brunette, and looking like high society that night in her party dress and shawl. Only she wasn’t high society, not by a long shot. On her own dime, Hazel wouldn’t ordinarily be in a place like the Vapors. She’d likely be at the Tower Club, with the other down-on-their-luck locals. Or, if it were a special occasion, she might be at the Pines Supper Club, or any number of the more proletarian establishments around town, where the low rollers and hustlers could gamble cheap and drink even cheaper. Hazel worked for the Vapors as a shill player, gambling with house money to keep the tourists interested and the games going. It wasn’t a great job as far as the money went, but it was the best job Hazel had ever had, playing with the house’s money and blowing on doctors’ dice for them. Whatever the pay, it was worth something to her to just be in the Vapors. It put Hazel right at the center of the whole world.Hazel was a street-smart high school dropout. She had become a wife and a mother in Hot Springs, earning her living on her wits and the skills she had picked up in the casinos—how to calculate odds, how to place and take bets, how to deal cards.Now, though, it was Dr. Rowe who was pocketing chips. The shills had their eyes on him. One of Hazel’s fellow shill players, a buddy of the club owner named Richard Dooley, watched Rowe like a hawk. One of the craps dealers was paying Dr. Rowe more money on each of his winning bets than he actually won. It could have been a simple error, but the fact that Rowe was putting the extra chips in his pocket, rather than in his stack of chips along the rail of the table, told Dooley all he needed to know.So much of sport involves accomplishment. It involves besting someone or something — be it an opponent, a distance, a time, or even yourself. Sometimes, people create and nurture their own identities based on their athletic achievements. But what happens — as Devin Kelly asks so thoughtfully in his Longreads essay — when the stories we tell ourselves about what achievement is turn out to be false? That the true reward is simply in the doing?For a long time, I thought I ran, and competed in sport, as a way to use the metaphor of sport to understand life. Life is a marathon, I was often told. I remember watching and re-watching Chariots of Fire, particularly that moment in the rain when Eric Liddell, just minutes after winning a race, states: “I want to compare faith to running in a race. It’s hard. It requires energy of will.” I loved that moment as a child, especially as someone who had, at one point, a deep amount of faith. But I always paused the clip before he stated what later became to me more obvious: “So who am I to say believe, have faith, in the face of life’s realities…I have no formula for winning a race. Everyone runs in their own way.” It’s true, that everyone runs in their own way, which is a fact I’ve come to appreciate as I’ve grown older. Patience, both with my own peculiar movements through life and with those of others, is a skill I actively try to cultivate and maintain. And yet, even Liddell’s quote has to do with winning. And that — the idea of winning, or finishing, or accomplishing — has become its own universal signifier. It’s not about what you do. It’s about what you have done.What happens if what you once used to make sense of things no longer helps you make sense of things? What happens if the patterns and habits and metaphors we lean on do not serve us in the moments we need them? What happens if the stories we tell ourselves about our lives leave us lonely, wrestling with meaning? What then?I grappled with these questions for hours on that farm in Georgia. Under the stars and all alone, I did not know what I was doing. Each lap, I shuffled past the bonfire, past my friends singing karaoke, past the laughter of strangers, and each lap I shuffled away from them, until they became the soft patchwork of voices traversing a distance, the kind of sound that hollows you to your core and fills you with a deep sense of missingness, a longing to be there and not wherever you are. At that point, the race had ceased to be a race for so many people, but it hadn’t for me.The thing about horizons is that, upon reaching one, you always encounter another. It’s the in-between where life lives. In another poem, “On Duration,” the poet Suzanne Buffam writes: “To cross an ocean / You must love the ocean / Before you love the far shore.” This is a beautiful explanation of what it means, as so many endurance runners say, to be “out there.” Out there is a place, but it is also a feeling. It is a series of moments stretched out across hours, or even days, that feel like one long moment. It is the act of building the bridge between two points and being the bridge at the same time. Out there is distance turned into feeling. It is metaphor actualized.* * *Read all the categories in our Best of 2020 year-end collection.
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
In 2018, Floridians voted overwhelmingly to end greyhound racing, a sport they were told was archaic and inhumane. What if they were wrong?Ashley Stimpson | Longreads | October 2020 | 26 minutes (7,001 words)It’s been nearly a decade since the numbers were tattooed in her ears, but they remain remarkably legible. In the right one, dots of green ink spell out 129B: Vesper was born in the twelfth month of the decade’s ninth year and was the second in her litter. The National Greyhound Association (NGA) gave that litter a unique registration number (52507), which was stamped into her moss-soft left ear. If I type these figures into the online database for retired racing greyhounds, I can learn about her life before she was ours, before she was even Vesper.Smokin’ Josy was born to a breeder in Texas, trained in West Virginia, and raced in Florida. Over three years, she ran 70 races. She won four of them. In Naples on May 12, 2012, she “resisted late challenge inside,” to clinch victory, according to her stat sheet. In Daytona Beach on April 17, 2013, she “stumbled, fell early.” Five days later, after a fourth-place showing, she was retired.There’s a picture of her on this website. Taken on an unidentifiable track, her leash is held tight at the collar by a man who is cut off at the torso. His left Reebok is planted between her front legs. Vesper — Josy — looks directly at the camera, her brown eyes full of something I could translate as either desire or worry, anticipation or anxiety. Perhaps her expression is simply confusion at the unfamiliar contraption pointed in her direction. She is wearing a sunny yellow tank top emblazoned with a black number six.She’s recognizable — younger and leaner of course — but different. This picture reminds me that so much of my dog’s identity is invented by who happens to be looking at her. When I see this picture, my chest swells for this cherished creature, a girl who is tall (and brave) enough to steal table scraps, who has no use for squeaky toys but sometimes spins her body in so many circles that she is still panting 10 minutes later. When the person who took this picture uploaded it to the site, he likely saw a working dog, a racing dog, an animal both fulfilling and fulfilled by its genetic destiny. The dog in the picture, like Shakespeare’s rose, doesn’t change but everything else does — the tone, the stakes, the moral obligation of the viewer.It’s been nearly a decade since the numbers were tattooed in her ears, but they remain remarkably legible. In the right one, dots of green ink spell out 129B: Vesper was born in the twelfth month of the decade’s ninth year and was the second in her litter.This subjective ambiguity defined the battle over and ultimately led to the passage of Florida’s Amendment 13, which effectively banned greyhound racing in the state after 2020. ​On one side of that argument were well-meaning citizens and well-financed animal rights stalwarts who alleged dogs were confined, abused, and discarded. On the other were breeders, trainers, and adoption organizations who claimed racing dogs live happy lives, that abused greyhounds wouldn’t win races, that nearly 100% of retired dogs end up on couches.In the run-up to the vote and in the weeks after, newspapers and magazines published articles about recent industry controversies, empty grandstands, and an anachronistic pastime. But few articles asked the questions that to me seemed most pertinent: If 97% of greyhounds bred annually in America were racing greyhounds, what would happen to the breed if the sport were to end? How is dog racing different from the many other forms of casual animal exploitation our society sanctions, like horse racing, a sport we not only condone but celebrate with minty cocktails and flowery hats? Most importantly, what could the racing ban tell us about our evolving-but-ambivalent relationship with dogs? With all domestic animals?Our democracy demands that we vote on issues we almost never have the time nor inclination to truly understand. But the greyhound racing ban felt personal — because I have a greyhound, obviously — but also because my life (my diet, my clothing, my concrete city built on top of forest) depends on cruelty far more sinister than dog racing. I wanted to know something the ear tattoos couldn’t tell me; I wanted to know if the dog in the picture needed my help.***Vesper’s life began in liquid nitrogen. It began in pellets of semen the size of a lentil, collected by a breeder from a brindle sire named Lonesome Cry and implanted in a dam named Jossalyn. This is the way it begins for the majority of racing greyhounds — on purpose, in the hands of a professional like Dr. Kent Law.Vesper/Josy (Photo courtesy of the author.)Law didn’t intend to become a foremost greyhound vet, but when he opened his practice in Abilene, Kansas, two miles north of the NGA’s headquarters, things just turned out that way. Today half of his patients are house pets and farm animals, and the other half are greyhounds.The day I visit his clinic, on the outskirts of town, Law is recovering from heart surgery. As we speak, he clutches a small, green pillow to his chest and submits to frequent coughing fits. Yet he maintains the air of measured authority that 35 years in the business has earned him.It was the early ‘90s when he and his partner began freezing semen, at the behest of kennel owners looking for an easier, more efficient way to produce high-quality dogs. Freezing semen wasn’t just convenient — dogs no longer had to endure stressful travel for forced and unpredictable mating sessions — it also allowed owners to choose from a wider variety of stud dogs, sometimes from around the world or beyond the grave.Near the front room of the clinic, Law stores thousands of semen specimens, stacked in tanks of liquid nitrogen. Some of these specimens are shipped as far away as Australia. Some are used for implants right in this office. Law prefers surgically implanting the sample. He asks if I’d like to sit in on a procedure and I warily agree.I push myself into the corner as a vet in bedazzled jeans casually slides her fingers into the side of an anesthetized dog. It is remarkable how little blood there is. ​Still, I am made so dizzy and so breathless by the procedure that I forget to jot down the dog’s fanciful name, just that she is from Texas and the semen is from Minnesota. Soon, the vet finds what she is looking for — the gummy-pink uterine horn. After triple-checking they have the right semen sample, the vet and vet tech inject it directly into the organ. It then travels up the horn to the oviduct, where the developing egg is waiting.Vesper’s life began in liquid nitrogen. It began in pellets of semen the size of a lentil, collected by a breeder from a brindle sire named Lonesome Cry and implanted in a dam named Jossalyn.While I am flattered to have a VIP seat for the surgery, I could have easily watched from a window: Law’s office is resolutely open-concept. Large picture windows broadcast the goings-on of every examination room. This is by design. “I want owners to be a part of the process and they want to be a part of it too,” he says. Law tells me some owners even like to be in the room when their dog’s semen is manually collected. Some owners even like to do it themselves, off-site. (That means what you think it means.)Law’s methods are modern, but this kind of breed devotion goes way back.The greyhound is a member of the sighthound family, notable for being among the first distinct dogs ever portrayed in art. Depictions of hounds with long torsos and spindly legs have been identified in Neolithic petroglyphs, paintings, and funeral vases in what is now Algeria, Turkey, and Iran. In the warm, wide-open spaces of the Middle East, these dogs developed a heightened sense of sight, to hunt over vast distances in the desert. Webbed toes provided traction in the sand, a deep chest meant greater stamina, and a jointed spine allowed for a steady, cat-like gait. Thanks to the arid climate, long hair and body fat were unnecessary. Uniquely adapted to their surroundings, greyhounds evolved into the singular, sinewy form that makes them so recognizable today. (Once when I was walking Vesper, a little girl we passed asked her mom, “why is that dog so weird-looking?” Her mother scolded her, but I wasn’t offended. The first few months of living with a greyhound feel like sharing a space with a deer, an alligator, a great blue heron. As the French poet Alphonse de Lamartine said, “These are not dogs, they are four-legged birds.”)In Egypt, greyhounds were revered. Tax revenues were used to fund elaborate canine funerals, while the dog’s family shaved their heads and fasted to mourn. The Egyptians also gave the hound a place in the firmament: Canis Major, or dog star, is part of the Sirius constellation, which now faithfully returns every year to watch over the hottest hours of summer, what we still call the dog days.Kickstart your weekend reading by getting the week’s best Longreads delivered to your inbox every Friday afternoon.Sign upThe Greeks loved greyhounds. Alexander the Great’s dog Peritas died in battle, protecting his master from an elephant. After a state funeral for Peritas, Alexander named a city after him. Homer’s Argos was likely a sighthound. When Artemis transformed Actaeon into a stag, he was ravaged by dozens of hunting hounds, whose names survive today (​and, in fact, can be found on Wikipedia​).The Romans were largely responsible for Italian greyhounds, who were pampered, perfumed, and perched on cushions like living statuettes. When roving Roman soldiers came upon the Gauls racing their dogs, the greyhound’s fate was sealed.Law guesses that in the zenith of American dog racing, his practice was inseminating upward of 18 female greyhounds a day. What he’s most proud of, what he wants to convey the most about this process, is that artificial insemination has produced better — and fewer — puppies and improved conception rates, meaning that while the female may spend a few uncomfortable hours licking her stitches, it’s a one-and-done process, and soon she’ll be back on the farm preparing for a new litter.***On my way to his farm, Michael Strickland calls to ask if we can push back our meeting. “My dogs ran their hearts out today,” he says, “I need to spend some time with them.”I’ve come to Abilene during the NGA’s Fall Meet, where breeders like Strickland show off their pups to kennel owners from around the country. An insistent prairie wind batters the banner that has been strung across 3rd​ Street: ​Abilene ❤ Greyhounds!When I arrive at Strickland Sires (30 minutes later than originally scheduled) I am far from the only visitor. The meet has brought old friends and professional acquaintances to town. I am greeted by a tousled farm dog who insists on inspecting (the inside of) my rental car.Strickland isn’t shy about giving tours of his sprawling farm, where he raises about 120 dogs at a time. A sturdy man with shaggy brown hair who looks younger than his 46 years, Strickland is a third-generation greyhound breeder. His maternal grandfather was involved in greyhound racing in Arizona and his mother, a woman who “has a deep passion for dogs,” introduced his father, David, to the stud business. The elder Strickland honed his animal husbandry skills at the U.S. Meat Animal Research Center in Nebraska and had been raising cattle and hogs until he married into the greyhound family, when he started breeding dogs, too. Some years he made more money on the dogs.David Strickland was instrumental in the industry’s shift to artificial insemination through frozen semen and for a time the business employed two veterinarians to perform surgical implantations. The Greyhound Hall of Fame (also in Abilene) recognizes him as a pioneer of the industry.Strickland inherited his father’s interest in breeding and raising animals and was heavily involved in Future Farmers of America as a teenager. He became fascinated by what he calls “genetic stuff” and went to Kansas State University in Manhattan for a while, until he realized that his agriculture business syllabus was basically a rundown of things he had been practicing on his father’s farm for years. He returned to Abilene.His parents, now Arizona snowbirds, still help out during the warmer months, but today Strickland runs the business largely on his own.The tour of Strickland’s property captures the first 18 months of a typical racing dog’s life. We begin in the brooding barn, where a shiny black dam is nursing her rowdy litter. They will stay here, with her, for the first two months, or until she gets tired of their endless needling. Next, groups of four or fewer from the litter will be moved to a large run, where every night they will still pile up together to sleep in a small, insulated shed. At around six months, they move again, this time to a run that stretches almost twice as long as a football field. This is where they begin to demonstrate their speed and aptitude for racing, competing with each other up and down the fence line.By the time we reach the finishing barn, the dogs are anywhere from 10 to 13 months old. They are no longer divided by litter and now wear muzzles to protect their thin skin from horseplay souvenirs. It is during this phase of their development that Michael trains them to run, using a trash bag and squawker that, tied to 1400 feet of string and a motor, acts as a lure.At the end of their time on the farm, the dogs reside in a kennel-like building that simulates what their lives will be like at the track. The greyhounds in this area are astoundingly athletic, with comically large thighs and butts.As we move around the farm, Strickland is constantly leaning over to tussle ears and offer silly greetings. “Your half brothers and sisters raced today,” he tells the teenagers as they jump up to greet him. “Yes! They did! They did good!”When I ask if he gets to know each dog well, he says yes. “This is not a turnstile.” He guesses that just one litter requires a $24,000 investment.While most domestic dogs today are bred for cuteness, racing hound breeders don’t consider appearance. Strickland looks for “confidence and sociability, independence and the ability to relax,” and, of course, athletic prowess.Dr. Jennifer Ng, a vet based in Columbia, South Carolina, who has a special interest in greyhound care and owns a racing greyhound herself, explained to me later that “breeding with athleticism as a priority keeps the breed healthy by selecting away from genetics that predispose to heritable orthopedic diseases, such as hip dysplasia, that are so common in other breeds.” In other words, the reason why my pet-store boxer suffers from a slew of maladies while my greyhound has thrived into her senior years is because one was bred to have a lovable, smooshed-up face while the other got the benefit of forethought.While most domestic dogs today are bred for cuteness, racing hound breeders don’t consider appearance. Strickland looks for “confidence and sociability, independence and the ability to relax,” and, of course, athletic prowess.Ng worries that if novices begin to breed greyhounds, “​there is a good chance they will lose many of the attributes that make the breed so unique,” including their strong constitution. Additionally, the characteristics that make retired racers such ideal pets — their passive nature, their poise — are the “​result of their early upbringing on the farm and the socialization and handling they receive at the track,” she says.On a phone call after my visit, Strickland speaks slowly and thoughtfully when I finally ask him about the racing ban in Florida. “I don’t want to sound defensive,” he says. “Regulation and oversight make sense to me. But if you applied the same standard to the average pet owner, nobody would have pets.” Like most in the industry, Strickland feels that the statistics about racing injuries and deaths are manipulated, and pale in comparison to many dogs that are, for example, hit by cars every year due to human neglect.Along with Ng, Strickland says he’s “very worried” about the breed. The end of greyhound racing will “interrupt centuries of caretaking,” and careful, controlled breeding. He maintains that every dog on his farm is treated like a superstar, if for no other reason than because it’s impossible to tell which dog will actually be one.“I’d be horrified if someone had my dog in their home and felt that they’d rescued it.”***For much of the last millennium, someone like Strickland — that is, a middle-class person without a royal title or royal friends — would have been in a lot of trouble for breeding greyhounds. From 1200 to 1831, “nothing symbolized the divide between the Patricians and everyone else better than greyhounds,” says Dr. Edmund Russell in his 2018 book ​Greyhound Nation. ​It was during this time that England’s Forest Laws set aside broad swaths of land exclusively for the aristocracy and their hunting buddies. Greyhounds became dogs of the elite, and lived like them too, residing in spacious, elaborate kennels with shelter, fresh food, and water.When Parliament finally opened greyhound ownership to all comers, the working class surged into hare coursing, in which greyhounds use sight, speed, and agility to pursue and oftentimes kill (read: eviscerate) a brown hare. The first Waterloo Cup was held in 1836 in Lancashire and would soon become a premier sporting event in Britain, attracting 80,000 spectators in its heyday. The democratization of greyhound ownership not only transformed the sporting scene, it forever changed the notion of the breed. “Once the minister only to the pastime of the kings or the nobly born, once the recognized companion of ‘the gentlemen’ only,” a journalist wrote in 1897, “the greyhound is now the instrument of sport for the gambling multitude and the lodestar of the mob.” The greyhound had gone street.I’d be horrified if someone had my dog in their home and felt that they’d rescued it.Coursing thrived in America, too, particularly the flat, open fields of the Great Plains. As the sport gained more followers, however, the audience became increasingly squeamish over the matter of the mangled hare (the Waterloo Cup itself ended in 2005 partly over complaints of animal cruelty). Greyhound racing may never have taken off in the States if it weren’t for Owen Patrick Smith, a South Dakota engineer who quit his job to develop an artificial lure. At least 40 patents and thousands of dollars later, spectators were satisfied enough with the sport’s newfound gentility for the show to go on. In 1919, Smith opened up his first (now-circular) track in Emeryville, California. Soon he was opening dozens of them around the country. For its sandy terrain and balmy weather, Florida became ground zero for greyhound racing, but only one of its tracks — St. Petersburg’s Derby Lane — survived the Great Depression. Today it is the oldest continuously operating greyhound track in the country.***As a young man in Ireland, Mick D’Arcy grew up dreaming about the neon lights and Art Deco allure of Derby Lane. “I used to get the magazines,” says the County Tipperary native who walked his neighbor’s greyhounds as a child. In them he saw photos of Derby Lane: “people with tuxedos … it looked good. I always had itchy feet for here.”Mick bought and raced a few dogs in England and Ireland before his wife Francis’ job brought them to the U.S. After stints at tracks in Boston, West Virginia, and Kansas, the couple and their two children finally made it to St. Petersburg in 1994. Two decades later, Grey’s Calibrator of D’Arcy’s Kennels won the Derby Lane Million — the richest dog race in history.There are a couple of pictures of Grey’s Calibrator on the muted pink walls of the D’Arcys’ modest home in the sunbaked suburbs of St. Pete. But there are dozens (and dozens) more of other dogs. Mick and Francis lead me through the framed photos — like the trophy room of a high school gym — first in the kitchen, then the living room and above the mantle, followed by the dining room and the office. Most of them feature dogs draped in satin, women held together by hairspray and pantyhose, and, of course, men wearing tuxedos. In fact, the only people​ that appear on the D’Arcy’s walls at all are the ones standing behind the greyhounds.Mick and Francis complete each other’s sentences with sweet and lilting Irish accents. They say “’tis” and “’twas” and call New York City “high-posh.” I couldn’t track down Vesper’s kennel owners, but I hope they were people like the D’Arcys — kind and thoughtful, deeply enamored of their dogs.Most of them feature dogs draped in satin, women held together by hairspray and pantyhose, and, of course, men wearing tuxedos. In fact, the only people​ that appear on the D’Arcys’ walls at all are the ones standing behind the greyhounds.In their three-plus decades as kennel owners, the D’Arcys estimate that 4,000 to 5,000 dogs have passed through their hands and they can recall a startling number of them. They tell me about Canvas, who was part of a prisoner-rehabilitation program in which her handler taught her to sing and obey cue cards. Their first dog, Father Breen (“couldn’t run at all”), their second dog, Cove Airport (“there’s no airport in Cove”), and Isle of Skye (“with ​Skye​ spelled the right way”). There was Super Spring (“a superstar”), and “the blue one” their daughter dressed in pajamas to startle the mailman. There was Keegan, who remembered their daughter’s belly rubs so fondly that, when he was reunited with her years later, immediately rolled onto his back to request one. There was Elwood (with one brindle leg and one fawn leg), who went away to Boston for a season and when he came back, remembered exactly where his former crate was; he was displeased to find it occupied. Oh, and Sidney, the old stud dog that was brought by his new owner to surprise Mick at the kennel’s annual beach reunion: “there [were] pictures of us absolutely bawling,” he says without shame.There’s no question that the D’Arcys adore the greyhounds they race. ​My​ question is whether or not they are the exception.We count on member support to bring you thought-provoking reported features. Please consider a one-time, or — better yet — a recurring annual or monthly contribution. Every bit helps!Yes, I’d like to contribute!“There is a bad element, but they are way, way in the minority,” says Mick. “Way, way.”But anyone paying attention to media coverage of the sport might have a hard time believing that. In 2017, ​about two dozen dogs tested positive for metabolites of cocaine​ at a track near Jacksonville. In 2010, ​eight greyhounds died of heat exhaustion​ in a transport trailer. In 2002, at least 2,000 dog carcasses were found in a makeshift Alabama cemetery​, bullet holes laced through their skulls. According to authorities, the alleged executioner — a security guard at a Pensacola track — had been paid $10 a dog by several Florida trainers. It is something of an open secret that before the advent of adoption groups, greyhounds at the end of their racing days were taken en masse to be euthanized. The most common excuse? Greyhounds were treated as agricultural animals. (Who would want a 45-mph farm animal as a ​pet,​ the thinking went.)He can’t deny this grisly past or the more recent bad actors, but Mick laments that “they tarred us all with the same brush.” Furthermore, he wonders why, if people were so concerned about the dogs, there were no provisions in the legislation to care for the thousands already in the racing pipeline. Ostensibly, Derby Lane could suspend operations at any time, and since the track owns the building his kennel is housed in, the dogs would have nowhere to go. In another irony, Amendment 13 outlawed betting on greyhound races that take place in Florida but it did not outlaw the simulcast of races run in other states, meaning money will still be wagered and won on dogs in Florida.Mick’s name is on a lawsuit that could require the state to compensate kennel owners for the loss in revenue that the racing ban will mean for many in the business, as well as the value of the dogs and lost wages for workers. “The livelihood has been taken away from us by an act of government.”In Florida, the ban has impacted mostly the people who spend their days in the kennels or in the grandstands. “Bitter,” Mick says when I ask him to sum up how he feels about it all. “I’m very bitter.”The couple thinks the breed they love will also be corrupted by misguided affection. “I call Hollywood the plastic people,” Francis says. “You look at the plastic people out there and they have these little dogs with no hair, and they have dogs in pocketbooks — ”Mick finishes her thought: “We’ll be looking down at ya, saying what have you done to my greyhounds?”***When I meet Kathi Lacasse, she is wrangling a dozen greyhounds into the paddock at the Sanford Orlando Kennel Club and wearing a shirt that says, The Universe is made up of protons, neutrons, electrons, and morons. Having recently injured her knee in a horse-riding accident, she is walking with a subtle limp. Her dogs are nearly uncontrollable with excitement.Lacasse is no stranger to journalists (a picture of her sitting with a dog in its kennel was featured prominently in a Washington Post article) or controversy (in 2017, she was accused of jerking a dog into a gate; a year prior she was suspended by track management for being verbally abusive to maintenance staff), but unlike many of her colleagues, she continues to speak on the record. Lacasse’s boyfriend, who owns a different kennel, has stopped doing interviews, she tells me, because “he’s been burned too many times.” Distrust of the press, I found, runs deep in the greyhound-racing industry.If the D’Arcys are the CEOs of the sport, people like Lacasse and her boyfriend are the laborers, the people who get up early, stay late, and scoop a lot of poop in between.Lacasse is the trainer of record for Bolton Racing near Orlando. On any given day she’s responsible for about 100 greyhounds — and her own two whippets that come to work with her. She arrives at the kennel around 5 a.m. to let the dogs out, shake out their bedding, clean the crates. The dogs that are racing that day will get weighed, brushed, maybe an ear-cleaning. The dogs that race the following day get a manicure, a rub-down, a once-over for any issues. Afterward, Lacasse heads outside to fill in all the holes the greyhounds dug in the dirt (“kills my back,” she says), the ones they like to roost in like pheasants. Then it’s time to run. Some days are “schooling days,” where the dogs go to the track to practice. Some days, it’s the sprint path outside of the kennel.Today, though, Lacasse has made time for me. We find a seat in the clubhouse, next to the windows that overlook the track. The crowd is surprisingly diverse. Retired white guys in Yankees caps. Baby-faced lovers pulling from the same pack of Pall Malls. Slick-haired, serious gamblers parked in front of simulcasts jotting down numbers and adjusting their earbuds. The facility is compact and aging. All the fixtures in the bathroom are still the do-it-yourself kind. Behind the sink there are two framed photos — one of hounds mid-race, eyes wild, sand flying; the other is of loaded nachos. Across the street — Dog Track Road — it’s probably fourth or fifth period at Lyman High School, home of the Greyhounds. On the corner, the lunch rush is starting at the Post Time Lounge Cafe.In her mid-50s, Lacasse has thick bangs and a bright, make-up free face. Her start in the industry came 38 years ago with a summer job at a track in New Hampshire that eventually led her to full-time work in Florida. She’s good at what she does — so far this year, her nearly 100 dogs have 615 wins. The second-place kennel has 526.In Florida, Lacasse has seen the industry transform over time. She readily admits that as recently as the ’80s, dogs at the end of their career were disposed of by the truckload. “I look back now and wonder how I did it,” she says. “Even now, if we have a dog that’s critically injured or critically sick, it kills me. I don’t know how I did it. It was a different mindset back then.”As the industry modernized yet again to become more humane, working closely with the many adoption groups that began to spring up in the ‘90s, efforts to end the sport intensified. Lacasse had seen the campaigns to ban racing come and go, but Amendment 13 was different, she felt it from the start. “Number one, our side didn’t have the money that that side had. I mean, our money goes back into the dogs. … they stole a lot of our pictures and they darken[ed] them and add[ed] weird music to them — like spooky music.”Christine Dorchak, president of GREY2K USA, an organization that calls itself the largest greyhound protection organization in the world, disputes this allegation. She said in an email that “industry images were used as-is.”Facing opponents flush with cash and celebrity endorsements, Lacasse says the industry’s common-sense arguments were drowned out. This is a phrase she uses a lot during our time together: “common sense.” But as I drive around Florida in the days after, past billboards advertising gator farms and monkey islands and Sea World, I can’t help but wonder if common sense is ever a winning platform in a debate about animals.Lacasse argues that greyhound racing is highly regulated, that the winning dog is urine-tested after every race. Her kennel can be inspected any time the state sees fit. In the last few years, the track has added a safety brake and a safety rail to prevent accidents. Furthermore, what benefits the dogs benefits the trainers. “Sick, scared, and unconditioned dogs are not going to make money and therefore neither are we,” she says. It’s just common sense.That’s why according to racing advocates like Lacasse, Amendment 13 was about much more than greyhound racing. Talk to anyone in the industry long enough, and they’ll point you toward the casino owners, who were sick of the 1997 law that required them to offer (increasingly unprofitable) wagering on live races in order to operate (very profitable) card rooms. Talk to them longer, and they’ll start telling you about voter fraud, voting machine glitches, conspiracy theories. It is Florida, after all.Lacasse isn’t sure what she’ll do when racing ends for good in Orlando. She and her boyfriend are in the process of moving to Texas, but the uncertainty is taxing. To unwind, they go to auctions; he likes autographs, she hunts for collectable glass. Still, she confesses, “My stomach is not good. I take Advil PM to fall asleep every night.”As for the dogs, Lacasse doesn’t have high hopes. “Everyone is like, ‘Oh, we’ll breed dogs for pets.’ They’re the way they are because of the way they’re raised. Your average dog is taken away from everything it knows at eight weeks and made to conform to human standards. Whereas greyhounds spend the first year of their life with their littermates. They’re in big runs. They’re allowed to be dogs.”Near the end of our interview, the first race of the day begins. We turn to watch. “I have the four dog, she’s not very fast,” Lacasse says.The four dog’s name is Sleek Silver, in the kennel they call her Sweetie. Sweetie’s on the verge of “pet-dom,” Lacasse calls it — adoption.“Oh my god, they’re so beautiful,” I whisper, oblivious to who is winning. “Yes,” Lacasse laughs, “She’s toast already.”***It is in their “pet-dom” that most people meet the greyhound. The average racing dog is retired around age four, picked up by adoption groups at the track, fostered, kid-tested, cat-tested, and rehomed. Adoptions groups were vocal in the debate over Amendment 13, but not on the side you might expect. More than 100 groups came together to form Greyhound Adopters 4 Racing, including Greyhound Crossroads, one of the largest adoption agencies on the East Coast.Kim Owens started Greyhound Crossroads in the mid ‘90s, a few years after meeting a greyhound named King at a South Carolina flea market — “the skinniest and most stunning dog I’d ever seen,” she remembers. King’s racing trainer (as well as a memorable hug from King) convinced Owens and her husband to adopt a dog from the next batch to come up from Florida. In the end, they took three: Stubby, Sunshine, and Angel, all littermates.It’s a gusty summer day in Greenville, South Carolina, when I meet Owens. The heavy air portends a thunderstorm. We convene on rocking chairs in the enclosed porch of Joanne Johnson, who facilitates most of Greyhound Crossroads’ adoptions, and Neil Roepke, an active member of the group who Owens has invited to talk about the political side of things. We are surrounded by four greyhounds in varying states of repose: Topper, Stutz, Sugar, and Peanut.For Owens, who works full-time as a computer technician for a school district, it’s very important that people understand Greyhound Crossroads is not a ​rescue​ organization. “In the last 15 years, we have not taken in one dog that was abused during its life as a racer,” she says. “When people adopt a greyhound from us, they aren’t doing us a favor. It’s not like they are saving a dog, because the dogs are not in any kind of danger.” Owens is so used to being challenged on this point that she often pulls up YouTube videos as evidence, “​this is the marshmallow video,​” she says when I ask her about life at the track, “it’s a really good way to show the relationship between the dogs and the trainers.”While Owens is changing minds with (truly) precious videos, what Roepke is peddling is good old-fashioned outrage. An unlikely racing proponent, Roepke never wanted a greyhound. When his wife suggested they adopt a retired racer, he told her he didn’t need “somebody else’s headache.” Even Johnson remembers his skepticism. “I really didn’t know if that adoption was going to work because he came in with such an attitude, like this was a poor, abused dog … and that she was going to have all these problems. And I was like ‘this is the best dog!’”Sara (racing name Sarandon) did turn out to be the “best dog ever,” according to Roepke. “Crazy and just loads of fun.” His profound affection for the greyhound compelled him to call her breeder, “to thank him for raising a great dog.” The breeder, a farmer in Iowa, was in the middle of a hardware store when Roepke called but eager to reminisce about Sara, who he remembered, and about greyhound racing in general. The conversation lasted an hour and a half.“I was pissed off that I had been deceived so bad,” Roepke says. He got more involved with Greyhound Crossroads. He also sent a 47-page complaint to the IRS about the tax-exempt status of GREY2K USA.It’s not only GREY2K spreading lies about greyhound racing, according to the group. It’s also the ASPCA and the Humane Society of the United States (HSUS). When I wonder whether slandering a beloved institution like the HSUS is a great PR tactic, they explain that the national arm of the HSUS is simply a lobbying group (the local chapters are the ones doing the admirable, boots-on-the-ground work, the ones who deserve our money and support). Johnson argues that these “organizations know the least” about greyhounds but are continually sought out by reporters as an authority on the matter.It’s how, according to the folks assembled in front of me and the many others I’ve talked with, so much bad information circulated prior to the vote in Florida. Those arguments — that dogs are kept too long in cages, that many are killed or injured — were supported with arguable statistics, altered photos, and outdated grievances that were addressed years ago, they say.Accuse the greyhound racing industry of cruelty in 1980? Sure — they would have given you that. But in 2019? Owens has spent the last three decades working to rehome greyhounds and categorically rejects those claims. “It is my job to protect these dogs. Why would I lie?” she says.In response to these allegations, GREY2K’s Christine Dorchek reiterated that all material used in the 2018 campaign in Florida “was recent, relevant, and sourced to state and track records, and the images used in our television ads were those posted by the kennel operators and greyhound breeders on social media.” Kate MacFall, HSUS Florida State Director, echoed Dorchek’s statement and suggested that voters were most disturbed not by statistics, but by the thought of dogs in cages. “That bothers people,” she said.Owens says Greyhound Crossroads will help resettle the last of the dogs coming out of Florida before it likely winds down operations. “The dog that has literally taken up half of my life will no longer be there. No matter how much we talk about it, it’s not the same thing as going home and realizing that the crate is empty, and the dog bed is going to be empty.”“If this breed were in the wild, it would be on the watch list as an endangered species,” Roepke says. “It would be a borderline protected species.”If Owens is nearing the acceptance phase of her grief, Roepke is still bargaining. “Do I get to decide that you can no longer have a cheeseburger?” he poses. “Hell, that’s the ultimate cruelty. Do I get to make that decision? Who makes that decision?”Maybe the problem isn’t about ​who​ is making the decision, but that the decision is always posed as a binary choice. The conversation about greyhound racing in Florida is considered only black and white, abandoning the gray space of nuance, the contradictions and complexity that arise when we explore what animal welfare looks like from multiple perspectives — including the animals​;​ w​e love our dogs more than ever​, but shouldn’t loving them mean something other than dressing them up and slathering our Instagram feed with their photos? Shouldn’t our love also mean breeding them more thoughtfully (under, yes, stricter regulation), allowing them, whenever possible, to experience the natural milestones of their own development, and rescuing their curious minds from the cruel monotony of the couch? If ending racing was a step in the right direction, its momentum is thwarted by our premature self-congratulations.I don’t mourn for greyhound racing and its long-delayed reckoning. I do sympathize with working-class people who genuinely love their dogs and who feel overlooked and overpowered by the currents of political change. And selfishly I feel sad that I’ll probably never have another dog like Vesper; I so love the bony ridge of her spine, the way her teeth chatter when she gets excited, the skin that clings to the cartilage between her eyes, softened by so many hands like an ancient piece of pottery. I don’t know if she was happier in the starting block at the track or tucked into her monogrammed bed here with me, but I’m open to the possibility that it was the former.***After months of reporting, I waffle about attending the National Greyhound Association’s annual Hall of Fame induction ceremony. When I call ahead to get details about the event, I am mostly looking to be let off the hook. I can hear the woman on the other end flipping through pages to tell me about this year’s canine inductee. “It’s a dog named Lonesome Cry?” she says like a question. “I know who that is,” I tell her. It’s Vesper’s sire.I feel sad that I’ll probably never have another dog like Vesper; I so love the bony ridge of her spine, the way her teeth chatter when she gets excited, the skin that clings to the cartilage between her eyes, softened by so many hands like an ancient piece of pottery.Nearly everyone I interviewed was dissatisfied by the NGA’s response to Florida’s constitutional battle, but no one wanted to speak on the record about it. The gist, they told me, was that NGA leadership is composed of older men — dog guys, handshake guys; farmers, not Facebook-ers — who had no idea what they were up against, no idea how to win a war of public opinion in 2019. Maybe they’ve failed to notice the tectonic shift in our attitudes about dogs, maybe they don’t follow the hashtag #doggo. For their part, the NGA maintains that it is simply a registry, not a political entity.The hall of fame is a surprisingly well-executed endeavor, manned by a small group of volunteers and two retired racers, Gary and Ginger. The night of the induction, about 150 people gather in a large conference room in the back of the building, shuffling around finger foods and tight coils of stackable chairs. I had expected festive, but the vibe feels strangely subdued. I find Kathi Lacasse in the crowd, who looks pretty in a lace-yoked shirt, but just as weary as the last time I’d seen her.“Did you hear the news?” she asks. I hadn’t. “Southland is closing. They announced it today.”Southland is the 64-year-old greyhound track in West Memphis, Arkansas. One of the five that would have been left after Florida’s go dark. With little fanfare, the casino, owned by Delaware North, and the Arkansas Greyhound Kennel Association had struck a deal to phase out racing by 2022. No one saw it coming.When NGA Executive Director and Secretary-Treasurer Jim Gartland steps behind the podium, the room settles to an anxious hush. “This ain’t gonna kill us,” Gartland begins, swallowing tears. “That’s for dang sure.” For a moment he pauses with a fist on his lip, then introduces the board of directors. “Their hearts are broken, too,” he says.I wonder if he is crying because in two or three or five autumns from now, he can imagine this room dim and voiceless. I wonder if he’s crying because it’s hard to lose money and harder to lose a fight. If I summon all my generosity, I can imagine the tears are simpler — the empty crate, the empty dog bed.I don’t stay to interview anyone after the ceremony; there’s an emotional fatigue in the space that doesn’t feel right to exploit. Regardless, I need to pack. My flight doesn’t leave until the next morning, but I want to be ready. I want to go home. I want to see my dog.***Ashley Stimpson is a freelance writer based in Columbia, Maryland. Her work has appeared in the Guardian, Nat Geo, Johns Hopkins Magazine, Atlas Obscura, and elsewhere.Editor: Krista StevensFact checker: Matt Giles
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
What if the Olympic Games never come back?Dvora Meyers | Longreads | August 2020 | 5,722 words (23 minutes)A year ago, back when we were still allowed to gather in groups larger than a minyan, activists convened in Tokyo to talk about how they were going to end the biggest global gathering of them all — the Olympic Games. The activists came from all over: past host cities like Rio, London, Nagano, and Pyeongchang; future host cities Paris and Los Angeles; cities that had managed to derail their bids, including Boston and Hamburg; and places like Jakarta, which is gearing up for a 2032 bid.They were in Tokyo exactly a year out from the scheduled start of the 2020 Summer Olympic Games, attending the first-ever transnational anti-Olympic summit, which was organized by Hangorin no Kai, a group of unhoused and formerly unhoused people based in Tokyo. The activists, along with academics and members of the media, talked about common Games-related issues, like displacement and police militarization, and discussed strategies for resisting local political forces and the IOC to protect their communities. Elsewhere in Tokyo, Thomas Bach, President of the International Olympic Committee, and the rest of the IOC crew had arrived to mark the start of the 365-day countdown to the Opening Ceremonies. Eight months after these two very different gatherings in Tokyo, the IOC announced that the 2020 Olympics were going to be postponed by a full year due to the COVID-19 global pandemic. By the time they made the announcement, most other major sports tournaments planned for the summer had been canceled or postponed and the athletes, many of whom were shut out of training facilities due to lockdowns, were calling on the IOC to act for over a week. Once the IOC made the inevitable official, the athletes were able to reset and refocus their training on July 2021.  That even a stripped-down version of the 2021 Games will happen is hardly a foregone conclusion. The pandemic may not be under control by then. Even if it is, and even if an effective vaccine against the coronavirus is developed in time, the Games still might not happen. The postponement is likely going to add billions to a budget that was already triple that of the original projection of the Tokyo bid that the IOC had accepted in 2013. Public opinion in Japan seems to be swinging against the Games, too. In a recent survey, 77 percent of respondents said that the Olympics could not be held next year. In another poll, a slim majority of Tokyo residents said the same thing.
The horrors of the pandemic are real and massive. Yet COVID-19 has offered an opportunity to derail the Games — one that didn’t exist just a few months ago and certainly hadn’t existed when the activists came to Tokyo last July. Dr. Satoko Itani, a professor of sport, gender, and sexuality studies at Kansai University, told me that the pandemic is a “powerful wake-up call to the people who otherwise wouldn’t have given a thought about the costs of the Olympics.” “Now that a lot of people in Japan are counting and monitoring the government’s spending to fight the pandemic, it became ever more clear actually just how much taxpayers’ money we had allowed the TOCOG [Tokyo Organizing Committee of the Olympic and Paralympic Games] and the government to spend on the two-week-long sport spectacle while we don’t have enough money to equip ‘essential workers’ with the essential protective gear,” they wrote in an email.That even a stripped-down version of the 2021 Games will happen is hardly a foregone conclusion.The Games’ postponement is happening not just against the backdrop of a global pandemic, but also that of a global uprising against state-sanctioned murders of Black people by the police. The catalyst for this movement was the murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis by Derek Chauvin, but the protests quickly spread beyond the Twin Cities to the rest of the U.S. and then around the world, including Japan.The pandemic, police brutality, and the Olympics are not unconnected events. While COVID-19 might be a virus incapable of racial bias, the course it has taken through the population of the U.S., wending its way through Black, Latinx, and poor communities, was determined by decades of racist policy and discrimination. American police forces have killed Black people for decades with impunity as part of the same system that allowed more African Americans to die from COVID-19 than any other group. It’s also the system that has allowed the Olympic Games in  the post-war period to reshape the cities that host the event, rarely for the benefit of all citizens. The Games have been a driving force behind displacement, police militarization, increased surveillance, and violence against the working class and poor people, especially Black and Brown, in the cities where they’ve touched down. The very same groups that the pandemic has disproportionately killed and that the police disproportionately target are those who become the victims, rather than the beneficiaries, of the Olympics. But people are growing wise to what the Olympic Games are actually about. “It wasn’t 15, 20 years ago you could say, ‘We’re going to have a bid in our city,’ and stand behind the podium and jabber on about jobs and economic upticks floating everybody’s boat, and people just nodded along,” Jules Boykoff told me. (Boykoff is a professor at Pacific University and author of Power Games: A Political History of the Olympics and NOlympians: Inside the Fight Against Capitalist Mega-Sports in Los Angeles, Tokyo and Beyond.) “Today, no way. People aren’t nodding along like they once did.”Over the last decade, residents of potential Olympic host cities have voted overwhelmingly to reject the Games. The IOC and local organizers have lost referenda in Hamburg, Calgary, Graubünden, Krakow, Munich, Sion, Vienna, and Innsbruck. Activists in other cities like Boston, Budapest, and Graz/Schladming managed to turn public opinion against the Games so decisively that the bids were pulled before the IOC and Olympic boosters could be embarrassed by yet another referendum loss. If the anti-Olympics activists have their way, soon no city will be a safe harbor for the Games. * * *Resistance to the Games is almost as old as the Games themselves. The very first modern Games in Athens, in 1896, already inspired wariness about using public funds to pay for Baron Pierre de Coubertin’s pet project. Greek prime minister Charilaos Trikoupis didn’t want the state to be responsible for financing the Olympics, and private (mostly aristocratic) donors footed the bill. Nowadays, a lot of tax money goes into financing Games-related projects, but one practice has persisted to this day: wildly underestimating the cost of running the event. Coubrertin had claimed that the whole thing would cost no more than 200,000 drachmas; as Boykoff writes in Power Games, “the stadium refurbishment alone cost three times that much.” Rome was originally supposed to host the 1908 Olympics, but many people there protested the decision because of the costs. London ended up taking over hosting duties at the last minute — not because the Italian government suddenly became responsive to the will of its citizens but because Mount Vesuvius erupted less than 200 miles away.In 1912, the Olympics really hit their stride, at least according to their most ardent supporters — the entire city of Stockholm was taken over by the event. The Games were no longer a thing happening in a city, a footnote to the World’s Fair. (The early Olympics were often held in tandem with the World’s Fair.) In Stockholm, residents couldn’t ignore the Games even if they wished to. “Whereas in London the life of the huge metropolis had not been influenced by the invasion of Olympism, the whole of Stockholm was impregnated by it,” Coubertin said of the 1912 Olympics. That the Olympics have since affected every aspect of life in their host cities is a feature, not a bug, and it’s been there almost from the get-go.  Several subsequent Games were met with resistance and with citizens arguing against a misallocation of public resources. The first Games ever hosted in Los Angeles took place in the middle of the Great Depression; “Groceries, not Games” was the rallying cry of people opposing the 1932 Olympics. In London, which in 1948 was a city still rebuilding after the Nazi bombing campaigns of World War II, people accused organizers of misspending public funds. Right before the 1968 Olympics, Mexican authorities massacred protesters, who, among other things, felt that the money being spent on the Games should instead go to social welfare programs.The very same groups that the pandemic has disproportionately killed and that the police disproportionately target are those who become the victims, rather than the beneficiaries, of the Olympics.Looking at this history of resistance to the Olympics is simultaneously inspiring and dispiriting. Ordinary people have consistently stood up to the IOC and to their local elected officials and demanded that residents’ needs be met before cities pay for a massive sports spectacle. Yet despite their best efforts, they mostly haven’t succeeded — at least if we define success as kicking the Games to the curb. In over a century, only one city has managed to cast off the Games after they had been awarded to it: Denver.  “I voted for the Olympics to come to Colorado,” Richard Lamm, former Colorado Governor, told me. At the time he was still in the state’s General Assembly. He had been to the 1960 Games in California’s Squaw Valley and had quite enjoyed himself. He thought it would be a good idea to bring the Olympics to Colorado. A couple of years after that vote, Denver secured the 1976 Winter Olympics. When I asked Lamm what he and his fellow legislators knew about the plans for the Games before they voted, he said that ”the state legislature voted in ignorance.”But Lamm, a certified public accountant by training, changed his tune when he became chair of the Legislative Audit Committee. He found that the local boosters, who were prominent, wealthy businessmen, grew more and more defensive as Lamm started to ask questions. “They condescendingly looked down on me and said, ‘Just move aside, you’re not being patriotic.’”This behavior is not unusual for Olympic organizers. They don’t provide much information about what it actually means to host the Olympics, because they recognize that the more people learn, the less they like it. Remember that scene in Clueless where Cher, the protagonist, describes her nemesis as a “full-on Monet”? “From far away, it’s okay, but up close, it’s a big ol’ mess.” The Olympics is the Monet of global mega-sporting events.Former Governor Stephen McNichols, in his attempt to keep the 1976 Olympics in Denver, appealed to manners and civility. “It’s like inviting somebody to dinner,” he said. “You just can’t tear up the invitation.” (I’m certain that even Emily Post would approve of uninviting someone if that person threatens to turn over the table and smash the china and leave you to clean it all up.) Despite fierce opposition from moneyed interests, the activists in Colorado managed to get a measure on the ballot in 1972, a constitutional amendment that would prevent any additional public monies from being spent on the 1976 Olympics. The Games’ boosters far outspent the activists, but the latter still won 60 percent of the vote. After the measure to withdraw public funding was passed, the IOC pulled the Games from Denver and moved them to Innsbruck, which had previously hosted them in 1964. (In 2017, Innsbruckers voted against bidding on another Olympics. Two was enough for them.)Activists in Los Angeles, Tokyo, and Paris are hoping to pull off a similar feat to the one that Lamm and Denver activists pulled off nearly half a century ago — but they also want to take it a step further. Not only do they want to rid their respective cities of the Games; they want to end the Olympic Games entirely. They believe that the Olympics bring misery to the already-vulnerable, so why would they advocate for ridding their cities of the Games only to see them pop up elsewhere? That would make them the Olympic Nimbys. In over a century, only one city has managed to cast off the Games after they had been awarded to it: Denver.To get rid of the Olympics, they’re going to have to fight both the forces of capital and the sense that these Games, once awarded, are a done deal. When I was in Los Angeles in late 2019, the people I spoke to who weren’t directly involved in activism — Lyft drivers, friends, people at cafes — seemed to believe that it was probably too late to stop them. A sense of inevitability had already set in.  For better and for worse, the pandemic has destroyed that feeling in numerous ways. Before COVID-19, students assumed that if they passed their classes, they’d be able to attend their graduation ceremonies. Engaged couples believed that if they paid for a wedding, their family and friends could come from all over. Olympic athletes may have acknowledged the possibility that they might not make it to the Games due to injury or a weak performance at trials, but never considered that the Games themselves might not happen at all.“The coronavirus shows how fragile the world system can be… COVID-19 showed [that] everything can come crashing down in dramatic fashion,” Boykoff wrote in an email. “COVID turned the global economy and our social order upside down,” Jonny Coleman, one of the organizers with the NOlympics-LA group, wrote. “Right now, when I talk to people, almost across the board there is a willingness to imagine a better city.” NOlympics-LA is a grassroots anti-Olympic activist organization that was started in 2017 by the Housing and Homelessness Committee of the local chapter of the Democratic Socialists of America with the goal of derailing the LA 2024 bid. (Paris ended up with 2024 and, in a weird Hail Mary move, the IOC awarded LA the 2028 Games at the same time, possibly concerned that no one would submit a bid to host the XXXIV Olympiad.) Coleman wrote that the group has seen their membership numbers go up and interest in their work increase since the start of the pandemic. “There’s both an increased interest in specifically anti-Olympic work, exploring alternatives to sports in general, and a lot of interest in the specific issues we organize around: gentrification, displacement, policing, capitalism, and so on… Who knows where [we] can take this?”(Disclosure: I have been a member of the DSA and will be again once I remember to pay my dues, which will be any day now.)* * *One of the activists who has recently come to NOlympics is Aliza Rood, granddaughter of Rodney Rood, an oil executive who was one of the men responsible for bringing the Olympics to Los Angeles in 1984. “I attended the 1984 Olympics as an 8-year-old while, unbeknownst to me, Black and Brown communities in Los Angeles were actively being decimated in the service of the spectacle,” she wrote in an email. “I’m personally horrified by everything my grandfather helped to ‘achieve’ for LA, I feel a responsibility to assist in keeping the Olympics from returning in 2028 (or ever) to cause further harm.”That the 1984 Summer Olympics harmed residents of the city might come as a surprise to many. In American collective memory, LA84 is  the “good” Olympics. It didn’t sink the city into debt the way that the ‘76 Games did to Montreal. The facilities used to host the sporting events didn’t become ruins with rolling tumbleweeds as those built for the 2004 Games in Athens. And the city didn’t divert funds from public employees to Games-related projects as officials did in Rio right before the start of the 2016 Olympics.But it was a disaster for some communities in Los Angeles. A Black Enterprise article from 1991 described the toll the 1984 Games took on Black-owned businesses in the city. “When it came to generating revenues for black owned businesses, I would give the Los Angeles Olympics an F,” Congresswoman Maxine Waters said at the time. Many Black business owners had been verbally assured by local organizers that they would have access to Olympic venues. They took on debt to make the improvements needed to compete in the Olympic marketplace. But they were shut out. Olympic organizers were not sending any foot traffic to those businesses, either. Though half the athletes were being housed in the USC dorms located in South-Central, they were actively discouraged from exploring the surrounding neighborhoods and speaking to locals.Black lives didn’t matter to the organizers of the 1984 Olympics. And Black activists in LA haven’t forgotten what the Olympics did to their community.“Upon moving into the USC Olympic Village in 1984, we were told to be mindful of where [we] were going outside of the large walls and barriers that surrounded the Village,” Tracee Talavera, a member of the silver medal-winning U.S. 1984 Olympic gymnastics team, said in an email. “We were told not to go past the fences and if we did venture past the Village barriers, the USOC would not be responsible for our safety.” Judging from how the city and the USOC treated them in the run-up to the Games and beyond, it’s clear that LA’s Black and Brown residents weren’t thought of as people who deserved to benefit from an event framed as a public good. Instead, they were treated like a security problem — as if the Olympics and its attendees had to protect themselves from them. Ahead of the 1984 Olympics, the LAPD went on a hiring spree, bringing additional cops onto the force to deal with the threat that the local population allegedly posed to the proceedings. These officers — and the rest of the force — were armed to the teeth. In conjunction with the FBI and the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department, the LAPD started rounding up Black and Brown youth and homeless people. Many of these sweeps took place right around the city’s Olympic stadium, the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum. “We saw how people were pushed out on the street, how all of the homeless people were being pushed out of downtown and pushed in the periphery,” Leonardo Vilchis, an East LA organizer and co-founder and co-Director of Union de Vecinos, said. “There was this very aggressive policing around the homeless community; a lot of our people were put into jail.”Black lives didn’t matter to the organizers of the 1984 Olympics. And Black activists in LA haven’t forgotten what the Olympics did to their community. They, more than any other group, recognize that events like the Olympics, which expand police budgets and powers, pose a major threat to their safety. Black Lives Matter-LA was one of the earliest coalition partners for NOlympics; their work against the 2028 Games predates the formation of the NOlympics working group.The LAPD has made it clear that hosting the Olympics in 2028 — and before that, the Super Bowl in 2022 and the World Cup in 2026 — will require an expansion of their budget and of policing in the city in general. Jamie McBride, director of the Los Angeles Police Protective League, recently discussed Mayor Eric Garcetti’s proposed cuts to the LAPD’s budget, and said that “If he cuts the budget, we’re going to be so far behind I don’t think it’ll be safe to have the World Cup here. I don’t think it’ll be safe to have the Olympics here.” Hosting the Games is not remotely compatible with current popular demands to defund the police, and McBride wanted to be sure that we all realized that. McBride is probably right. It will be impossible to secure the Games in the way we currently understand “security” — surveillance, mass arrests, targeting of minorities — if the budget of the LAPD is slashed. But McBride is actually making the activists’ arguments for them, explaining precisely why we need to call the whole thing off. “Any time you talk about putting more resources into policing, you’re talking about taking those resources away from things that actually make the people that we care about safe,” Dr. Melina Abdullah, co-founder of BLM-LA, said at an anti-Olympic forum held in 2017. “When we talk about putting police on the streets it means putting people with guns who are there trained to see us with targets on our backs and our fronts,” she said.Kickstart your weekend reading by getting the week’s best Longreads delivered to your inbox every Friday afternoon.Sign upVilchis, the East LA organizer, agrees. “We saw the continuity from 1984 to 1992 with the riots.” This is a point that many other activists and academics have made over the years — that you could draw a line from the militarization of the police in 1984 to the 1992 uprising. The LAPD didn’t fire the officers it had hired for the ‘84 Games; they just found ways to use them, notably by deploying them to terrorize Black communities. They also didn’t give back the fancy weapons they had received from the federal government for ‘84. That tank-like vehicle that they got for the Games? They used it for drug raids. In one incident, they took down the wall of a suspected drug house only to find a mother and her children eating ice cream. The militarization of local forces, mass arrests, and mass surveillance did not stop with the 1984 LA Games; they’ve all become even more prominent Olympics staples since 9/11.“There are […] standardized, globalized security models associated with the Olympics, and that involves the heavy use of exclusionary zones around sports venues where public space gets privatized; the heavy use of private security corporations in public space; militarization of local police forces,” Dennis Pauschinger, a professor whose research has focused on the security at sports mega-events, told me last year. (He’s also affiliated with the anti-Olympic activists in Hamburg that defeated that city’s bid.)  “Also what happens is always a huge mobilization of CCTV cameras and other surveillance technologies.” And as we saw with LA, the security upgrades aren’t short-lived; they remain even after the athletes have gone home. “It’s called the security legacy of the Games,” Pauschinger told me.The militarization of local forces, mass arrests, and mass surveillance did not stop with the 1984 LA Games; they’ve all become even more prominent Olympics staples since 9/11.Organizers and politicians will argue that they have to do everything in their power to keep athletes and spectators safe, but Pauschinger argues that the security measures are almost always in excess of what is actually needed to secure the event. If something does happen, they will be asked why they didn’t pull out all the stops — so they preemptively terrorize whole communities for the sake of appearing to do something.But it’s not just the athletes and spectators that officials are concerned about protecting. They are worried about protecting their product, too. “The security is put into place with the justification of the War on Terror… but also to protect the highest and best product they have, which is the World Cup and the Olympic Games,” Pauschinger said.Sometimes, the security itself becomes the product. Pauschinger said that mega-events like the Olympics and the World Cup have become showrooms for security and surveillance technologies, such as the ALSOK Reborg X model, a surveillance robot that NOlympian Spike Friedman encountered when he went to Tokyo for last summer’s transnational activist summit.  “The robot is designed to scan crowds and target individuals who are too ‘jittery’ or have skin that is too ‘red tinted’ as these are supposedly signs that someone is about to commit a terrorist act,” and not, say, that they’re having an allergic reaction to something they ate. The potential here for racial and ethnic profiling is terrifying. But if these robots are shown to “work” — and I’m not sure how we’d measure success here — then you’d probably see them popping up all over, perhaps even at future Olympic Games.In fact, the security industry in Japan has the Olympics to thank for its very existence. According to Tokyo 2020’s own promotional materials, the country’s security sector came into being in preparation for the 1964 Olympics. The upcoming Games have been a boon to the very same industry; in the name of security, the ISDEF, a large Israeli security and weapons expo, was held outside of Israel for the first time. One of the reasons cited for hosting this event in Kawasaki was the 2020 Olympics. Itani, professor at Kansai University, said that some activists managed to sneak inside the event and saw that weapons were being advertised there in addition to high tech security and surveillance equipment on display. The Olympics, which claim to be a movement promoting peace and unity, are used to rationalize the buying and selling of arms.* * *One legacy of the Games that no one puts in promotional materials is that of displacement.According to a report from the Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions, more than two million people — most of them poor — have been displaced from their homes since 1988 in order to make room for Olympics-related projects. Most of the activists I spoke with put displacement at the top of their concerns. This issue is not separate from the racism and police brutality highlighted by BLM activists. The unhoused are particularly vulnerable to over-policing and violence, and more often than not, the people who are displaced by events such as the Olympic Games are poor and marginalized. Concerns over displacement and housing were foremost on the agenda when I attended a NOlympics meeting last September. NOlympics is partnered with more than two dozen organizations in California, including Black Lives Matter, K-Town for All, Union de Vecinos, SAJE, LA Tenants Union, and several others. The work of several of its partner organizations is focused on housing insecurity and displacement in the city.The meeting, which was convened to discuss the Tokyo summit that many of the activists had attended in July 2019, was held at the Skid Row offices of one of its other coalition partners, Los Angeles Community Action Network (LA-CAN). The setting, one of the most visible encampments for the unhoused in the U.S., provided an object lesson in what happens when resources are shifted from social programs meant to serve the poor to mega sporting events for the global elite. All of the messaging inside LA-CAN was a response to the homelessness crisis — LA’s unhoused population increased by 12 percent in 2019; things are looking even more grim for 2020. Of the few folding tables pushed up against the perimeter of the room, one was laden with leaflets, bumper stickers, totes, and zines, all with some sort of anti-Olympics or housing-justice message, such as “Homes, Not Hotels.” Rooster, a small mutt belonging to one of the activists, was wearing an orange bandana with a pin that read “Services not sweeps.” Even the dog was on message.According to Boykoff, the form that Olympic displacement takes usually depends on where the Games are being held. In the global north, it’s usually the racist market forces of gentrification that do the dirty work. In the global south, however, the displacement is usually achieved through force. To prepare for the 2008 Olympics in Beijing, the Chinese government pushed more than a million people out of their homes. More than 77,000 people living in favelas lost their homes to make way for the 2016 Olympics. Atlanta went to great lengths to rid the city of as many poor residents as possible before the 1996 Olympics, issuing people one-way bus tickets to leave the city, and making them put it in writing that they wouldn’t come back. Anita Beaty, the former executive director for the Metro Atlanta Task Force for the Homeless, “came into possession of piles and piles of arrest citations pre-printed with the designations ‘homeless’ and ‘African-American,’” according to a 2016 radio story. Over 9,000 Atlantans were arrested during the lead-up to the Games. The 1996 Olympics also led to the destruction of Techwood, the oldest public-housing project in the United States. The housing project stood on valuable Atlanta real estate in the center of the city, next to Georgia Tech and the Coca-Cola headquarters. By the time the athletes arrived in Atlanta, the housing projects were gone and so were their former residents. The transfer of public resources to the private sector was complete.“It’s not a coincidence that they happened to be the residents of public housing because that’s the easiest target. It was sitting on this prime location by the national stadium,” Itani said of the homes destroyed for 2020. To make this even more horrific, these razed buildings were constructed for Japanese citizens displaced by the 1964 Games. And worse still, the buildings destroyed for the 1964 Games had been built for people left homeless by World War II and soldiers returning from the conflict. Boykoff and Nation columnist Dave Zirin interviewed two elderly women who had been displaced twice.Displacement isn’t just about losing the roof over your head; it’s about losing the community you’ve built over the course of years.The move to displace low-income residents in LA has already started. Right across from Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum, which was used for the ‘32 and ‘84 Games, are a couple of blocks of two-story homes, broken down into apartments. These will be gone by the time the 2028 Olympics kick off, and so will the people who have lived in them for decades. What attendees will see instead is the Fig, a gleaming 4.4-acre mixed-use development that’ll contain a hotel, private student housing, and residential units, some of which will be set aside as so-called “affordable housing.” LA city councilmember Curren Price, Jr., who put forth the motion for the Fig, said that the city “must balance the need for affordable housing with the needs for hotel rooms.” A preposterous thing to think, let alone say aloud, in a city where there is a pressing houselessness crisis, one that is getting worse by the day. And that was before COVID-19. Activists are bracing themselves for thousands of evictions once the moratorium is lifted. Displacement isn’t just about losing the roof over your head; it’s about losing the community you’ve built over the course of years. Hundreds of people were displaced from London’s East End to make way for the 2012 Olympics when the Clays Lane housing estate was destroyed to make way for Games-related construction, and those forced to leave mourned not just the loss of their physical home but the community that the unique complex, replete with communal living spaces and a cafe, engendered. “We’ll never see the likes of this kind of community again,” Ed Doherty, one of the residents who was forced to leave, said. Giselle Tanaka, an organizer in Brazil working in the social housing movement, told me that some of the displaced from London sent notes of encouragement to those facing eviction in Rio. “They said messages like, ‘We know what you’re suffering, and we hope you have more success than us,’ because those people were evicted in London.”Itani told me that some of the senior citizens who were displaced for the 2020 Games had asked if they could be resettled together to keep their community intact. That request, they said, was denied. When demolition of the Kasumigaoka public housing complex began in July 2016, it was after a protracted battle with the last three remaining households, who had resisted the city’s eviction orders. One of the elderly residents died while protesting their upcoming forced relocation.You can also lose your claim to the city in smaller ways. Boykoff described watching a father playing catch with his child on a cement patch in Tokyo. He later learned that they could no longer play on grass at a neighboring park because a warm-up track was being constructed on top of the grass, right where people used to play baseball. * * *Should the Olympics cease to exist? It’s a question I never thought I’d ask. I did gymnastics when I was younger and have been thoroughly obsessed with the sport ever since. I even built my writing career around gymnastics, so the Olympics — where the sport is a perennial favorite — factor heavily into my work (and my income).  “I had an emotional attachment to the Olympics growing up as an athlete,” Itani said. “It’s such a well-produced media spectacle. It’s amazing to see these athletes, the quality of the camera, the angles, the stories of the athletes in the Olympics that are covered by the media.”I experienced the same emotional attachment that Itani described — and still do. I was aware of all of the harm that the Olympics brought to communities but I took a reformist approach: we could preserve the good and eliminate the bad through smart policies and transparency. But reform hasn’t worked. In 2014, the IOC introduced Agenda 2020 to make reforms to the bidding process and curb the excesses of hosting the Games. Yet the tab for Tokyo 2020 is more than triple what was originally projected.Nobody’s right to participate in sports justifies the amount of destruction and the violence that goes into hosting the Olympics.“It took me a while to really digest the critical writings about the Olympics,” Itani said. It was visiting Vancouver in 2010 and Rio in 2016 and seeing the damage firsthand that helped them let go of that emotional attachment. “Nobody’s right to participate in sports justifies the amount of destruction and the violence that goes into hosting the Olympics. People understand on many levels that this is not a good idea but something about the Olympics makes it so hard for people to say no.”And even if you get to the “no,” the powers that be will force you to offer up alternatives. Well, if you say no to the Olympics, how will we get all those jobs and all those tourists? If you say no to this luxury housing development, what do you propose to build in its place? It’s a twist on the first rule of improv: “No, and.” But “no” can be a full sentence. It is enough.“The saying ‘no’ is really your real goal, to stop these things. When you already start thinking that, ‘Oh, this a done deal, we have to negotiate,’ you’re not just negotiating your defeat. You’re preparing for your exit, for your displacement, for your criminalization,” Vilchis said. People might finally be ready to say “no” to the Olympics, to the police, and to many other oppressive institutions as Vilchis, Itani, and many others have done. They’re not willing to wait for things to get worse. Back in 2017, at the NOlympics forum, someone asked about the potential for an uprising after the next LA Olympics, similar to what happened in 1992. Abdullah replied, “Let’s not wait until after to have the uprising. Let’s do that shit now.”* * *Dvora Meyers is a freelance journalist whose work has appeared in several publications, including Deadspin, the Guardian, and Texas Monthly. She also writes a newsletter about gymnastics called Unorthodox Gymnastics.Editor: Ben Huberman
Factchecker: Julie Schwietert Collazo
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right

		Gear-obsessed editors choose every product we review. We may earn commission if you buy from a link.

					How we test gear.
Ahmaud Arbery went out for a jog and was gunned down in the street. How running fails Black AmericaImagine young Ahmaud “Maud” Arbery, a junior varsity scatback turned undersized varsity linebacker on a practice field of the Brunswick High Pirates. The head coach has divided the squad into offense and defense and has his offense running the plays of their next opponent. The coach, as is his habit, has been taunting his defense. “Y’all ain’t ready,” he says. “You can’t stop us,” he says. “What y’all gone do?” The next play, Maud, all 5 feet 10 inches and 165 pounds of him, bursts between blockers and—BOOM!—lays a hit that makes the sound of cars crashing, that echoes across the field and into the stands, that just might reach the locker room. It’s a feat that teenage Maud also intends as a message to his coaches, his teammates, and all else that ain’t hitherto hipped: Don’t test my heart. Some of those teammates smash their fist to their mouth and oooh. Others slap one another’s pads and point. An assistant coach winces and runs to the aid of the tackled teammate. And the head coach, well, he trumpets his whistle. “Why’d you hit him like that?” he hollers. “Save that for Friday. Let’s see you do that on Friday.”


		Related Stories
	




Running Has a Racism Problem




Don’t Run for Ahmaud Arbery Just Once




#irunwithmaud Virtual Runs Will Continue



That Friday, in Glynn County Stadium (one of the largest high school stadiums in all of gridiron-loving Georgia) the Pirates, clad in their home white jerseys with blue and gold trim, huddle in the locker room. Maud, who wears high shoulder pads, a 2x4 face mask, and number 21 in honor of his brother, Buck, and his idol, famed NFL safety Sean Taylor, swaggers into the center of his teammates and begins the chant he’s christened into a pre-game ritual. “Y’all ready!” he shouts.“Hell yeah!” they shout.“Y’all ready!” he shouts.“Hell yeah!” they shout.“Y’all ain’t ready?!” he shouts.“Sheeeeeit!” they shout. To applause that could be thunder, the team stampedes out of the fog-filled mouth of a blow-up tunnel onto the field. The school band plays the fight song and cheerleaders shake pom-poms from a row in front of the band. There’s a raucous sea of blue and gold in the stands, including plenty of Maud’s people. Game time, the opposing team calls the play that Maud put the fierce kaput on in practice, and beneath a metal-halide glare that’s also a gauntlet, Maud barrels towards the running back and—BOOM!—lays a hit that sounds like trucks colliding. It’s a noise that resounds across the field and into the stands, that just might ring all over Brunswick. The fans send up a roar but Maud trots to the sidelines almost insouciant. Jason Vaughn, an assistant coach who also coached Maud on JV, grabs him by his face mask. “Now that’s how you hit,” he says, tamping astonishment that a boy his size could hit that hard.But that’s young Maud, undersized in the physical sense, super-sized in heart.  Sunday, February 23, 2020 | 1:04pm Time-stamped security footage from an adjacent home shows Maud, who’s out for a run in Brunswick’s Satilla Shores subdivision, wandering up a sunny patch of narrow road and stopping on the spotty lawn of a sand-colored under-construction bungalow addressed 220 Satilla Drive. There’s a red portable toilet in the front yard. The garage is wide open.Ahmaud, dressed in light-colored low-top Nikes, a white t-shirt, and khaki cargo shorts, loafs on the lawn for a moment before drifting into the building. The security camera records him inside the home, a brightened skeleton of beams and plywood and stacks of sheetrock and piping and wire. There are boxes of materials scattered about and a small forklift pushed in a corner. Maud doesn’t touch any of those things. He looks around, gazes beyond the frame of the camera toward the river behind the house. Maybe he wonders what the home will look like when it’s finished. Maybe he conjures an image of a family who could afford to live in a place so close to water.  Maud ain’t the first person to wander onto the site. Its security cameras have recorded others including a white couple one evening and a pair of white boys one day. On four occasions, it also recorded what appears to be the same person: a slim young Black man with wild natural hair and tattoos on his shoulders and arms, a dude, that by my eye, don’t resemble Maud. Let me add that the homeowner will confirm that nothing was stolen or damaged during any of the visits.  Meanwhile, a coveralled neighbor spies Maud roaming the site and calls 9-1-1. “There’s a guy in the house right now,” he reports. “It’s a house under construction. 219 or 220 Satilla Drive.” The man waits near the corner of Jones Road and Satilla Drive. “I just need to know what he’s doing wrong,” says the dispatcher. “He’s been caught on the camera a bunch before. It’s kind of an ongoing thing out here,” says the caller. It’s a statement of which he can’t be sure, though he does get right Maud’s physical description: “Black guy, white t-shirt.” To fathom what it meant for Maud to be out for a run in Glynn County, you need to know a thing or two about the pastime of recreational running. Before the 1960s, the idea of jogging for almost everybody save serious athletes was this: Now why would I do that? But in 1962, legendary track coach and Nike co-founder Bill Bowerman visited New Zealand and met with fellow coach Arthur Lydiard who’d developed a cross-country training program. Bowerman returned to the States excited by what he’d seen. He launched a similar program in Eugene (home of his alma mater and employer, the University of Oregon), wrote a pamphlet on the subject in 1966, and the next year, published a co-written book titled Jogging: A Medically-Approved Physical Fitness Program for all Ages Prepared by a Heart Specialist and a Famous Track Coach. That book became a bestseller and kickstarted jogging as an American pastime. Jogging, by and large, remains a sport and pastime pitched to privileged whites.Let me acknowledge that I am one of the rarest of Americans, one otherwise known as a Black Oregonian. As such, I feel compelled to share a truth about my home state: It’s white. I’m talking banned-Blacks-in-its-state-constitution white. At the time that Bowerman was inspiring Eugene residents to trot miles around their neighborhoods in sweatpants and running shoes, Eugene was a stark 97 percent white. One could argue that the overwhelming whiteness of jogging today may be, in part, a product of Eugene’s demographics. But if we’re keeping it 100, the monolithic character of running can be credited to the ways in which it’s been marketed and to the systemic forces that have placed it somewhere on a continuum between impractical extravagance and unaffordable hazard for scores of people who ain’t white. Matter of truth, around the time Bowerman visited New Zealand and published a bestselling book, millions of Blacks were living in the Jim Crow South; by 1968, Blacks diaspora-wide had mourned the assassinations of Medgar Evers, Malcolm X, and Martin Luther King Jr. And by the late ’60s and beyond, the Blacks of the Great Migration were redlined into ever more depressed sections of northern and western cities, areas where the streets were less and less safe to walk, much less run. Forces aplenty discouraged Blacks from reaping the manifold benefits of jogging. And though the demographics of runners have become more diverse over the last 50 years, jogging, by and large, remains a sport and pastime pitched to privileged whites. Peoples, I invite you to ask yourself, just what is a runner’s world? Ask yourself who deserves to run? Who has the right? Ask who’s a runner? What’s their so-called race? Their gender? Their class? Ask yourself where do they live, where do they run? Where can’t they live and run? Ask what are the sanctions for asserting their right to live and run—shit—to exist in the world. Ask why? Ask why? Ask why? Ahmaud Arbery, by all accounts, loved to run but didn’t call himself a runner. That is a shortcoming of the culture of running. That Maud’s jogging made him the target of hegemonic white forces is a certain failure of America. Check the books—slave passes, vagrancy laws, Harvard’s Skip Gates arrested outside his own crib—Blacks ain’t never owned the same freedom of movement as whites.Sunday, February 23, 2020 | 1:08pm Maud strolls out the house and in just a few steps, begins to jog. He’s unaware of the witness who called 9-1-1, a man still surveilling him. “He’s running right now. There he goes right now,” says the witness to dispatch. “Okay, what is he doing?” says the dispatcher. “He’s running down the street,” says the man. The footage shows Maud jogging past the Satilla Drive home of Gregory and Travis McMichael—a father and son. Gregory McMichael, an ex-cop stripped of his power to arrest for failure to attend use-of-force training, notices Maud passing his house and deems him suspicious. “Travis, the guy is running down the street,” he hollers. “Let’s go.” For reasons the McMichaels must now account for in court (both have been indicted on nine counts, including felony murder and aggravated assault), they arm themselves—the son with a Remington 870 shotgun and the father with a .357 Magnum—and hop in a white Ford pickup truck.   The Golden Isles lie along Georgia’s Atlantic coast between Savannah and Jacksonville, Florida. The region encompasses the barrier islands of St. Simons, Sea Island, Little St. Simons, and Jekyll, as well as the mainland cities of Darien and Brunswick. Satilla Shores, part of the Golden Isles, is an unincorporated neighborhood of upper- and middle-class families; of blue- and white-collar retirees; of seasonal vacation-home owners and lifelong denizens; of fresh transplants. The small neighborhood features narrow roads canopied by moss-draped live oaks, tall Southern Pines, and crepe myrtle; and one- and two-story homes with landscaped lawns and driveways parked with late-model vehicles and boats. Homes on one side of Satilla Drive—the neighborhood’s main street—boast as a backyard amenity, the sediment-colored Little Satilla River, replete with its miles-wide spartina salt marshes. Maud’s family home in Brunswick, the one where he lived at the time he was murdered, is a mere two miles from Satilla Shores, but in meaningful ways, it’s almost another country. The median household income for all of Glynn County is $51,000; in Brunswick that figure is $26,000. The poverty rate of what young Black residents call “The Wick” is a staggering 38 percent.That Maud’s jogging made him the target of hegemonic white forces is a failure of America.“The Wick” is where Ahmaud Marquez Arbery was born on May 8, 1994. He was the third beloved child of Wanda Cooper-Jones and Marcus Arbery Sr. Their working-class family included his older brother Marcus “Buck” Jr. and sister Jasmine. The family called Ahmaud “Quez,” a shortened version of his middle name, while his friends called him Maud. Maud had a slight gap in his front teeth and dark skin forever burnished by hours outside. He and his stair-step siblings attended Altama Elementary School. Around that time, Maud met his best friend Akeem “Keem” Baker, a fellow resident of the Leeswood Circle apartment complex. Keem, who in those days was a chubby introvert, recalls Maud being one of the popular kids in the neighborhood, someone he won over by bringing him snacks. The “sandlock brothers” were soon inseparable: sitting together on the bus ride to school, scouting the neighborhood in search of basketball rims, playing a football game called “Hot Ball” or a basketball-shooting game they christened “Curb Ball.”  In those days, Maud’s brother, Buck, just three years older, was a hovering protector. Buck also introduced Maud to the sport he grew to love. It happened during the 2002 BCS National Championship game. Buck’s favorite player at the time was Sean Taylor, and despite the Ohio Buckeyes upsetting Taylor’s Miami Hurricanes, he became Maud’s favorite player too. The next year Maud began playing peewee football, ultralight beaming as a running back and linebacker.Maud also began playing tackle football with Buck’s friends, boys who were two and three years older or more. During an early neighborhood contest, one of those friends tackled Maud so hard that Buck thought his brother was injured and moved to defend him. Before he did, Maud sprang to his feet and shook it off. “I knew then he was tough,” says Buck. “That he was going to be able to take care of himself.” Forces aplenty discouraged Blacks from reaping the manifold benefits of jogging.Around that time, Maud’s parents gifted his sister a Yorkshire terrier she named Flav. Maud might’ve been hard-nosed on the field, but he spent hours frolicking with Flav outside and helping his sister with caretaking duties. Their bond was such that Flav would sleep at the foot of Maud’s bed when Jasmine was gone. The family moved to a small white house on Brunswick’s Boykin Ridge Drive when Maud was in middle school, and in the new place Maud continued to share a room with his brother. “I was a neat freak,” says Buck. “But Maud would have his shoes scattered everywhere. Have his t-shirts where his boxers go. His polos with his socks.”  In high school Maud got a job working at McDonald’s, to keep some scratch in his pocket, but also to help his mother, who often worked two jobs. By then Maud had experienced a first-crush transformation, had adopted some of his brother’s tidiness, had become fashion conscious. He favored slim jeans and bright-colored polo shirts and rugbys, and kept his hair shorn low with a sharp hairline. Some days Keem—he was the first with transpo—would swoop Maud, wheel to the Golden Isles YMCA, and play basketball and/or work out for six or seven hours straight, jaunt across to street to Glynn Place Mall for the fries and wings combo at America Deli, and head right back for hours more of playing/training. Or else they’d roll as long as their gas needle allowed with Lil Wayne or Lil’ Boosie or Webbie or Gucci Mane (Maud’s favorite artists) cranking from the speakers. Brunswick High JV coach Jason Vaughn met Maud his sophomore year when a fellow coach promised him a tough linebacker for his squad. When Maud, always-ever slim and undersized, walked out, Vaughn was quick to doubt him. “Are you forreal?” he said. “What’s this little guy gone do?” He soon had his answer. Team workouts often included a drill called Oklahoma where two players would stand three to five yards apart and go heads up like. Keem remembers Maud excelling at the drill, not from cock-diesel strength, but because “he was fearless on that field.” Maud tore his ACL and meniscus in a game sophomore year. A less dedicated player might’ve given up, but he completed an arduous rehab. He reinjured his leg the following summer and committed again to a tough rehabilitation. “Our parents used to tell us, if you start something, don’t quit,” says his sister, Jasmine. Maud wore a leg brace during junior year, which hampered him and no doubt limited his prospects of playing in college. Still, the fact that he played at all is further proof of strong character. This was South Georgia football, and Maud played in a league that included a number of future pros as well as a game against Valdosta High School, the winningest high school football team in all the land.         Sunday, February 23, 2020 | 1:10pm The McMichaels, both strapped, tear off after Maud in their pickup, stalk him down Burford Road, another narrow street shaded by lush oaks, pines, and magnolias. From his front yard, William “Roddie” Bryan, sees his neighbors hounding Maud, and for reasons he’ll have to answer for in court (he’s been indicted on nine counts, including felony murder and criminal attempt to commit false imprisonment), jumps in his pickup and joins them. The McMichaels race ahead of Maud and try to cut him off, but Maud doubles back—maybe recalling all the times he’s eluded a would-be tackler—only to find himself facing down Bryan’s pickup. Bryan tries to block Maud, but he skirts the truck, and huffs around a bend onto Holmes Road. The elder McMichael, Gregory, climbs from the cab to the bed of his son’s truck, the one with a Confederate flag on its toolbox, armed with his .357. They track Maud as he sprints down Holmes Road.  Maud played in the ballyhooed Florida-Georgia War of the Border All-Star game after his senior season but didn’t land a football scholarship. After graduating, he enrolled in South Georgia Technical College (SGTC), in Americus, and set his sights on becoming an electrician. Like Maud, I was a passionate high school athlete (my sport was hoop) who was not recruited to a major college program. And like Maud, I attended a small school (mine a community college) in my home state. Both Maud and I witnessed friends reap scholarships, float off to towns or cities elsewhere, and continue playing the sports we loved. Maud quit SGTC after a year and returned to Brunswick and his mother’s home. I, too, quit my first community college. But unlike Maud, I didn’t have to return to my mother’s apartment because I already lived there. James “J.T.” Trimmings, another one of Maud’s day-one homeboys, believes homesickness was the root cause of Maud’s premature return from college. But I suspect that Maud also doubled back because his life as an athlete was over and disappointment can grind on even the toughest of us. The year after he graduated, Maud was arrested for carrying a gun and sentenced to five years of probation, which he violated by shoplifting. A few years after I graduated high school, I was arrested with drugs and a gun and spent 16 months in a state prison. Maud—dear God, whhhyyy?—is dead, and I, by grace, am a writer-professor hurtling toward middle age.If Maud nursed thoughts of re-enrolling in SGTC, that idea lost appeal once he met his first serious girlfriend in 2013. Shenice Johnson first saw Maud when he strolled into McDonald’s one day and convinced the manager to give him his old job back. The pair, both shy, were soon google-eyeing each other on their shifts. It’s a little unclear who made the first move. Keem says Maud talked for weeks about the beautiful girl at his job, and how he was nervous about approaching her, that is, until Keem hyped him. “Man, you Maud,” he said. “Just walk up to her and introduce yourself.” Per Shenice’s story, their five-plus year relationship began when she offered the handsome boy on her job a free McFlurry. Their first date, Maud swooped her in the gold Camry (“The Cam”) that his mother had bought him and that J.T. says he treated like a Mercedes. Decked in a white-collared shirt and sparkling Air Force 1s, he treated Shenice to a seafood feast and opened doors and pulled out her chair and paid the full bill without hesitance. “When I was with him, I didn’t have to worry about anything,” she says, a smile in her voice. On the couple’s first Valentine’s Day, Maud drove all the way to Savannah, bought Shenice a Build-A-Bear he named Quez, and delivered it to her along with a gold heart-shaped promise ring.Sunday, February 23, 2020 | 1:14pm Cell phone footage captures Maud on Holmes Road, bolting away from Bryan’s pickup but toward the McMichael’s white pickup. Bryan, about this time, pulls out his cell phone and starts to film. Meanwhile, Gregory McMichael calls 9-1-1. “Uh, I’m out here at Satilla Shores,” he tells dispatch. “There’s a Black male running down the street.” The dispatcher asks where. “I don’t know what street we’re on,” he says. “Stop right there. Dammit. Stop!” the tape records him yelling at Maud.Maud, fleeing now for no less than six minutes, runs toward a red-faced Travis McMichael who stands inside the door of his truck with his shotgun aimed, toward Gregory McMichael perched in the truck bed with his gun in hand, runs into what must feel like a trap, but perhaps feels like another time his courage has been tested. Maud zags one way and the other. He darts around the right side of the truck and crosses in front of the hood. Travis McMichael heads him off at the nose of the truck and shoots Maud in no more than a heartbeat. The blast cracks over Bryan’s cell footage. “Travis!” screams Gregory McMichael and he drops his phone in the truck bed. The buckshot blast hits Maud in the chest, puncturing his right lung, ribs, and sternum. And yet somehow, he wrestles with Travis McMichael for the shotgun, and yet somehow, he manages to punch at him. Gregory watches for a moment from his roost. Meanwhile, Bryan continues to film. Travis fires his shotgun again, a blast that occurs outside the view of Bryan’s phone, but sends a spray of dust billowing into the frame. Maud, an island of blood now staining his white t-shirt, continues to tussle with Travis McMichael, fighting now for what he must know is his life. In the midst of the scuffle, Travis McMichael blasts Maud again point blank, piercing him in his upper chest. Maud whiffs a weak swing, staggers a couple of steps, and falls face down near the traffic stripes. Travis, shotgun in hand, backs away, watches Maud collapse, and makes not the slightest effort to tend him. His father, still clutching his revolver, runs to where Maud lies facedown, blood leaking out of his wounds.    Maud jogged alone on the day he was killed. No one can know for sure the route he took before reaching Satilla Shores, but he’d set off from his home, which means there’s a strong chance that on his run he encountered homes flying a Confederate flag or a Gadsden flag (“Don’t Tread on Me”), homes tacked with No Trespassing signs. To reach Satilla Shores from Boykin Ridge, he would’ve also had to cross US Route 17, a highway that for years served as a de facto county border between the area’s Blacks and whites.Maud had been running for years, but the origin of his practice lacks consensus. According to his sister, Jasmine, who was once an avid runner, sometime in 2017 Maud asked her how many miles a day she ran and soon after, began doing it himself. She says it was natural for her brother since he loved the outdoors and “wanted a release.” Akeem agrees that Maud used running as a kind of therapy, but thinks his main motivation was staying fit after football. This theory would locate the timing of when he began running to a few years before 2017. Maud would run in a white t-shirt and khaki shorts. He’d run shirtless in basketball shorts. He’d run in a tank top and basketball shoes. Or as Keem sums it, “He could run in anything.” Sometimes Maud would persuade his boy J.T. who “doesn’t like running all like that,” and a couple of other homeboys to ride out to the North Glynn Country Recreational Complex and run miles around the park’s freshwater lake. Other times, when Keem was home from college, he and Maud would cruise to one end of the Sidney Lanier Bridge—the longest spanning bridge in all of Georgia—do some warm-up stretching and run back and forth across it, a distance of just under three miles. The pair would keep a steady pace. “But sometimes he’d push me,” Akeem says. There’s no evidence of Maud training for 10Ks or full or half marathons or obsessing over his miles or PR times. And yet it’s obvious that he was a young man who loved to run and who by all accounts was a gifted runner. It’s also clear to me that the same forces that transformed running from a fledgling pastime in my white-ass home state into a billion-dollar global industry also circumscribed a culture that was at best, unwelcoming, and at worse, restrictive to him.  Sunday, February 23, 2020 | 1:15pm Per the police report, Gregory McMichael rolls Maud from prostrate to his back to check for a weapon. He checks despite the fact that Maud hasn’t brandished or fired a gun during any part of his flight, not even when caught between two armed white men and what he couldn’t have known was an unarmed white man behind him. Glynn County police officers will arrive within seconds of the shooting, their sirens screaming along Satilla Drive. But before those squad cars reach the scene, Travis McMichael—per Bryan’s statement to investigators in May—will call Maud a “f*cking [n-word].” The bridge that Maud and Keem used to jog is named for 19th century poet and Confederate Sidney Lanier. It’s hard to imagine a Georgian with honorifics on par with Lanier. Not only is he the namesake of that bridge, there’s also the eponymous Lanier County in southern Georgia, and Lake Lanier, a reservoir in northern Georgia. Keem seems surprised when I mention Lanier’s Confederate ties, which makes me wonder how much Maud knew about the history of his home. Whether the young men were aware of Lanier’s hagiography or not (who stops to read the plaque on a bridge?) every single jog across that bridge was insult, an insidious means of humiliating them and their/our people. Yeah, the tiki-torch toting bald-face racists menace a spectacle. But what about the legions of bigoted invisible men and their myriad symbols? Lanier died in 1881, which is to say near the end of Reconstruction and the outset of Jim Crow. In 1964, a few months after the Civil Rights Act ushered the de jure end to Jim Crow, a documentary film crew from National Educational Television (the precursor to PBS) profiled Brunswick because it was managing to integrate without the bloodshed that was occurring almost everywhere else in the South. “The Quiet Conflict” won numerous awards and was a key reason for Brunswick’s reputation as a “model southern city.” On February 23, 2020, a young man out for a run was lynched in Glynn County, Georgia. While Brunswick might not have equaled the bloodletting of its southern counterparts, its segregationists still put up stern resistance. In one example, the KKK was called in to threaten Blacks attempting to integrate a local bowling alley. In another, whites filled a public pool with dirt rather than let Black kids swim in it. Several residents have gone on record to proclaim their surprise at Maud’s slaying and to downplay the significance of race. And for those who would argue that the spirit of Sidney Lanier and the segregationists is bygone, or that the younger McMichael might not have said what Bryan claimed in his statement to police, recent evidence—including McMichael’s own social media posts cited by investigators—I submit, as another example, this Facebook post from Chris Putnam, a former high school classmate of Travis McMichael: The NAACP once defined lynching as a death in which 1) There was evidence that a person was killed 2) The death was illegal 3) A group of at least three actors participated in the killing. According to “Lynching in America,” a report by the Equal Justice Initiative, there were 4,084 southern-state lynchings between 1877 and 1950. Of the 594 reported in Georgia during that period—one of only four states yet to pass a law on hate crimes—three occurred in Glynn County. Between 1920 and 1938, the NAACP New York headquarters flew a flag that announced “A Man Was Lynched Yesterday” to mark a murder that fit their criteria. A boy was lynched today: for walking hooded down a street and refusing the command of an overzealous neighborhood watchman. A man was lynched today: for selling loosies outside a bodega. A teen was lynched today: for a disputed exchange of cigarillos. A child was lynched today: for holding a toy outside a rec center. A man was lynched today: for fleeing a traffic stop unarmed. For hawking CDs outside a convenience store. For announcing a legal gun and reaching for his license. A woman was lynched today: for sleeping. And yet another man was lynched today: for suspicion of passing a fake twenty. D-e-a-t-h! In Florida, New York, Missouri, Ohio, South Carolina, Louisiana, Minnesota, Kentucky, and again in Minnesota.Sunday, February 23, 2020 | 1:16pm “Two subjects on Holmes Road. Shots fired. Male on ground, bleeding out,” radios an officer. Maud musters his last breath near the intersection of Holmes Road and Satilla Drive, a mere 300 yards from where, not 10 minutes prior, he wandered inside a construction site. The officers will cordon the scene and investigate. They will question the McMichaels—Gregory’s hands bloody from rolling Maud onto his back—and William Bryan. And in an act that is itself another violence, they will let all three go about their merry way as free men—for almost three months.  On February 23, 2020, a young man out for a run was lynched in Glynn County, Georgia. His name was Ahmaud Marquez Arbery, called “Quez” by his beloveds and “Maud” by most others. And what I want you know about Maud is that he had a gift for impressions and a special knack for mimicking Martin Lawrence. What I want you to know about Maud is that he was fond of sweets and requested his mother’s fudge cake for the birthday parties he often shared with his big sister. What I want you to know about Maud is that he signed the cards he bought for his mother “Baby Boy.” What I want you to know about Maud is that he and his brother would don the helmets they used for go-carting and go heads-up on their trampoline, and that he never backed down from his big brother. What I want you to know about Maud is that he jammed his pinkie playing hoop in high school and instead of getting it treated like Jasmine advised, he let it heal on its own—forever crooked. What I want you know about Maud is that he didn’t like seeing his day-ones whining, that when they did, he’d chide, “Don’t cry about it, man. Do what you gotta do to handle your business.” What I want you to know about Maud is that Shenice told me he sometimes recorded their conversations so he could listen to her voice when they were apart. What you should know about Maud is that he adored his nephews Marcus III and Micah Arbery, that when they were colicky as babies, he’d take them for long walks in their stroller until they calmed. What you should know about Maud is that when a college friend asked Jasmine which parent she’d call first if ever in serious trouble, she said neither, that she’d call him. What I want you to know about Maud is that he was an avid connoisseur of the McChicken sandwich with cheese. What I want you know about Maud is that he and Keem were so close that the universe coerced each of them into breaking a foot on the same damn day in separate freak weight-room accidents, and that when they were getting treated in the trainer’s office, Maud joked about it. You should know that Maud dreamed of a career as an electrician and of owning a construction company. You should know that Maud gushed often of his desire to be a great husband and father. You should know that he told his boys that he wanted them all to buy a huge plot of land, build houses on it, and live in a gated community with their families. You should know that Maud never flew on a plane, but wanderlusted for trips to Jamaica, Japan, Africa. What you must know about Maud was that when Travis McMichael, Gregory McMichael, and William “Roddie” Bryan stalked and murdered him less than three months shy of his 26th birthday, he left behind his mother Wanda, his father Marcus Sr., his brother Buck, his sister Jasmine, his maternal grandmother Ella, his nephews, six uncles, 10 aunts, a host of cousins, all of whom are unimaginably, irrevocably, incontrovertibly poorer from his absence.Ahmaud Marquez Arbery was more than a viral video. He was more than a hashtag or a name on a list of tragic victims. He was more than an article or an essay or posthumous profile. He was more than a headline or an op-ed or a news package or the news cycle. He was more than a retweet or shared post. He, doubtless, was more than our likes or emoji tears or hearts or praying hands. He was more than an R.I.P. t-shirt or placard. He was more than an autopsy or a transcript or a police report or a live-streamed hearing. He, for damn sure, was more than the latest reason for your liberal white friend’s ephemeral outrage. He was more than a rally or a march. He was more than a symbol, more than a movement, more than a cause. He. Was. Loved.Some of those loved ones got to see Maud play the last game of his senior season, a play-in [playoff] away game at Lakeside-Evans High School. In the locker room, the coach delivers a passionate pep talk, and Maud, accessorized in school-color blue high socks and a sparkling white wrist band, leads the team in the pre-game chant. “Y’all ain’t ready,” he shouts. “Sheeeeeeeeit!” they say, and ramble out of the locker room, cleats clattering against the concrete, and onto the field. Maud’s a team captain, so he swanks onto the 50-yard line to help call the coin toss.Rare is an athlete that ends a season on a win. Maud, who’ll earn the team award for most tackles that season, blazes around the field stopping play after play, and still his Pirates commit four turnovers in the first half and trail by 20 points. But the team—hooray, hooray—mounts a second-half comeback, one no more promising than when Maud leaps to snatch an interception in the middle of the fourth, zags here, jukes there, and bursts down the field, wind whispering through his helmet, his lithe legs floating him across the 50, the 40, the 30, and oh so close but not into the end zone. The Pirates don’t score on the preceding drives. They lose the game and miss the playoffs for the first time in half a decade. While their opponents celebrate and fans mill out of the stands, Maud and some of his senior teammates, circle in the middle of the field. There they stand, hand in hand, grass stains in their tights, tears running into their eye-black strips. Boys who will soon be young men mourning a season-ending loss, boys in thrall of youth mourning the eternal end of their football seasons. Maud could use his gift for humor to lighten the mood, but this time, he concedes to the moment’s gravity. Yes, some will play on in college. Indeed, others will attend as students alone. And sure, some will forsake a campus altogether for work. But here’s the truth, a whole truth, so help me: Under that final gleam of Friday night lights, neither Maud nor any of his teammates can be sure of what lies ahead.How two kids from London, Ontario birthed the most unique goal in hockey’s history.Sam Riches | Longreads | June 2020 | 21 minutes (5,399 words)During the third period of a late October game between the Carolina Hurricanes and the Calgary Flames, Andrei Svechnikov, a right-winger for the Hurricanes, corrals the puck deep in Calgary’s offensive zone.Sensing the presence of the 19-year-old Russian, Flames goaltender David Rittich seals his body against the post. It’s textbook positioning, a preventive measure in case Svechnikov — the second overall pick in the 2018 NHL draft — attempts a centering pass or a sneaky shot from a bad angle. Unfortunately for Rittich, who has seen, studied, and saved a lot of shots in his life, there is no playbook for what’s about to happen. Svechnikov cuts behind the net and then stops abruptly. He shifts his momentum and reverses course and all eyes — from the scrambling defense to the nearly 14,000 fans in the PNC Arena in Raleigh — shift with him. With his feet still moving, he shifts the puck onto its side, slips his stick underneath it, and cradles it on his blade until he spots a window in the top of the net, next to Rittich’s head. It’s enough space to make history. Like a postal worker jamming the last letter of the day through a mail slot, Svechnikov stuffs the puck into the net. It’s not the smoothest finish, but it doesn’t matter.For the first time in National Hockey League history, a high wrap, lacrosse-style goal has been scored, and it happens so quickly that initially only Svechnikov realizes the significance. As he glides across the ice, he invokes one of his signature celebrations, an overhead first pump, one leg hitched up into the air, before his teammates mob him. Brian Gibbons, a hockey journeyman who is more than a decade older than Svechnikov, is the first to reach him. He grabs the teen by his collar and shakes him enthusiastically, if not a little mercilessly, as the rest of the Hurricanes join the celebration. For just a moment, everyone forgets about the game. It seemingly doesn’t matter that Svechnikov’s game-tying goal ends Rittich’s shutout, or that there’s still ten minutes left to play. The focus is solely on Svechnikov, who is not only the first player born in the 2000s to score in the NHL, but now the record holder for first lacrosse-style goal in NHL history.“It’s a signature moment for a guy overflowing with confidence,” says color commentator Tripp Tracy during the broadcast.Svechnikov scores again three minutes later, on a shot from the point during a power play. It’s the game-winning goal, but the crowd is still buzzing from what they’ve witnessed moments earlier. They are still floating in that liminal space, where the rules of possibility have been reimagined and are now being rewritten. It’s a quality that all transcendent stars like Svechnikov possess, an ability to call history into existence.Svechnikov is interviewed on the ice afterward, the short exchange broadcast on the jumbotron for the entire arena to hear. “I practiced that today,” he says. “I was dreaming to score that goal.”He steps off the ice to raucous and unbridled applause, the type usually reserved for a playoff victory and jogs down the tunnel to the locker room, letting out a squeaky “Woo!” that sounds every bit his 19 years of age. He is beaming ear to ear. As he turns the corner and steps into the dressing room, his teammates erupt as soon as they spot him, shouting over one another with their hands on their heads.

“What was THAT?”“Oh. My. God.”“That was a dirty goal!”Head coach Rod Brind’Amour stands at the edge of the room, a smile on his face. He rubs his chin and raises an eyebrow. He’s just as perplexed as everyone else.“All right, I’ll be quick,” he says, stepping forward to address the team. He’s standing near, but not on, the carpeted Hurricanes logo in the center of the room.“First of all, that was a great effort. … You feel pretty proud watching that.”Then he raises his index finger in Svechnikov’s direction. “Pays to practice, huh?”Svechnikov attempted a lacrosse-style goal last year, in his rookie season, but the defense knocked him off the puck before he could finish it. He’d been waiting for his chance to try it again. He works on his puck control every day. It is not uncommon to see Svechnikov gather a cache of pucks behind the net after practice and before games. He scoops the vulcanized-rubber discs off the ice and, one by one, and deposits them into the goal, like quarters into a slot machine.“What a move. I mean, that’s …”Brind’Amour doesn’t finish the thought. He doesn’t need to. It’s the second consecutive win for the Hurricanes, a team that had recently lost four of its last five games. The timing was right for history to break in their favor. Right now, in this locker room — in this moment — things are good for the young team. Better than good.“Everything is perfect,” Brind’Amour says.Down the hall, in the visiting locker room, things are less perfect.Matthew Tkachuk, who finished the season as the Flames point leader, keeps his eyes locked on the floor in the post-game interview scrum.“They just took it to us. They had all the momentum in the world,” he says. “That guy scored an awesome goal.”Rittich keeps his answers short — the embarrassment aside, he had a shutout in reach before allowing two goals in a span of five minutes.“Good play. Smart,” he says of Svechnikov’s shot. “I don’t know what I can say about it.”Turns out, the sports world has a lot to say about it. In the rush to publicize the funky shot, it seems that every story traces the move back to what is — or was — its most famous example: Mike Legg scoring for Michigan in a 1996 NCAA tournament game. In the comments section and across social media, people argue about what to call the goal.Don’t call it the Michigan, or the Svech, or a lacrosse goal — call it the Mike Legg. After all, he’s the guy who invented it. It’s a reasonable argument to make. But it’s also misinformed. If the goal’s creator should be honored by name, then it shouldn’t be named after Legg, it should be named after a forward who played a single NHL game then never appeared in the league again.It should be named the Bill Armstrong.***Both Armstrong and Legg grew up in London, Ontario, a city of about 400,000 people, a few hours west of Toronto. The area is known mostly for an abundance of both farmland and hockey players. About 50 local athletes have skated for a team in the world’s best hockey league, including Jeff Carter, Joe Thornton, and Eric Lindros.Though Armstrong is nine years older, Legg remembers watching him at the local rink. Each summer Armstrong, who was then working his way through the Philadelphia Flyers system, would return to London to train and coach at local hockey schools.“I’m like, ‘Oh, I gotta watch this guy,’” Legg says from outside of Vancouver. For the past 14 years, he has worked as a firefighter, and now also coaches minor hockey. “‘Look at how smooth he is. Wow, look at the reach, look at his hands.’ I was like, ‘Oh my goodness, he’s the new Mario Lemieux.’” For Legg, the lanky 6’2” Armstrong looked even taller, his size inflated by Legg’s admiration. “He was the man,” Legg says. “I just wanted to do what he was doing.”During one warm-up skate in the summer of 1993, Legg watched Armstrong scoop a puck onto the blade of his stick and stuff it into the net. Legg, who was still a few months away from enrolling at the University of Michigan, had never seen anything like it: “He wrapped it in and I’m like I have no idea how he just did that.”Legg says he was too nervous to approach Armstrong after, but he also couldn’t shake the image of Armstrong lifting the puck off the ice and lassoing it into the net. He decided to learn it himself. He practiced at home, away from prying eyes, and taught himself how to apply leverage to the puck to make it stick to the blade. He worked on it every day and mostly kept it to himself. But as he packed his bags that fall and headed to Michigan, a college hockey powerhouse, the move came with him. He had essentially mastered the shot, by this point. All he needed was the green light from a coach.As the Wolverines prepared for the NCAA tournament in March 1996, he finally got it. Legg and some of his teammates were giving goalie Marty Turco (the sophomore would go on to play in the NHL for more than a decade) a hard time: “I was behind the net, just doing different versions of it,” Legg says. “Up and around and over, trying to tuck it around and put it in the five-hole, all the way around him and just goofing around.” Standing at the blue line, Red Berenson, the team’s head coach, noticed the moves from his shaggy-haired, third-year winger from London. As Legg skated off the ice after practice, Berenson stopped him. “Intimidation was a major factor with him,” Legg says of the coach, who retired in 2017 after more than three decades on the bench. Berenson kept his hair military short, and Legg thought the coach was about to question him over his grooming habits. “Usually he was going to see if your hair was short enough, if you were presentable enough,” Legg says. Instead, the coach asked him:“Is that legal?”Legg, unsure of how to read the situation, mumbled. “Uh, yeah, I asked a ref about it, and it is.”Berenson had never seen anything like Legg’s move before. “Well,” the expressionless coach said, “Why don’t you do it in a game?”Legg breathed a sigh of relief — he had the blessings of an ex-player who once scored six goals in a single NHL game, though he still didn’t think the coach would approve of such a maneuver in a scenario as high stakes as the NCAA tournament. But down 2–1 to the University of Minnesota at the end of the second period in the Western Regional semifinal, Legg knew unless he swung the game’s momentum, the Wolverines’ season was over. When a defender dragged his teammate Johnny Madden down behind the net, Legg recognized his opening. In one motion, he pulled back on the puck, secured the leverage on his stick, and then threw it in the net.For Legg, it was a relief to finally score with a move he’d long practiced, but at that moment, he was largely unfazed: “I was like, ‘It’s only 2–2. C’mon, we need to get going.’”On the broadcast, though, there was a moment of pause. The announcers, along with everyone else watching, weren’t sure what had happened.“It’s a goal. Michigan, finally, somehow, got it in the net to tie the game.”“I don’t believe I saw what I think I just saw.”That play not only changed the course of the game — Michigan ultimately defeated its regional rival and, after two more wins, would hoist Division I hockey championship’s trophy (the program’s first championship in decades) — it also charted its own history. The game had been broadcast nationally, and the move was soon seen around the world.His stick went into the Hockey Hall of Fame in Toronto. Inside Hockey, a Swedish magazine, flew him out to receive its Goal of the Year award (and a kiss from a former Miss Sweden). TSN declared Legg’s move the play of the year, and at the fifth annual ESPY awards, it received two nominations: Play of the Year (which it lost) and the Most Outrageous Play of the Year (which it won).He put that image in my head of pulling it off. That’s what started it all.In front of a star-studded audience that included Ray Charles and Muhammad Ali, ESPN persona Keith Olberman introduced the clip, telling the crowd, “Every year tens of thousands of plays are made by athletes in the heat of competition and then quickly forgotten, eclipsed by the next bit of action, but there are other moments, sights, sounds, emotions … that we will never forget.”At the same time Legg was sucked into the sports media vortex, Armstrong was grinding out hours-long bus rides and playing in front of half-empty arenas as a member of several teams spread across the American Hockey League and the International Hockey League. Unlike Legg’s games at the University of Michigan, Armstrong’s games weren’t broadcast nationally, and though he had scored with the move a handful of times, most video footage — if it existed at all — ended up the by-product of highlights shows favored by the sleep deprived. If you didn’t see it live, you probably wouldn’t have known about it. Legg tried to deflect attention to the player he had long admired, but his highlight often overshadowed his words. Despite his best efforts to give Armstrong credit, Legg stood on the shoulders of an unknown giant.“He’s it,” Legg says of Armstrong. “He’s the man.”“He put that image in my head of pulling it off. That’s what started it all.”***A few years earlier, on a Monday night in February 1991, Bill Armstrong slipped a number 58 jersey over his head and stepped onto the ice at Philadelphia’s Spectrum arena. As an NHL rookie, even for a team that finished the 1991 season near the divisional cellar, Armstrong would never have tried the move in a game. He still needed clout. If he scored a goal in that fashion — creative and unconventional — at that time, he likely would never leave the bench again. He had mastered it, but the first step was lasting in the NHL — his puck flip could wait.An undrafted prospect out of Western Michigan University, Armstrong was signed by Bobby Clarke, the team’s general manager and a Flyers legend. Armstrong says Clarke liked his soft hands and quick feet, not to mention he didn’t back down when challenged. Clarke admired that trait: After all, this was a man who, upon taking an errant slapshot to the face, scored his 1,000th NHL point with his jersey splattered with his own blood.And though Armstrong made his NHL debut on the same ice where Clarke had led the Flyers to back-to-back Stanley Cups, he wasn’t nervous. He knew he had worked his way there and he figured he was going to stick around. He would have more opportunities to try to score his goal, he thought.The light bulb had first clicked on for Armstrong years earlier, when he tinkered with the puck during those summer hockey camps and, as athletic savants are wont to do, made an accidental discovery. When he flipped the puck into the net, he surprised even himself. In pick-up games, he would often do a similar move, where he would scoop up the puck, spin around, and throw it over his shoulder toward the net. It was an exciting play and would always catch the goalie by surprise, but it was also high-sticking. This was different. This is an actual legitimate play, he thought to himself. I can make this happen.Armstrong had grown up playing ball hockey, which elevated his hand-eye coordination while honing his handling skills. He learned to corral the ball and gain control, and eventually, he mastered a variety of trick shots that were easily translated from practicing in his driveway to stepping onto the ice.His first NHL game, however, wasn’t the right time to unveil the move. Instead, Armstrong registered his presence in the NHL with a wholly traditional maneuver. In the third period, with the game tied at 3, he used that Lemieux-like length to tip a centering pass to his linemate Scott Mellanby, who snuck the puck past goalie Ed Belfour for the go-ahead goal.The coach implored him, ‘Any time you get around the net in a game, do that.’The play seemed an auspicious start to Armstrong’s NHL career. One game, one point. But the Flyers had dismissed Clarke before the season, and even though Armstrong showed promise, the new GM wasn’t as enamored with the rookie’s game. Besides, there were a slew of new prospects to be developed in 1992. Armstrong wasn’t in the long-term plans.“That killed me because I signed a three-year contract and [Clarke] liked me,” Armstrong says. He returned to the Flyers’s AHL affiliate in Hershey with renewed determination to make it back to the world’s top league.He still hadn’t attempted to score his high-wrap goal at this point in his career, but with some NHL experience now on his resume, he felt confident, and by the 1994 season, when Armstrong joined the Albany River Rats of the AHL, he had racked up hours of ice time just working on the shot. He knew that once he got a chance, he’d be able to pull it off. Like Legg, Armstrong’s coach in Albany, Robbie Ftorek, noticed how seamlessly the player could flip the puck onto his stick and fling it into the net during practice.“What was that?” Armstrong remembers Ftorek asking. Armstrong did it again.The coach implored him, “Any time you get around the net in a game, do that.”“He just said, ‘Do it,’” Armstrong recalls. Those two words were prophetic. A few games later, Armstrong scored with the move; and he did it again several days later. Once, on a weekend road trip years later, he scored it in back-to-back games. In total, he would score the goal five times while wearing a River Rat sweater. The crowd grew so familiar with the move that any time Armstrong got behind the net, they would start screaming “DO IT!” For a while, the move was simply known as the “do it.”“You could hear the whole building getting into it,” Armstrong says. “ All you could hear was do it, do it, do it!”Whenever someone complained about the goal — that it shouldn’t be legal, or that it defied tradition — Armstrong shrugged it off. “My job was to put the puck in the net,” he says. “I was never trying to show anybody up. If I go on a breakaway and I have a good shot, should I not use my shot because it’s so good or should I try and score because that’s my job? My job was to score. If you want to come after me, come after me.”Armstrong posted three straight seasons of 30 or more goals. He thought, eventually, he might become a regular presence back in the NHL, especially following that 1994 season, in which he led Albany with 82 points in 74 games, but it didn’t work out that way. Whenever there was an injury, Armstrong was a convenient salve, added to the waiver wire only to languish in the press box or locker room waiting for another chance. He was ahead of his time, and as such, stuck on the outside looking in. He would never play another game in the NHL.Armstrong was flummoxed. So was Legg.“He was easily talented enough,” Legg says. “Like, there’s no question about it. It was just maybe the wrong setting. The wrong time.”***It’s just after 11 a.m. on a Saturday morning in November and the only sound in Ottawa’s Canadian Tire Center, home of the Senators, is the drone of a Zamboni. Save for a few members of the Carolina Hurricanes, who are waiting on the bench for the ice to be resurfaced, the arena is empty.When the Zamboni slowly glides off the ice and down an arena tunnel, the players clamber over the boards, and soon the arena is alive with sound. Passes land blade to blade with a satisfying thud, shots ping out from the crossbar, the net whips back with each puck that sneaks by the goaltenders. During their drills, the players weave across the ice like birds in flight, a murmuration of hockey players. Broadcasters do their pregame hits in the empty lobby, still hours away from being flooded with fans for the evening’s game.Svechnikov is one of the last players off the ice, which is usually the case. He likes to work on his puck control near the end of practice, flipping shots into the net, bouncing the puck on his stick like the blade is a trampoline, defying basic gravitational laws. Off the ice, he has a keen interest in magic, which makes sense, given his penchant for on ice wizardry. He’s more than a week removed from his historic goal now, but it’s still reverberating through the hockey world.“Obviously, it’s something special to score that goal,” he says, as he peels off his equipment in the visiting locker room after practice. “There was space for me to do it and I was like, ‘Why shouldn’t I try it?’”Svechnikov learned the move from his older brother Evgeny, who is currently in the Detroit Red Wings system. Andrei moved to the United States around the age of 16 and began playing for the Muskegon Lumberjacks of the United States Hockey League. His brother, who then played in the AHL for the Grand Rapids Griffins, was less than an hour away.“I saw how he did it and I went to him and said ‘Bro, you have to teach me that move,’” Andrei says. “He would teach me after each practice. You have to teach that move for hours.”The brothers are almost four years apart in age but close by every other conceivable measure. Andrei wears number 37 because that’s the number his big brother wears. They speak with each other every day. Like his younger brother, Evgeny makes his living in the offensive end, and while both brothers are prone to creating a highlight in an instant, only one, for now, is in the NHL record books. Evgeny couldn’t be happier about it. When Andrei scored the goal, his older brother was watching.It’s going to stick with us for life.“Once I saw, I was like ‘Holy moly, it’s crazy,’” Evgeny says, speaking from Grand Rapids after practice. “I was very pumped, shocked, excited, surprised. All of those emotions that you can have, I had it. I was proud of my little brother. It’s definitely special.”Evgeny learned the move from watching Finnish player Mikael Granlund score a similar lacrosse-style goal against Russia during the semifinals of the 2011 IIHF Ice Hockey World Championship. Granlund first saw the move watching highlights of Legg.“I saw Granlund score it and I said ‘Oh my God, I want to score that one day’ and ever since I saw it I just wanted to practice it,” Evgeny says. When Andrei moved to Muskegon, the brothers had the chance to work on it together, meeting up after their respective practices to put in more work.“I was telling him about that move. I was doing it a lot,” Evgeny says. “We skated together, I was showing him and he was like ‘Yeah, I really like it,’ and I was like ‘Yeah man, try that always.’”Andrei listened. About two months after making history with the first lacrosse-style goal, he scored another one, this time against the Winnipeg Jets. The goalie even saw it coming this time, but there was nothing he could do to stop it. The magician had struck again.“It’s going to stick with us for life,” Evgeny says of his brother’s historic accomplishment. “I’m really proud of him.”***Armstrong was a goal scorer. He was shuffled in and out of lineups, called up and sent down, traded to different teams with different coaches and different systems, and none of it mattered. He put the puck in the net everywhere he went — until he ended up with the Grand Rapids Griffins for the 1997 season. He didn’t mesh with the coach, and after scoring 38 goals the previous season, he only scored once in 35 games with the IHL franchise. He spent much of his time stuck to the bench. “I was a healthy scratch,” he says. “I wanted out of there.”Halfway through the season, he got his wish. He was traded to the Orlando Solar Bears, whose owners also ran the NBA’s Orlando Magic, and found his groove again. “That was the best thing that could have happened,” he says. “I went down to Orlando and went, ‘Wow, I want to play 20 more years here.’”Armstrong would score two more high-wrap goals in Orlando, bringing his career total to eight, but disaster struck before he’d field another NHL call-up. Following a check on an opposing player, the player stalked Armstrong and hit him in the face with the butt end of his stick. Armstrong was knocked unconscious. It resulted in a concussion, which led to a CT scan, which led to an MRI, which led to the discovery of a brain tumor. There’s never a good time to make a discovery like this, but for Armstrong, it ended any chance he had to show the world his goal.When he was diagnosed, he says his agent — determined to showcase Armstrong’s skill set on a global stage — had already begun talks with David Letterman’s late-night show so that his client could demonstrate the goal. “Things would have been different if Letterman had worked out,” Armstrong claims. But once he learned about the tumor — doctors thought it might be malignant — his health concerns quickly took precedence.Armstrong was 31 years old and had an 8-month-old daughter to worry about. His future was more important than a game. “It was scary. It was a really tough time,” he says. When Armstrong went under the knife, though, the tumor was found to be benign. “It was unbelievable,” he says of the quick reversal of fortune. The whole thing was a whirlwind, but the surgery effectively ended his career.“The doctor said there’s such a space now between your brain and skull that one hit would be like 100 concussions. He said ‘You can’t go back and play,’ so I was forced to retire,” Armstrong says.At that point, Armstrong hadn’t given much thought to his post-hockey future. “I just wanted something that I was in control of,” he says. “With my own scheduling.” He found it in real estate.Currently, Armstrong works as a realtor in the London area. He says he carries no bitterness or remorse about how his hockey career went. He played nine years of professional hockey and even assisted on an NHL goal — which is more than most can say. “Would I have liked to have played more in the NHL? Of course I would have,” he says. “Unfortunately, that didn’t happen but I have no regrets.”Instead, he has memories.His helmet is still plastered with the original Cincinnati Cyclones logo — he played 42 games for the team, whose design (an anthropomorphic angry cyclone named Twister) was often ridiculed as the worst logo in sports. He still has his gloves from the Solar Bears, his name stitched above an empty cuff, which he claims was left blank when the sponsor failed to pay their licensing fee. And he still has his goal, the move etched into his muscle memory, and the knowledge that he was the first to ever do it in North American professional hockey. He wishes that the record was set straight more often, but he is happy knowing his family and friends know the true origin story. And when it comes up in conversation, he’s quick with a correction.“For me, it’s like, if you’re going to put a name on something, you have to name it after the person that did it,” he says. “It’s like taking a Picasso and saying that’s a Legg. No, it’s not, it’s a Picasso.”***On an otherwise grey wintry November afternoon, there’s a thin band of light on the horizon of Lake Huron. Snow blows across the roads in whistling gusts. From the ditch, a coyote watches the local traffic — an old pickup truck, a slightly newer pickup truck — rumble past, before loping off into a snow-covered cornfield.This part of Ontario is known for its open land, its sunsets, and coastline. In Zurich, with a population of just a few hundred, the village is dotted with the familiar buildings of small towns across Canada. There’s a church, a liquor store, a Tim Horton’s and a hockey arena.Inside that arena, there is a man alone out on the ice. He’s zipping behind the net, scooping the puck up onto his stick, bouncing it into the air, throwing it over his shoulder. He’s moving around the net, again and again, faster and faster. You can hear his skate blades cutting into the ice. You can hear the wooden blade of his stick tapping the puck, directing it one way, then another.At the edge of the rink, a door creaks open. Another man walks into the building, a tattered hockey bag slung over his shoulder. He shouts hello and the man on the ice raises his stick in acknowledgment. Then more men arrive. A few minutes later, they are all out on the ice.“We’re not worth taking photos of,” one of the men tells a reporter standing nearby, before stepping onto the gleaming sheet. As much as this appears to be the case, as the players warm up in lazy, looping laps and appear uniform in the seriousness with which they are approaching this game (not very), it isn’t true.A new era beckons in hockey, marked by creativity and skill and speed and freedom for the players. Hours before Svechnikov scored his goal last October, Nils Höglander, a 19-year-old Vancouver Canucks prospect currently playing in the Swedish Hockey League for Rögle BK, also scored a lacrosse goal, and maybe the best one yet.At 5’8”, Höglander is blisteringly fast, and while he is a bit undersized by NHL standards, he is also 183 pounds of muscle. Before games, to hone in on his control, he indulges in training exercises like riding a unicycle while stick handling or juggling. Höglander, like Svechnikov, is part of the new generation of hockey, their games rooted in speed and skill instead of brawn.Höglander doesn’t remember the first time he saw a lacrosse-style goal in ice hockey, but he says it’s a popular move in Sweden for floorball players, one of the country’s most popular sports.“When I was young, I had fun with a floorball stick and just did the lacrosse move,” he says, speaking before practice from Ängelholm, a small city on the southeastern Swedish coast.“I just practiced it a little bit. I tried to have fun with it. I tried it in the game and I scored, so it was good.” In Sweden, the move is known as Zorro, a nod to the fictional sword-wielding character. Höglander has Zorro-ed twice in the SHL, and in December, during the IIHF World Junior Ice Hockey Championships, he notched another. In January, Filip Forsberg, a forward with the Nashville Predators, became the second NHL player to score the goal. Before coronavirus put the season on hold, almost every week, another rising NHL star took a shot at the shot. Most missed, but even the misses make the highlights.In the village of Zurich, Ontario, out there on the ice, there is a player who is part of that story, who once made a living scoring goals that no one had ever seen before.Out there on the ice, in this small arena, in this small town, there is someone worth taking photos of.His name is Bill Armstrong, and he is the original author of one of hockey’s greatest goals.***Sam Riches is a writer and journalist based in Toronto.***Editor and fact checker: Matt GilesCopy editor: Jacob Z. Gross
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
My favorite director, Lynn Shelton, died suddenly this month at the age of 54. Did the spirit of indie filmmaking go with her?Soraya Roberts | Longreads | May 2020 | 10 minutes (2,564 words)Lynn Shelton was the kind of artist no one asked for, but the only one you really wanted. The kind of person who was so good — so empathetic, so altruistic, so honorable — her work couldn’t help but be good in all the same ways. But in the face of what film became — a monstrous inequitable monopoly — she played too kind, too female, too independent, too old. When Shelton died suddenly on May 15 at only 54, from a blood disorder no one knew she had, artists more famous than her surfaced one after the other to remember her flawless reputation and critic after critic emerged to fawn over her career. It was so familiar, all those people so quick to praise in private but almost never in public, until, you know, it kind of doesn’t matter anymore. The reality was that Shelton had made eight films, directed countless television series, and still had to audition for jobs even when she knew the people giving them. The reality was that she had to work in TV to pay for the work she really wanted to do. The reality was that people in the industry knew her name, but no one outside of it did. “The main reason women make inroads in independent film is that no one has to say, ‘I pick you,’” she told The Los Angeles Times in 2014. “I’m not pounding on anybody’s door. I’m just making my own way.” As existence increasingly became exhibitionism, Shelton made being a private success — being a good person making good work — more valuable than being a public one. Which is why I loved her more than any other artist around. Because it wasn’t just about loving her films, it was about loving her as a filmmaker, as a woman. Because, somehow, over two decades, she was always pure independence — fervent, uncompromising, relentless and humble, humble, humble — despite the constant pressure to be otherwise. Because, to me, she was the only kind of artist to be.
* * *
If I met Lynn Shelton, I don’t remember it. I probably saw her and would have undoubtedly come across her name more than a decade ago, in the summer of 2009, when I interviewed actor Joshua Leonard about her third film, Humpday. It irritates me that I can’t remember. She was at the very least on the fringes of mumblecore, a no-budget indie film movement which really got going in 2005 with The Puffy Chair, Mark and Jay Duplass’ $15,000 parent-funded road trip movie. These films were hipster-style verité, with mix-and-match personnel and, according to Film Journal International, a “highly naturalistic feel, a fascination with male/female relationships and low-fi production values.” Originated by writer-director Andrew Bujalski (Support the Girls), the movement also established the Duplasses, triple-threat bros with their fingers in every indie pie — from Jeff, Who Lives at Home to Amazon’s panegyrized series Transparent — and Joe Swanberg, the guy behind Netflix’s Easy. It was less of a vehicle for women. Even the It Girl.In 2008, about a decade before she became GRETA GERWIG, I profiled Greta Gerwig for a now-defunct magazine called Geek Monthly. She and Swanberg had co-everything’ed the long-distance relationship drama Nights and Weekends. (As it happens, Shelton, who started out as an actor before it began to feel like “an exercise in narcissism,” appears briefly on screen though I don’t mention her in the interview.) I somehow addressed mumblecore’s gender divide while missing Shelton’s two features, We Go Way Back (2006) and My Effortless Brilliance (2008). “It can really feel like boys[’] town,” Gerwig confirmed at the time. She mentioned being broke, despite her omnipresence on the mumblecore scene: “There have been nights where I sit and stare at the wall and say, ‘What am I doing? What’s going to become of me?’” She was 24. Shelton was 43. Maybe that’s why I missed her, along with the rest of the world. Even the oldest mumblers, the Duplasses, were several years younger than her. Shelton had taken a while to get into film, the same way it took me a while to get into writing. She started acting in theatre, then studied photography before moving into experimental film, editing, and documentary. “I just did not have the confidence to do it,” she told The New York Times in 2009. “And then I had to find a backdoor way in.” Shelton was intimidated, just like I would be intimidated, but the pull landed her there anyway, as it did for me. She joked that her version of film school took two decades. It sounded familiar, that long way around. The way she finally gave herself permission also sounded familiar — through a female artist, Claire Denis, who was almost two decades older than her (I was more promiscuous about my idols). “I thought: ‘Oh, my God. She was 40 when she made her first film,” Shelton told the Times in 2012. “I thought it was too late for me, so in my head was, ‘Oh, I still have three more years.’” I’ve had this exact thought about writing: that it took me too long to get here, that I’m past the point of it being worth it. You may find that many artists — many women artists, who, if they weren’t actively discouraged from pursuing art, weren’t actively encouraged, either — have had this exact thought.Shelton beat Denis by a year. Her first movie, We Go Way Back, is probably her most autobiographical, perhaps because she had just come from the world of documentary. It follows a 23-year-old woman (Amber Hubert) as she floats through life, acting in a theatre production she doesn’t really feel and doing men she doesn’t either, until she unearths a series of letters to her disconnected adult self from her confident 13-year-old self (Maggie Brown). This specter, her own past, helps her find her way back (so to speak). Shelton has said she herself had a similar trajectory, a trajectory familiar to so many women, where she started out with all this bravado and, slowly, bit by bit — as she became a woman, as her body changed, as society encroached — she lost it. It reminds me of all those typewriters I got as a child, all the writing I knew I would do, until I suddenly felt not good enough to write, not smart enough, not allowed enough. When Shelton got some semblance of her confidence back, she was already 39. And it showed. Though she was skirting the edge of mumblecore, her films just felt more baked than the others on every level, from screenplay to soundtrack: more considered, less flip (less male?). They weren’t sentimental romances; the relationships were more complicated, the dialogue funnier. Her films weren’t self-serious, they were mature. They were about people making messes and then cleaning them up.It makes sense that in an industry that prefers men, Shelton’s third film, Humpday, about “two straight dudes, straight balling,” would be the one to get attention — it won the Special Jury Prize for Spirit of Independence at Sundance in 2009. As she herself says exasperatedly in the film, in which she plays a polyamorous boho den mother-type, “Boys. Fucking boys.” By that point, three years into the career she took so long to get to, Shelton had already settled on the formula that served her best, one that reflected the realism of life through the realism of her characters. She molded the movies to her muses, most of them men, from Mark Duplass (Humpday) to Josh Pais (Touchy Feely) to Jay Duplass (Outside, In). She limited the set to a small crew, cut down the takes, and shot with many of the same people (including musicians — do yourself a favor and listen to Tomo Nakayama’s “Horses” from Touchy Feely) in her drizzly home state of Washington, before sculpting it all in the editing suite. That she worked so organically, so modestly, from the place she grew up — not New York, not L.A., not some soundstage — was part of the whole thing. It wasn’t about careerism (repulsive), it was about her doing her best work. As for the money, if Shelton wasn’t funding her films through her own television work (she has said she only really felt like a pro after she directed Mad Men in 2010, while being named executive producer on Hulu’s Little Fires Everywhere last year was a whole new level of arrival) it was through grants and fundraisers, with the crew paid through a profit-sharing system. When no one was getting money, at the very least they were getting warm meals. As Shelton told Anthem magazine two years ago: “I want to create this emotionally safe environment as much as possible for [the actors] to take the risk of opening up their hearts and their faces and their eyes.” This is the opposite of how art is made now, where everything is about money — huge studios, huge budgets, huge concepts, huge stars. Mid-budget films, which thrived in the indie boom times of the nineties, the most formative films for me and for the last Gen-Xers, the ones that started to sputter in the aughts when Shelton came around, have virtually vanished. What passes for mid-budget now has no less than $10 million behind it and a marquee name slumming it for cred. The few earnest indie directors left, like The Rider’s Chloé  Zhao, are snapped up for superhero content — even Shelton was in early talks around Black Widow. I can’t imagine a Marvel movie by Shelton. I’m not sure I want to. But I would still see it. I would see it because she made it.Shelton’s plots were not high concept; they were barely plots at all. Which is just how I like it. I like my movies with nothing going on: just people living their lives. Maybe it’s my processing speed — even the simplest plot can be hard for me to follow — or maybe it’s being the kid of psychiatrists. Shelton always said she wasn’t the smartest person in the world, but she was fairly sure she had pretty high emotional intelligence. She was the daughter of a psychologist. Her interest was in tangled relationships, often with multiple family members involved, and the discomfort that emerges from within them. “I’ve always been that close observer of human behavior,” she told Slant last year. “I feel like the thing that makes humans human are their flaws.” The scene that touched me most in a marathon re-watch of Shelton’s eight films was in Touchy Feely — neither my favorite of her films nor the one featuring an actor I particularly like, which proves how skilled she was with performers. Ellen Page, playing Jenny, a sheltered, existentially morose twenty-something, sits on on a couch opposite her aunt’s oblivious boyfriend (played by handsome indie regular Scoot McNairy), staring at his lips, laughing tightly, nervously, her eyes bigger than the whole room. With no music, and just the two of them, side by side, quietly talking late at night in a dingy apartment, Jenny’s lust is so powerful it’s practically a third character, and her words, as though overflowing from her loins, come out almost despite her: “Have you ever wanted to kiss someone so badly that it hurts your skin?” Yes. Right now. This isn’t cinema, it’s a conduit for intimacy. Which maybe says more about me than I want it to. But I have a feeling this approach — slow, humane, in no way prescriptive or showy —  is what led so many critics to dismiss Shelton. That scene, and Shelton’s movies as whole, remind me of a quote from Before Sunrise, a movie made by a man, but as collaborative in spirit: “I believe if there’s any kind of God it wouldn’t be in any of us, not you or me but just this little space in between.”My favorite Lynn Shelton movie is Laggies. I’ve probably seen it ten times. It’s the story that gets me. Which is the same reason Shelton made it, the only movie she did not have a hand in writing (Andrea Seigel is the screenwriter). It’s about a 28-year-old woman (Keira Knightley) having a quarter-life crisis, a woman who in the end describes herself as a snake carrying around her dead skin — old life, old relationship, old friends. Until she can shed all of this (will she?) she is in “this weird in-between place,” eventually befriending a teenager (Chloë Grace Moretz) and falling for the kid’s dad (Sam Rockwell), who is not unlike her. “You know, I never anticipated still having to find a place where I fit in by the time I was an adult, either,” he says. “I thought you automatically got one once you had a job and a family. But it’s just you, alone.” God, yeah. You don’t see much of that on screen, the female midlife crisis, though you do see a lot of the male version. And that sucks. Shelton refers to it as floating, but to me, when I have experienced it, it feels more menacing — like you have no tether, like you’re one of those astronauts who becomes detached from that shuttle cord and disappears into the black. Shelton questioned whether she was selling out by making a movie someone else wrote, a glossier movie than usual, one starring real life celebrities. But she couldn’t resist the story in the end, a story that essentially defined her. “She doesn’t know what she wants to do but she knows what she doesn’t want to do, which is to fall in lockstep with this conventional timeline of what quote-unquote adults are supposed to do and that all of her friends around her are doing,” Shelton told The Georgia Straight in 2014. “I’ve tried to do things on my own terms and it took me 20 years to get to doing what I’m doing so I really relate to that prolonged journey of self-discovery.”* * *
“I’m sorry,” one of my best friends said when I told him Lynn Shelton had died. I’ve never had someone I know respond that way when someone I don’t has died. “I wouldn’t normally say that,” he explained, “but I know how you feel about Lynn Shelton.” It’s true that I didn’t know her, but I knew her films, and the two were inextricable. Just like her and Marc Maron, her creative partner and her partner in life. Maron was Shelton’s last muse. She made Sword of Trust for him, a film in which he plays Mel, a pawn shop dealer, who is brought a sword by a couple that supposedly proves the south won the Civil War, which they collectively sell to a pair of loony right-wing conspiracy theorists. Shelton appears as Mel’s ex, a woman with whom he fell into drug addiction and whom it is clear he still loves but can’t trust. But it’s Maron you can’t take your eyes off, maybe because it’s him Shelton can’t take her eyes off.  As he said on his podcast, “I was better in Lynn Shelton’s gaze.” Everything was. When Shelton was walking around, it meant that, despite how bad it was, the world was still a place where a woman could be an artist, a woman could be a woman, on her own terms. What Denis did for Shelton, she continued to do for me. I don’t want to think of what her death means for film, but I know for me, as a woman, as an artist, it makes the world a whole lot harder to bear.* * *Soraya Roberts is a culture columnist at Longreads.
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
History may have pigeonholed her as Renaissance Italy’s most notorious seductress, but it’s high time we give the Duchess of Ferrara a closer look.Anne Thériault | Longreads | May 2020 | 33 minutes (8,371 words)From the notorious to the half-forgotten, Queens of Infamy, a Longreads series by Anne Thériault, focuses on world-historical women of centuries past.If you love Queens of Infamy, consider becoming a Longreads member.* * *Mention the Medieval period and people free-associate themselves right into visions of plague, violence, and shit-covered peasants. The term “Renaissance,” on the other hand, conjures up stuff like humanism, science, and paintings of people that actually look like people. But late 14th-, 15th-, and 16th-century Italy consisted of more than just painters with Ninja Turtle names wanking their way from one Tuscan villa to another; it was also full of intrigue, murder, and complex intergenerational family drama. If there was one family that featured heavily in some of the most violent and licentious stories of the period, it was the Borgias — even today their name is a by-word for depravity. And at the center of many of the wildest Borgia stories was the beautiful, wily, thrice-wed Lucrezia.Looking for a Queens of Infamy t-shirt or tote bag? Choose yours here.People have called Lucrezia many things over the years: seductress, murderess, femme fatale of the Borgia cabal. The attributes assigned to her didn’t come out of nowhere; as we shall see — and as Lucrezia noted herself — many of the men around her came to unfortunate ends. In portrayals where she escapes the villainess role, she’s often made out to be another hapless aristocratic daughter traded off into various political marriages, someone with no agency or ambitions of her own. The reality, of course, is much more nuanced. While Lucrezia was indeed married off several times to further her family’s agenda, as an adult she proved herself to be a skilled ruler loved and respected by her subjects. LUCREZIA: women! we contain multitudesLUCREZIA: and not just in a constantly-pregnant, heir-providing wayLUCREZIA: although, let’s be real, I also did that at the same time I was doing everything elseLUCREZIA: among other things, women invented multitaskingThe Borgias — Borja in the dynasty’s hometown, Valencia — had shown up on the Roman scene in the early 15th century with Cardinal Alfonso de Borgia’s promotion to Pope Callixtus III in 1455. His election didn’t mean that he was particularly popular; the elites of the Italian city-states were notoriously hateful towards outsiders in general, and specifically loathed the fact that Borgia came from a former Moorish kingdom with a large Jewish population. Callixtus was chosen as a compromise candidate in a conclave divided by two powerful Roman families, and since he was an elderly foreigner, both factions assumed that a) they could manipulate him, and b) he would die soon. Even though Callixtus was pretty chill as far as Renaissance popes go, apparently even managing to remain chaste, he and his family were always viewed with suspicion. The Borgia family would go on to produce several popes, but their contemporaries would constantly deploy xenophobic and anti-Semitic slurs against them. This almost certainly contributed to the clannishness for which the Borgias became notorious (although Callixtus didn’t help matters by bringing a large contingent of Spaniards to the Vatican, including his nephew Rodrigo).After Callixtus’ death in 1458, the Italians swore up and down that they would never tolerate another foreign pope. “Never again” turned out to be less than 50 years, since in 1492 the College of Cardinals elected Rodrigo de Borgia to the church’s highest office. On August 26 of that year he rode through the lavishly decorated streets of Rome to claim the Throne of Saint Peter as Alexander VI.The fact that the name Lucretia was so strongly associated with an icon of feminine chastity would be the cause for much hilarity during Lucrezia’s lifetime, since she was often anything but.The first thing you need to know about Alexander is that women apparently found him extremely, irresistibly fuckable. “[He] moves them in a wondrous way, more powerfully than the magnet influences iron,” wrote a former tutor. He wasn’t the type to let a pesky vow of celibacy get in his way, and over the course of his lifetime, he fathered between eight and ten illegitimate children. His favorites — Giovanni, Cesare, and Lucrezia — were with a twice-married Italian woman named Vannozza Cattanei. She also had a fourth child, Gioffre, whom Alexander acknowledged as his own, although he had his doubts and never afforded him the same affection as the couple’s other three children (in fact, he accused her of cheating on him with her second husband, which is… a reach). As with so many of the other infamous women that I’ve written about in this series, the details of Lucrezia’s early life are hazy. But unlike, say, Eleanor of Aquitaine or Anne Boleyn, we do know the date and place of Lucrezia’s birth: April 18, 1480, in the fortress of Subiaco just outside of Rome. Her father placed her in the care of his relative Adriana de Mila at a young age; while Vannozza was fine as a mistress, he didn’t trust her in the business of raising his children. She was named after the Ancient Roman noblewoman Lucretia, who was said to have killed herself after being raped by Sextus Tarquinius, son of the last king of Rome. The fact that the name Lucretia was so strongly associated with an icon of feminine chastity would be the cause for much hilarity during Lucrezia’s lifetime, since she was often anything but. * * *Alexander was a loving and attentive father — a real Renaissance Daddy — and Lucrezia and her siblings were much, much closer to him than they were to Vannozza, who seemed content enough with the child-rearing arrangement and milked whatever money and social climbing she could from her position as mother of the Pope’s children. Although it might seem somewhat counterintuitive for the pope to have children — literal evidence of sins committed! — it was actually pretty common. Most popes preferred to help their offspring through back channels rather than publicly promote them, but Alexander was a man who couldn’t help flaunting what he had. Lucrezia was 12 when her father ascended to the papal throne, and at that point she came much more directly into the public eye. Lucrezia was a beautiful young woman, although, as contemporaries kept feeling the need to point out, not quite as lovely as her father’s new mistress, Giulia. Describing Lucrezia in her early 20s, Niccolò Cagnalo of Parma wrote that she was “of middle height and graceful in form.” He went on to praise her long golden hair, well-cut nose, and “admirably proportioned” bust, concluding that she was always “gay and smiling” — if he had only added that she had quirkily ordered a burger for lunch but only eaten the side salad, his letter would have read like a Vanity Fair celebrity profile. Her bearing was also striking, and she was said to carry herself in such a way that she barely seemed to move even as she crossed a room. (Gliding around like a nimble ghost was a big thing for Renaissance women.) The Borgias were a tightly-knit group (a bit too tight according to some of their frenemies). Feuds and shifting alliances were common for prominent Roman families, but when it came to the Borgias, it was them versus literally everyone else. They dealt with this isolation by surrounding themselves with their countrymen — the only people they felt they could trust — and by segregating themselves from everyone else, hosting private parties and speaking Valencian when they were together.Feuds and shifting alliances were common for prominent Roman families, but when it came to the Borgias, it was them versus literally everyone else.Like any loving father who also happens to be the Vicar of Christ on earth, Alexander had big plans for his kids. He made Giovanni the Duke of Gandía and promoted Cesare to the position of Bishop of Pamplona at the age of 15, grooming him for a life in the Church. He even managed to winkle a prestigious marriage for Gioffre: a young noblewoman named — wait for it — Sancia, pronounced san-chya (I see you, George R.R. Martin, flipping through the history of Europe like it’s a baby name book). When it came to Lucrezia, his plans were slightly more complicated. Her greatest value as a woman in Renaissance Italy lay in her ability to marry well, especially since her position as Vatican princess would last only as long as her father lived, but Alexander also recognized that she had talents that exceeded your basic snagging-a-rich-man-with-a-title needs.Kickstart your weekend reading by getting the week’s best Longreads delivered to your inbox every Friday afternoon.Sign upAt the age of 12, Lucrezia was already on betrothal number three; her first engagement had fallen through, and her father ended her second engagement when he became Pope and her prospects improved. The third time was the charm, and her engagement to Giovanni Sforza, the illegitimate son of a count, managed to stick. They were married on June 12, 1493, Lucrezia having just celebrated her 13th birthday. The Sforzas had been powerful allies of Alexander and had helped him secure the papal throne, and so he wanted to reward them. But, unfortunately for Giovanni, it was not a union built to last.ALEXANDER VI: I mean, I’m a pope who flagrantly has childrenALEXANDER VI: even Isabella of Castile told me to take it down a notchALEXANDER VI: obviously I have a, shall we sayALEXANDER VI: less than traditional approach to the sanctity of marriageLike everything else in her life, the collapse of Lucrezia’s first marriage was complex in both the political and personal arenas. But before we get to the juicy, a bit of backstory. Giovanni (Borgia, the brother, not Sforza, the husband), left Rome for Barcelona shortly after Lucrezia’s wedding, and Alexander made Cesare the Archbishop of Valencia. It’s not necessary to get into details here, but please know that the Borgia brothers were being fuckboys supreme while in Spain. Meanwhile, back on the Italian peninsula, the King of Naples, Ferdinand I, died and the pope supported Ferdinand’s son Alfonso’s claim to the throne instead of the much more specious claim of King Charles VIII of France. This ticked off Lucrezia’s husband Giovanni, whose family — the Sforzas — were the traditional enemies of the royal family of Naples, and he politely asked Alexander what on earth he was thinking. The pope responded by telling him even more politely to fuck off. It was the beginning of the end of poor Giovanni’s relationship with the Borgias. History has left us plenty of information about what Giovanni and Alexander thought about this turn of events, but not much about how Lucrezia viewed it. Her behavior suggested that she felt humiliated by the public unraveling of her relationship, but she was too much under her father’s thrall to push back. After all, she’d been taught from the cradle that her duties to the Borgia family always came first.Like any loving father who also happens to be the Vicar of Christ on earth, Alexander had big plans for his kids.But, back to Charles VIII for now. He decided that if the pope wasn’t going to give him Naples, then he was going to take it, along with whatever else stood in his path. His army rapidly made their way through the north of Italy, and on December 31, 1494, they entered Rome. Lucrezia was in Pesaro with her husband and Giulia, Giovanni was still in Barcelona, and 12-year-old Gioffre was in Naples, all of which meant that the only family the pope had nearby was Cesare. Luckily, both brought out the Borgia craftiness in spades.Alexander knew that Charles was a deeply religious man, and as the French entered the city, the pope proclaimed that if a single salvo was fired, he would mount the battlements himself and hold the Communion host above his head.CHARLES VIII: what was I supposed to do?CHARLES VIII: shoot at the Holy Sacrament?CHARLES VIII: I don’t know if you’ve ever heard of a little thing called transubstantiation, butCHARLES VIII: that little bread thing is literally Jesus’ bodyCHARLES VIII: anyway, I just couldn’tCHARLES VIII: so I went to some brothels instead, let my soldiers sack the cityCHARLES VIII: Christ-like, you know?When Charles finally met Alexander, the king flung himself at the pope’s feet. The two spent the next few weeks together, Alexander offering Charles advice and referring to him as his first-born son. Eventually they formed a pact of non-aggression that would allow the French safe passage through the Papal States, although Alexander refused to provide a firm answer on the question of Naples. Charles left Rome on January 28 with Cesare as a hostage, but the pope’s son sneaked back to Rome by disguising himself as a groom. When he found out that he’d been Borgia’d, Charles furiously declared that all Italians were dirty dogs and the pope was the dirtiest of them all. Charles took Naples in February of 1495, but a month later Alexander, along with the rulers of Venice, Milan, and the Holy Roman Empire, came together to form Team Fuck The French The League of Venice. Charles might not have been a brilliant strategist, but he was geographically savvy enough to know that, being in the south of Italy, he and his troops had to pass through the north — and The League — to get home. So he quickly peaced out of the peninsula, but not before he and his men bestowed the gift of syphilis upon Naples, where it would subsequently become known as the French disease. * * *The summer of 1496 was one long Borgia party. Lucrezia returned to Rome shortly after her father’s victory, Gioffre and Sancia made it back in May, and Giovanni joined the clan in August. 18-year-old Sancia allegedly began having an affair with either one or both of her husband’s brothers, probably because her 14-year-old husband wasn’t done with puberty yet. Sancia also became close friends with Lucrezia, and the two of them scandalized Rome by gossiping and giggling through boring sermons at St. Peter’s. Meanwhile, annulment plans were afoot.By early 1497, it was clear to everyone that the Borgias had collectively moved on from Lucrezia’s marriage, although their reasons were unclear. Was Alexander still angry that Giovanni Sforza had briefly stood up to him? Was he punishing him for the fact that the rest of the Sforza family had sided with the French against him? Had his recent military success convinced him that he could make a bigger and better match for this daughter? What we do know is that Giovanni left Rome — more like fled — at the end of March. He then began dropping hints that his in-laws had been making threats against him. Once again, it’s hard to know what (if any) role Lucrezia played in any of this; some people believe that she was the one who had warned Giovanni that Alexander and Cesare were out to get him, while others believe that she was in league with her family. Whatever the case was, the outcome was a separation.GIOVANNI SFORZA: and thenGIOVANNI SFORZA: and THENGIOVANNI SFORZA: the pope said he wanted to annul my marriageGIOVANNI SFORZA: on grounds of non-consummationGIOVANNI SFORZA: DUE TO IMPOTENCEGIOVANNI SFORZA: and I was like, bro, my penis works greatGIOVAANNI SFORZA: anyway, I told everybody that Alexander probably wanted his daughter for himselfGIOVANNI SFORZA: you know, incest-wise17-year-old Lucrezia had checked out of the situation and retreated to a convent. Some claimed she was angry with her father over the annulment, while others confirmed that she and Giovanni had parted on “unamicable terms.” No matter how you slice it, it was clear Lucrezia was tired of the men in her life engaging in nonstop histrionics.Less than two weeks after Lucrezia had ensconced herself in the walls of San Sisto, tragedy struck the Borgias. Giovanni Borgia disappeared after leaving a family dinner at his mother Vannozza’s house; his body turned up in the Tiber covered in stab wounds. Alexander was distraught at the loss of his favorite, and spent days shut in his room, weeping and refusing all food and drink. In a public statement given on June 19, he said that he would give up seven papacies if that could bring back his son. Rumors about the murderers’ identities flew around Rome. Was it a retaliatory move from Giovanni Sforza and his publicly maligned penis? Was it the Orsini family, who had an old vendetta against the Borgias? Was it, some whispered, Cesare, over the fact that he and Giovanni were allegedly competing for Sancia’s attention? The mystery deepened when, after just a week, all inquiries were suspended.You can’t keep a good pope down for long, though, and within a month a grieving Alexander was scheming about Lucrezia’s next marriage. This one was going to be even bigger and better than the first, the prospective groom being Alfonso of Aragon, the illegitimate son of the now-abdicated King of Naples (and brother to Lucrezia’s old pal, Sancia). Lucrezia wasn’t the only papal child with new prospects; with the once-promising Giovanni dead, Alexander decided to pull Cesare, whom he’d made a cardinal, out of the Church and set him on a more secular path to power. This was fine with Cesare, who had inherited all of his father’s libertine qualities and none of his religious devotion.In the midst of all the chaos around her, Lucrezia proved to be a competent leader and administrator, a role she would come to relish later in life.In the middle of this hullabaloo, a wild infant Borgia appeared. Where did he come from? Whose child was he? Although the papal family acknowledged that the baby belonged to their ranks, none of them would disclose who the actual parents were. Rome, already awash with conspiracy theories about Giovanni’s death and Lucrezia’s annulment, buzzed with even greater fervor. The fact that Lucrezia had just spent several months out of the public eye did nothing to help the situation; it was rumored that the baby was hers by Giovanni Sforza, or hers by a chamberlain in Alexander’s household (a man named Pedro Calderon, whose body had also recently turned up in the Tiber). Some suggested that Cesare, or even the pope himself, had conceived the child with Lucrezia. Three years later Alexander would issue two separate bulls naming first Cesare and then himself as the boy’s father — a mother was never named — but for a while the baby was known only as the Infans Romanus (the child of Rome), adding yet another layer of dysfunction to Italy’s holiest family.Lucrezia and Alfonso were married in the summer of 1498 in a sumptuous nuptial mass. The bride’s robe was made of golden brocade with crimson velvet; her sleeves and belt were studded with jewels, and she wore a rope of pearls around her neck. The bridegroom chose a semi-matching outfit of black brocade lined with crimson silk, and a cap topped with a brooch that his new wife had given him, featuring a unicorn and a cherub. After the ceremony, everyone feasted at the palazzo until, at Alexander’s signal, the group was escorted to a hall in the Vatican, where the real party began. At first it was pretty standard wedding stuff: drinking, dancing, gift-giving, more feasting. Later, a select few made their way to the Borgia apartments within the Vatican, where Cesare had organized a set of amusing tableaux, one of which involved him dressing as a unicorn with poor Gioffre relegated to the role of a sea-goose. The dancing and drinking continued until dawn, when a light meal was served and everybody went to bed. The festivities ended a week later with a lavish bullfight given in the couple’s honor.LUCREZIA: if you think this is the height of obscene Borgia parties, wait til you hear about the Banquet of the ChestnutsLUCREZIA: it allegedly involved 50 courtesans crawling around nakedLUCREZIA: and prizes for the guests who had the most sex with the courtesansLUCREZIA: while my father and I watchedLUCREZIA: I mean, it probably never happened but, you knowLUCREZIA: allegedlyNot long after, Cesare officially resigned from his ecclesiastical role and set off to France, where he was determined to woo Alfonso’s cousin Carlotta. She presented the opportunity for a choice alliance, since her father had become the King of Naples when Alfonso’s father had abdicated during Charles VIII’s occupation (Neapolitan politics had hardly become less complicated since Joanna of Naples’ time a century earlier). His departure was so disgustingly splendid that jewels, precious metals, and other finery had to be imported from Venice — all the recent Borgia celebrations had put a dint in the Roman supply of luxury goods. Unfortunately, Carlotta was not impressed by Cesare, and in the summer of 1499 he wound up marrying Charlotte D’Albret, sister to the King of Navarre. Louis XII, the new King of France, wrote to tell Alexander in awed tones that the couple had sex eight times on their wedding day (twice before supper, and six times at night), which was four more times than he had managed on his special day. Unsurprisingly, Alfonso and Sancia were not impressed that Cesare was associating with their enemies instead of marrying their cousin, an alliance which they’d hoped would strengthen both Rome’s support of Naples and their own position in Alexander’s family. They were even less impressed when Louis accompanied Cesare on his return to Italy, apparently intent on picking up where Charles had left off. Alfonso, fearing for his safety, fled Rome, leaving behind Lucrezia, who was six months into her second pregnancy of the year after suffering a miscarriage in February. He wrote to Lucrezia asking her to join him in Naples, but Alexander forced her to refuse. Instead of allowing his daughter to be with her husband, the pope appointed her Governor of Spoleto, a position usually held by a cardinal. In the midst of all the chaos around her, Lucrezia proved to be a competent leader and administrator, a role she would come to relish later in life.Eventually Alfonso joined Lucrezia in Spoleto, and together they travelled to the fortress of Nepi, which Alexander had also put under her control. Meanwhile, King Louis and Cesare were riding across Italy, snapping up territories here and there; the pope did his part by relieving several lords of their states with the excuse that they were behind on their taxes. The Borgias had officially begun their long-anticipated conquest of the peninsula. GIOVANNI SFORZA: it’s interesting how the Borgias were against the French until Cesare realized they could help fulfil his expansionist fantasiesGIOVANNI SFORZA: very interestingGIOVANNI SFORZA: in conclusion, I’m still not impotent, from beforeGIOVANNI SFORZA: I actually have an aura of potency, people tell me that all the timeGIOVANNI SFORZA: strangers see me on the street and say, there goes a potent manGIOVANNI SFORZA: I bet his dick works great, they say, and they’re correctGIOVANNI SFORZA: no, my divorce isn’t eating me up inside, why do you ask?Lucrezia gave birth to a son, Rodrigo, on November 1, 1499. For a brief moment, it must have seemed to Lucrezia as if everything was going to be alright, with her father, brother, and husband united in their joy at the arrival of a son and heir. But as the new century dawned, Cesare drew Rome and his family deeper into chaos.First, he and Louis took Milan. Then they set their sights on Naples. Louis, like his cousin Charles VIII before him, had a legitimate(ish) claim to those lands, but taking them meant unseating two powerful families — the Sforza, to which Lucrezia’s first husband belonged, and the Aragons of Naples, family of her current husband and sister-in-law. Needless to say, Alfonso and Sancia were furious over what was happening, and neither was subtle about their feelings. If Lucrezia had any thoughts on the matter, she prudently kept them to herself. More than anyone, she understood the importance of staying out of her father and brother’s way.For a brief moment, it must have seemed to Lucrezia as if everything was going to be alright, with her father, brother, and husband united in their joy at the arrival of a son and heir.On July 15, 1500, Alfonso was attacked on the steps of St. Peter’s by four heavily armed men. He barely survived, and had to be carried back to the Vatican. By all accounts, Alexander was shocked and dismayed, and had his son-in-law installed in apartments above his own, where Lucrezia and Sancia could care for him around the clock. Lucrezia was terrified that another attempt on her husband’s life would follow, and she insisted that he only eat meals that she had prepared for him and be treated by no one other than his personal physician from Naples.Alas, her efforts were in vain. On August 18, Alfonso, Sancia, and Lucrezia were enjoying a visit from his uncle when Cesare’s chief assassin, Micheletto, burst into the room with his men. The intruders managed to get everyone but Alfonso out of the room under a false but urgent-seeming pretext, and then Cesare’s so-called ministro tristissimo strangled the young duke in his bed. When the pope’s daughter and her sister-in-law returned to Alfonso’s rooms and found his corpse, their screams filled the halls of the Vatican. Alexander was distraught as well at first, but Cesare eventually convinced him of the necessity of the murder. Alfonso had, he said, tried to shoot him with a crossbow in the garden, so really, it was an act of defense. As improbable as the story was, the pope accepted it; the alternative was to believe that his most cherished and ambitious son was a monster. Lucrezia, though, was furious. Just a few weeks after her husband’s death, Alexander packed her off to their castle in the nearby town of Nepi, apparently irritated by her obvious grieving and worried that it would further stain his son’s reputation. Rumors of incest sprang up (again), this time asserting that Cesare had killed Lucrezia’s husband out of jealousy. Some even speculated that Lucrezia had been in on the crime. Meanwhile, the always forward-thinking Alexander began to plot a third marriage for his 20-year-old daughter.* * *Just as she had after the end of her first marriage, Lucrezia went into a complete retreat after Alfonso’s murder. She remained in Nepi for several months, writing letters signed “the most unhappy princess of salerno [sic],” which was the title she’d acquired through her marriage to Alfonso.  She ordered oodles of black clothing and furnishings for her mourning and requested masses to be said for her dead husband’s soul. When Alexander began talking of another marriage, Lucrezia balked. The pope asked her why she didn’t want to marry again, and she replied acidly, “Because my husbands have been very unlucky.” Still, she eventually agreed to wed Alfonso d’Este, the son and heir of the Duke of Ferrara. (It’s kind of weird to marry someone with the same first name as your former partner, but if Ben Affleck could make it work, so can anyone else.) This match was even more advantageous than Lucrezia’s first two marriages, and if she was understandably reluctant, there was also a part of her that must have been eager to escape her father and brother’s poisonous clutches. Before, she had willingly participated in her family’s shenanigans, but now she saw the necessity of asserting her own will.LUCREZIA: I mean, as much as one can assert one’s own will against the literal popeLUCREZIA: the temporal and spiritual leader, direct line to God, etcLUCREZIA: but, you know, I’d learned a thing or two from him during our years togetherLUCREZIA: one was that you can never have too many jewelsLUCREZIA: another was how to work a situation to your advantageAlfonso d’Este was a bit of an odd duck. His main passions in life were artillery, pottery, and brothels. His first wife, yet another Sforza, had died in childbirth, not that he cared much. Their relationship had been marked by deep mutual disinterest, which allowed him to look the other way when she began dressing as a man and sleeping with women. According to at least one source, Alfonso liked to march naked through the streets of Ferrara, a sword in one hand and his penis clutched in the other. You know, normal Renaissance stuff! Lucrezia’s third husband was a jumble of eccentricities, but, somehow, he would prove to be a good match for her.An escort from Ferrara arrived in Rome in the fall of 1501, and we know exactly what Lucrezia wore to meet it because her future sister-in-law, Isabella d’Este, had sent a spy among the retinue. He wrote that the bride-to-be was dressed in a mulberry gown banded with gold under a gold jacket lined with sable, a necklace of rubies and pearls, and a gem-encrusted snood. He also reported that Lucrezia was graceful and beautiful and a good Christian, much to Isabella’s dismay. The proxy marriage took place on December 30 and just over a week later, Lucrezia set out for Ferrara with a large retinue. She had agreed to leave her 2-year-old son Rodrigo behind, and her parting from him must have been wrenching. Had she been a man, she most likely would have been able to bring him along, but as things stood, the Borgias wanted her to seem  unencumbered by her dicey romantic past. Of course, the double-edged reality of womanhood meant that although she had been counseled to leave her son behind, the fact that she did so would be used for many years after her death as evidence that she was monstrously unmaternal. But she stayed as involved in his care as possible, sending him letters and gifts and arranging his education. She was distraught when he died at the age of 12 from a fever; in typical Lucrezia fashion, she retreated to a convent for a month to grieve in private.Wedding no. 3 was yet another lavish affair.The journey to Ferrara, way up in the north of the boot, was long and made longer still by Lucrezia’s frequent requests to stop and wash her hair. Her blond curls reached all the way to her knees and cleansing them — which she did every three days with a boiled mixture of vine stock ashes, myrrh, scrapings of horses’ hooves, and other assorted ingredients — was a time-consuming enterprise. “She [keeps] always to her room, to wash her hair but also because she is rather solitary and remote by nature,” wrote one envoy. Was she anxious about meeting her new husband? Or was she just exercising what little control she could muster over the situation? Alfonso d’Este surprised her by meeting the convoy in the city of Bologna, bursting into his bride’s room while she was combing her damp hair, barely dressed in a muslin gown. This romantic gesture delighted Lucrezia, and the bridegroom, for his part, was surprised by his immediate attraction to his new wife. He had never had much interest in his first one, and hadn’t remotely expected to fall into deep smit with his second. The two traveled on to Malalbergo where they met Isabella d’Este, whose jealousy only deepened upon meeting her new sister-in-law. It probably didn’t help that Isabella’s own marriage to Francesco Gonzaga was an unhappy one; her main interests in life were collecting art and meddling in the lives of those around her. They arrived in Ferrara together, where Duke Ercole d’Este met them with great fanfare.Wedding no. 3 was yet another lavish affair. Alfonso wore a tunic of gray velvet covered in beaten gold scales, a black velvet cap, and gray calfskin boots. Lucrezia wore an ermine-lined robe made of violet satin and cloth of gold; she had a diamond and ruby necklace and a headdress bedecked with still more diamonds, plus sapphires and other precious stones. The procession wound through the city to the piazza, where an acrobatic display had been arranged. Later, the happy couple retired to specially-prepared bridal apartments where, Isabella’s spy reported to her, they thrice boned. The remainder of Isabella’s letters home detail her disdain: Lucrezia slept in every morning, the plays and mock-battles arranged for the wedding were boring, the balls were too crowded to actually dance. “Your Lordship should not envy me for your not being here at this marriage because it is of such a coldness that I envy anyone who remained in Mantua,” she concluded one letter.Machiavelli, who just happened to be on the scene, was suitably impressed; Cesare would serve as a major inspiration for The Prince, a classic on the art of political scheming.Much to Isabella’s chagrin, the rest of the Este family adored Lucrezia. Ercole, who was a bit of an eccentric himself (he collected famous nuns, which were a bit of a tourist attraction at the time, and placed them in local convents), was almost as thrilled about her as his son. Alfonso d’Este’s brothers Ferrante and Ippolito were also charmed by their new sister-in-law. When Lucrezia became ill during the first pregnancy of her third marriage, it was Ferrante who accompanied her to the Este country estate at Belriguardo so that she could rest and get some fresh air. Lucrezia’s illness continued throughout her pregnancy and, indeed, would affect her during all of her subsequent pregnancies. It’s not clear if it was a pregnancy-related disorder like preeclampsia or HELLP syndrome, or had to do with the fact that her husband likely had syphilis — the epidemiological effects of Charles VIII’s invasion were still rippling across Italy. She was further stressed by the behavior of her brother Cesare, who captured Urbino in June 1502; not only was her family’s continued warmongering upsetting for Lucrezia, but the Duke and Duchess of Urbino had become her friends after giving her a warm reception on her trek to Ferrara. Her condition continued to deteriorate over the summer, and by the end of July she was suffering from a fever and having seizures. LUCREZIA: meanwhile Cesare wrote me a letter being likeLUCREZIA: “I know what will make you feel better, I’m about to invade Camerino!”LUCREZIA: surprise, him being back on his bullshit didn’t fix my pregnancy problemsLUCREZIA: the things men know about women could fill a very small paragraph in a very small bookLucrezia had returned to Ferrara at this point, and Alfonso slept in the room next to her and attended to her at every meal. But even with his thoughtful care she continued to decline until, on September 5, she suffered a seizure so severe that she went into preterm labor and delivered a stillborn daughter. Cesare rushed to his sister’s side and spent a day with her; she seemed to rally under his attention and even laughed at one of his jokes while her doctors bled her. Then, on September 13, she became so ill that when she tried to feel her own pulse, she couldn’t find it, exclaiming, “Oh good, I am dead!”* * *If Cesare’s visit to Lucrezia seems strangely brief, that was because he was hatching yet another scheme. He had his eye on Bologna, but several of his own followers — including members of the Orsini family — began plotting to bring him down. Hey, remember the Orsini? The ones who were suspected of orchestrating Giovanni Borgia’s murder? Alexander sure did, and when he and Cesare learned of their treachery, they began counter-plotting. Cesare and Micheletto did the dirty work of strangling the main conspirators, while Alexander arrested and incarcerated a bunch of lesser Orsini, including the Archbishop of Florence. Machiavelli, who just happened to be on the scene, was suitably impressed; Cesare would serve as a major inspiration for The Prince, a classic on the art of political scheming.As Cesare’s powers waxed, Lucrezia embarked on an affair with a poet named Pietro Bembo (who would later multitask to become a linguist and a cardinal). Alfonso d’Este was still regularly visiting brothels, so he wasn’t exactly being a paragon of fidelity, and everyone knows that poets are irresistible (if often terrible). As much as Lucrezia was fond of her husband, his earthy ways weren’t exactly to her taste, and she missed the highfalutin artistic and philosophical circles she’d moved in at her father’s court. We’ve all been through our own “dating an artist” phase; we get it. (Speaking of bad artist boyfriends, the letters between Lucrezia and Bembo would one day drive Lord Byron into a horny frenzy, leading him to steal a lock of her hair from the archives in Milan. Oh, Byron!)Hundreds of people died each day from disease and hunger, while the ruling class fled to their country estates.In the summer of 1503, while illicit romantic tensions were mounting in Ferrara, catastrophe struck. On August 11, Alexander celebrated the 11th anniversary of his ascension to the papal throne; on August 12, he and Cesare both came down with an illness that caused vomiting and frighteningly high fevers. For a while it seemed as if the pope was recovering while his son got worse, but then things took a turn. Pope Alexander VI died on the evening of August 18; some said his last words were “I come; it is right; wait a moment.” The funeral was an objective fiasco, with the August heat bloating and putrefying Alexander’s body to the point where it could no longer fit in his coffin — attendants had to roll it up in a carpet and shove it into the narrow box. When Cesare learned of his father’s death, he knew his status was about to take a nosedive. Still recovering from his illness and barely able to stand, he sent his troops in to control the new conclave, forcing the election of a man he knew would support him. Unfortunately for Cesare, Pope Pius III would have one of the shortest pontificates in history — just 26 days.Lucrezia was once more undone by her grief, but, given her family’s ongoing expansionist activities and general treachery, she wasn’t likely to find a sympathetic ear in Ferrara. Bembo counselled her to hide her mourning and display her famous aloofness, writing, “this is not the first blow which you have suffered at the hands of your cruel and malevolent destiny. Indeed your spirit ought to be inured to shocks of fate, so many and so bitter have you already suffered.” LUCREZIA: things went downhill from thereLUCREZIA: after Pius, my father’s mortal enemy Giuliano della Rovere was elected popeLUCREZIA: and then I had another miscarriageLUCREZIA: then Cesare was captured and imprisonedLUCREZIA: luckily, through it all I was surrounded by emotionally supportive menLUCREZIA: hahaha omg obviously I am kiddingLUCREZIA: the men in this story are many things, but “emotionally supportive” is not one of themIn the middle of this personal and geopolitical rollercoaster, Lucrezia began another affair, this time with her brother-in-law Francesco Gonzaga. That’s right, Isabella’s husband, a man so wanton with his favors that a large number of children in Mantua bore a striking resemblance to him. Listen, we all make choices in this life! Speaking of life, Lucrezia’s was about to be turned upside down once again. Duke Ercole d’Este died on January 25, 1505, making Alfonso the new Duke of Ferrara. Lucrezia became pregnant once again, and must have felt that her spot was nearly secure: she had the title of Duchess and was hopefully carrying the Duke’s heir, all in spite of her family’s downfall. But if any year proved to be Lucrezia’s annus horribilis, this was it. Cesare, whose situation caused her great anguish, tried to escape from prison, only to be caught and sent to a better-fortified stronghold. The newly-minted duchess began a letter-writing campaign to free him, appealing to anyone and everyone she could think of. Then, as the weather warmed, an outbreak of the plague hit Ferrara, followed by a drought that spoiled the crops. Hundreds of people died each day from disease and hunger, while the ruling class fled to their country estates. Lucrezia was ill too — although it’s not clear if it was the plague, or pregnancy-related, or something else — but as the brutal season wore on she continued her borderline delusional campaign to secure her brother’s freedom. She even grew desperate enough to ask the new pope, Julius II, to release Cesare.JULIUS II: lolJULIUS II: just… lolJULIUS II: one might even say, lmaoShortly after this botched attempt, Lucrezia suffered another one of those “shocks of fate” that Bembo had described: after giving birth to a sickly son on September 19, her legs went numb and she was once again struck by a fever. Hoping that her baby might channel some of her father’s strength, she named him Alexander. But the newborn struggled to eat and, less than a month later, died. It was one more blow to Lucrezia’s emotional well-being. LUCREZIA: meanwhile, trouble was brewing amongst my brothers-in-lawLUCREZIA: I’m not really going to get into it here, but it started with a fight over a musicianLUCREZIA: then turned into a fight over my slutty cousin AngelaLUCREZIA: then one of them stabbed the other in the eyesLUCREZIA: then it somehow devolved into a plot to assassinate my husbandLUCREZIA: men call women dramatic, but really?LUCREZIA: every single man in my life has been like thisIn early 1507, Lucrezia miscarried yet again; this time Alfonso d’Este blamed her for carousing too much during carnival season. Two months later, Cesare, who had escaped prison once again in late 1506, was betrayed, stabbed, then stripped and left to die alone. Lucrezia, who only learned of his death a month after it happened, was distraught, wailing, “The more I try to please God, the more he tries me.” She shut herself away from the world once again, not knowing how else to cope with this fresh loss. Although Cesare and their father had manipulated her, used her to promote their own agenda, and (likely) killed her beloved second husband, they remained the two people to whom she felt the closest in the world. The bonds of abuse and trauma are strange things; while Lucrezia came to question how they had treated her, she still believed them when they swore that it was the Borgias versus the world. Now there was nobody left on her side.* * *Lucrezia became pregnant once again in the summer of 1507, and on April 4, 1508 gave birth to a healthy son who, according to Isabella D’Este’s spy, had “a most beautiful mouth but a little snub nose and eyes [which were] not very dark nor very large.” The boy was christened Ercole after Alfonso d’Este’s father, but even his birth didn’t fully pull Lucrezia out of her spiral. She wrote flagrant letters to Francesco Gonzaga, which she knew would infuriate her husband if he ever intercepted them. She was long past the point of caring, and begged her lover/brother-in-law to visit her. He refused on the grounds that his syphilis was flaring, which may or may not have been a convenient excuse. The Italian Wars that Charles VIII had begun 15 years earlier were still ongoing, and Alfonso was absent from the end of 1509 until 1512. Lucrezia remained in Ferrara and once again flexed the muscles of leadership and administration that she’d first begun exercising all those years ago in Spoleto. Alfonso, meanwhile, proved to be an able soldier and tactician. Together, Lucrezia and Alfonso were a real, if unlikely, Renaissance Dream Team. LUCREZIA: again, I don’t want to get into it, but we switched over to Louis XII’s side LUCREZIA: and Julius II had some big feelings about thatLUCREZIA: he excommunicated us and tried to capture FerraraLUCREZIA: it was a whole thingAlfonso managed to get his hands on a statue of Julius that Michelangelo had made, which he promptly melted down and forged into a cannon he called La Giulia — all except for the head, which he stuck on a pike. The fighting was near-constant, and both sides suffered heavy casualties. In the midst of all this, Lucrezia gave birth to another son, named Ippolito after his cardinal uncle. The war dragged on until Easter Sunday 1512, when a decisive battle took place outside Ravenna, at which an estimated 10,000 men were killed. It was a significant win for Alfonso d’Este, whose innovative approach to artillery carried the day.ALFONSO: see??ALFONSO: all those weird hobbies were worth itALFONSO: and during the war, when we had to sell all our fancy silver plates?ALFONSO: that’s right, we ate off my potteryALFONSO: the brothel visits were probably also good for something, although I’m not sure what yetThe Duke’s re-entry into his city was a splendid victory parade, and Lucrezia was waiting for him at the Castello. Three months later Alfonso d’Este travelled to Rome, where Julius gritted his teeth and gave him absolution. Secretly, though, the pope was still determined to take Ferrara by hook or by crook (or, technically speaking, by ferula). Alas for him, he died on February 21, 1513, before any of his plots could come to fruition. Lucrezia and the Este family had won, and it was a victory that would shape the papacy for years to come: among those they took prisoner during the Battle of Ravenna was Cardinal Giovanni de’ Medici, the man who would soon be Leo X — as well as great-uncle to noted serpent queen Catherine de’ Medici. Soon enough he would begin orchestrating his own Borgia-like schemes, making the Medici name at least as infamous (if not more).Together, Lucrezia and Alfonso were a real, if unlikely, Renaissance Dream Team.In spite of her various indiscretions, Lucrezia had always had a pious bent — even after leaving Rome she would retreat to convents during difficult periods — and as she got older, she became even more devout. Her personal losses certainly played a big part in this progression; not only had she lost her father and brother, but Rodrigo, her son with the ill-fated first Alfonso, had died in 1512. In 1514, she gave birth to another son named after her father, but he died in 1516. She also gave birth to a healthy daughter in 1515, and another healthy son in 1516. Each pregnancy and birth was physically difficult, and it’s hard to imagine how worn out she must have been from, well, everything.LUCREZIA: as an aside, I would just like to note that I named my youngest son FrancescoLUCREZIA: that’s right, as in GonzagaLUCREZIA: we were still kind of an itemLUCREZIA: it’s called misdirection, look it upShortly after little Francesco d’Este’s birth, Lucrezia received word that her brother Gioffre had died. Her mother Vannozza died in 1518. Lucrezia had never been particularly close to either of them — in fact, her main communication with her mother involved the latter constantly writing to ask her for money — but these deaths meant that she had now lost both her parents and all of her siblings. Vannozza being Vannozza, she had organized her own lavish funeral and had arranged to put all of her children’s names and titles on her tombstone, even though she had maintained almost no relationship with any of them (other than Cesare) since they were young children. It’s hard not to respect a baller move like that.1518 was also the year Alfonso d’Este was summoned by the French king to attend a rapprochement between the French and English crowns. During his absence, Lucrezia, who was in the early months of  yet another pregnancy, was left to govern Ferrara in her own name. Once again she did a superlative job. She and her husband had developed a powerful mutual admiration — by this point her relationship with Francesco Gonzaga was a thing of the past — and discovered that their strengths and talents complemented each other. When Alfonso d’Este returned home in early 1519, he went straight to Lucrezia’s chambers.* * *This final pregnancy was another difficult one. By June, Lucrezia was barely able to eat, and soon doctors decided to induce labor to save her life. They broke her water, and on June 14 she gave birth to a daughter so weak that Alfonso d’Este rushed to have her baptized; as was predicted, tiny Isabella Maria did not survive. At first Lucrezia seemed to improve, but on June 20 her health went into steep decline. She began to have seizures again and blood poured from her nose. The doctors cut off her hair and bled her, but she continued to worsen, losing the ability to see and speak. On June 22 she rallied, and those around her hoped she might make a full recovery, but Lucrezia knew the end was near. She dictated a letter to Pope Leo X asking him to pray for her. Two days later the seizures started again and that night, just two months after her 39th birthday, she died.Alfonso d’Este had barely left Lucrezia’s side during her illness, and was inconsolable after her death. In a letter written shortly after, he described her as a “sweet, dear companion” and spoke of “the tender love there was between us.” In another he said that he was left “in the greatest imaginable anguish.” What began as a political match had turned into a loving marriage, and he could not imagine life without her.How can we view female leaders as being fully human when we’ve spent so long fudging the history of powerful women to suit misogynist agendas?Lucrezia is a rare case of a historical woman who was, against all odds, actually appreciated in her lifetime; her father, brothers, and husband all recognized her intelligence, administrative skills, and political acumen and, rather than being intimidated by those traits, allowed her to use them. Her story has been twisted into that of an incestuous man-eater who dabbled in murder, but when we look at (relatively) unbiased sources, there’s no evidence that any of this is true. Many readers suggested that I write about Lucrezia when I first began this series, but for a long time I resisted covering her. My reasoning was pedantic: she wasn’t a queen (even if she was sort of a Vatican princess), and if I expanded my self-created rules then all would soon descend into chaos. But beneath that was another worry: there was too much scandal in Lucrezia’s story and not enough humanity. Like so many others before me, I let her reputation precede her and took it at face value. I should have known better. The way that historians and contemporary observers have twisted Lucrezia’s story over the years tells us a lot about how the Western world views women and power. We’re equally entranced by and terrified of the women who wield it, and those feelings — not the facts — shape their narratives to fit our beliefs. Sometimes this means creating sanitized versions of their lives in which they are indisputably virtuous heroines, but more often, as in Lucrezia’s case, it means arranging facts and rumors into the worst possible interpretation. This does an obvious disservice to the subjects of these biographies, but it also has a larger impact on contemporary politics. How can we view female leaders as being fully human when we’ve spent so long fudging the history of powerful women to suit misogynist agendas? Re-evaluating the stories of scandalous women from history is one place to start.Long live Lucrezia! Long live the fucking duchess! * * *For further reading on Lucrezia:* * *Previously:* * *Anne Thériault is a Toronto-based writer whose bylines can be found all over the internet, including at the Guardian, the London Review of Books and, obviously, Longreads. She truly believes that your favourite Tudor wife says more about you than your astrological sign. She is currently raising one child and three unruly cats. You can find her on Twitter @anne_theriault.Editor: Ben Huberman
Illustrator: Louise Pomeroy
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
Edging, or extending the time leading up to an orgasm, is almost a character of its own in Normal People, Run, and Portrait of a Lady on Fire. It also has a lot to teach us about sexuality and consent.Soraya Roberts | Longreads | May 2020 | 10 minutes (2,500 words)Isolation is horny as fuck. Not for everyone, obviously, but if you’re single and you live alone. . . I mean, I have never thought this much about sex in my life. Not even in high school. Although this does kind of feel like high school: snacking, jerking off, sort-of working, snacking, jerking off. Or maybe we’re regressing to a point in history when we were exclusively driven by our basest instincts: horny, hungry, trying not to die. In between we binge-stream. And through this fogged up lockdown-induced lens, the horniness of what we are watching is compounded by our own.Normal People is the big one. The Hulu adaptation of Sally Rooney’s critically felated millennial romance is softcore for hipsters: an outcast girl and a sensitive jock, both of them equally brilliant (of course), having some messy, bildungsroman-style sex over the years (to Imogen Heap, in Malick-ian light) like that’s all the world is. The sex is hot, but everything that happens right before it is hotter. All that staring, all that sizzle — by the time they actually do it, it’s almost an afterthought. Almost. The same goes for Run, the HBO series by Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s creative partner, Vicky Jones, about two ex-lovers fleeing their lives to the kind of loin-tingling wit that got us through the Hays Code. Here, once again, the foreplay is the sex. Then there’s Portrait of a Lady on Fire, the French period piece in which two women, with their eyes alone, strip, fuck, and share a cigarette before they physically do all three.This is the kind of hot — leg-crossing, side-eying — where you don’t have to say it out loud, you feel it. The kind of hot spun by women from Europe, where sex doesn’t have the same moral implications it does in America. But more than that, it’s a hotness related to a wider move toward women reclaiming their own stories, their own sex. We all know by now that sex under the male gaze tends to objectify women — hotness, in the hands of men, is predominantly naked women getting fucked. Permission is neither here nor there. Under the female gaze, sure, naked women get fucked too, but there’s also enthusiastic consent. Great sex is not orgasm upon orgasm so much as agreement upon agreement, through looks and gestures and breaths and talk — the personification of ongoing accord, no permission slips or questions necessary. The point being that sex isn’t sexy unless it’s between people, not just their bodies; people who change their minds as well as their positions. In isolation, where you have nothing to do but wait for it, it only makes you hotter to watch not only the physical restraint and psychological tease, but every move, every look, every word that says “Yes!” before it’s screamed aloud.* * *I have no idea where or when I first heard the term “edging,” but I think it was a couple of years ago. I recall being told that it came from teenagers who used it to describe holding off orgasm deliberately to make it that much stronger in the end, a kind of pleasure binge that seemed to fit that generation (if everything sucks, might as well overdose on suckage). Which is not to say that climax control is new; it goes back to Tantric and Taoist traditions, where it’s less about splooging as hard as you can and more about a kind of physical transcendence. But the idea of mindful sex, of really feeling everything — together — instead of just trying to get yourself off as quickly as possible, didn’t really hit conservative America until the sixties. Masters of Sex reintroduced us to William Masters and Virginia Johnson, the couple responsible for the huge human sexuality study published in 1966 that identified the four-stage sex response: excitement (arousal), plateau (pre-orgasm), orgasm, resolution (post-orgasm). Of course, it turned out that cycle was generally reserved for men, while women across the country were left dissatisfied (and often pregnant). But the sixties and seventies brought heightened awareness of women’s rights along with heightened awareness of sexuality.Enter edging. “Understanding this new kind of orgasm can be especially difficult for men. When it comes to pleasure, women are the first in line.” This comes from the worryingly titled Extended Massive Orgasm by Vera and Steve Bodansky, a 2002 addition to a slew of slow masturbation and one-hour-orgasm how-to books, all of which fall under the rubric of edging. The Bodanskys emphasize being fully present — fully engaged with yourself and your partner — and aware that the mechanics of sex are not the sole source of pleasure. A human being has a psychological as well as a physical self, and sex also has both elements; eye contact, verbalizing, variations in touch, and breathing responsively aren’t requirements for ejaculation, but they definitely make it more agreeable. Which is why the Bodansky book, somewhat patronizingly, addresses men the way it does. Because sex has been generally dictated by men, it has generally served them and them alone. Putting women first doesn’t mean men are neglected, it means women aren’t.But Hollywood is still predominantly run by men and men predominantly run it the old way when it comes to heat (erotic thrillers were a brief light at the end of the tunnel, but then the tunnel just kept going). Think of Game of Thrones or anything on Starz: what passes for hot, once again, is conventionally beautiful women with no clothes on being bent over. The physical part may be there, but the psychological part, not to mention the consent, is not. Which is why reality series like Too Hot to Handle (contestants win by not touching) and Love Is Blind (contestants get together before seeing each other) are not particularly orgasmic, though they are positioned as the perfect pandemic watch. The payoff of edging requires real chemistry and it helps to have some real stakes thrown in. Which is not to say it can’t be fictional. There are nine sex scenes in Normal People. Actually, there are more than nine, but there are nine between the two superficially polar-opposite teens we follow from high school to college. (There are only 12 episodes). Try finding a story about Normal People that doesn’t mention its horniness. You can’t; horniness defines it. Obviously, being particularly susceptible in lockdown to anything related to the possibility of sex has affected how we respond to it, but this is also the kind of hotness that transcends pandemics. Let me explain, with Connell and his little chain.Connell (Paul Mescal) isn’t just hot because he looks like an animated version of Michelangelo’s David, he’s hot because he looks like an animated version of Michelangelo’s David and is shy. He is hot because he is entirely uncomfortable in his own skin despite inhabiting skin in which he should be entirely comfortable — he is a super-smart, super-handsome, super-athletic white man; how much better can he have it? Connell is hot because despite all of that, he can’t stop staring at the guileless-verging-on-neurodivergent-poor-man’s-Anne-Hathaway Marianne (Daisy Edgar-Jones) when Marcia Brady (that’s not her name, but does she ever look like her) can’t stop staring at him. He is hot because he is charmed as fuck when Marianne, during their second kiss, blurts out the “guy” question: “Now can we take our clothes off?” He is hot because he gives Marianne an out during her first time. He is hot because he takes Marianne’s advice about his future. He is hot because he is inconsolable when he realizes how badly he has treated her by keeping them secret. Connell is hot because as much as Marianne is at his mercy, he is even more at hers.And the sex scenes in Normal People are hot because the director realizes all of this — that the hotness is as much in everyone’s heads as it is in their bodies. “In some movies, they treat sex scenes like they treat car chases or gun fights, like an opportunity to try a different form of filmmaking,” Lenny Abrahamson told the Irish magazine Hot Press. “How I shot, if we were moving from dialogue to sex, there’s no point where we enter a different dimension, it’s just a continuation of their interaction.” The way the show is filmed, the confined settings, the proximity of the camera to their faces, their eyes — all of it magnifies the intimacy. But it isn’t just in the shooting, it’s also in the choreography. With the help of intimacy coordinator Ita O’Brien, every frisson between Connell and Marianne — from every long gaze and every small touch to all that heavy breathing in flagrante — coalesces into an intoxicating six-hour expression of the fluid physical connection between two characters whose psychological connection (whose verbal agreement, even) came first. It’s like nothing else exists but them. These two are entirely in it with each other.While Run is less about what’s in their heads than what’s coming out of their mouths, its not-so-brief encounter on a train has a similarly close-quartered intimacy. The HBO series stars Merritt Wever as Ruby, a wife and mom of two, and Domhnall Gleeson as Billy, a Jordan Peterson type. The two exes reunite after 15 years on a cross-country trip to escape their lives. She has her family to lose, he has his book deal. The stakes are slightly uneven, but their banter is not: their edgeplay is their wordplay. Like Normal People, the camera stays close to the two lovers who are already confined in their seats (and, later, “roomette”) shoulder to shoulder, face to face, almost mouth to mouth. Just like we do, they become so hot off each other’s proximity that they are forced to take breaks to secretly masturbate in the bathroom. Both of them. Separately.But here again, as in Normal People, the woman ultimately has all the power. With a family back home, this is Ruby’s encounter to take or leave, not Billy’s. It is her thirst that fuels the ride, not his. “I turned up to have sex,” she says. And later, “I want to fuck you… now.” These exclamations are all the more pregnant for the person saying them — Wever herself has admitted she did not see herself as a lead in a rom-com (Gleeson had already done About Time). And yet here she is not only in one, but subverting it. A man admitting he wants to fuck a woman who might not want to fuck him isn’t transgressive, it’s a cliché. But a woman admitting she wants to fuck a man (more conventionally attractive than she is, more successful, more single) who might reject her? That’s hot. So will he say yes? Do we even need him to anymore? “Holding back on the sex was always something we knew we had to do,” creator Vicky Jones told Refinery29. “Because it’s not really a will-they-won’t-they, since they do. It’s, will they have sex and how?” But with foreplay this good, the sex can’t help but be an anti-climax.That upending convention, that the woman dominates really, suggests why the queen of edging is Portrait of a Lady on Fire, a queer love story by a queer filmmaker (Céline Sciamma) about a painter named Marianne (Noémie Merlant) and her subject, Héloïse (Adèle Haenel). There is no dilution here by the well-trod tropes of male sexuality, there is only a pair of  women drowning in each other. The female gaze turns in on itself as Marianne’s view of Héloïse becomes ours. The film’s title summons the slow burn of their relationship, with every new plateau advancing so achingly slowly — Marianne even seeks consent before repositioning Héloïse’s arm as she sits for her, which is the first time they touch — that every act, when it comes, is that much more extreme, the whole thing mimicking that aforementioned menacing “massive extended orgasm.” It takes 13 minutes for the heroines to meet, despite being in the same house, and even then, one of them is only introduced from behind in a black head-to-toe cloak, a funereal tease. This is no meet-cute; it’s the slowest reveal ever, with her cloak fluttering in the breeze until a mess of blond strands escape, which almost make you gasp despite yourself, before the whole hood falls to expose the back of a blond head. And then, suddenly, the faceless woman is running to her death, we think, until she stops right at the edge of a cliff and, abruptly, turns, her flushed face, her great blue eyes, downplaying the grand mort to a petit mort. “I’ve dreamt of that for years,” Héloïse says breathlessly, post-coitally. A pure distillation of the female apex, no wonder the French, their sexual legacy defined by males, thought the film wasn’t erotic enough.* * *The hottest scene in Normal People, ergo the hottest scene of my isolation, doesn’t actually include an orgasm. And it, fittingly, takes a while, not arriving until near the end of the second half of the series, which was directed by Hettie Macdonald. Now in college, no longer dating, Connell and Marianne are sort-of-not-really watching some sports game in Connell’s hot, cramped childhood room in a haze of hormones. Everything is sweating. She stares at him. He stares at the screen. She pretends to sleep. He gets up. “Want some ice cream?” He goes, she stays. He returns. It’s not ice cream, it’s penis-shaped rocket popsicles. And the room is dripping in sex. When Marianne stretches out her bare feet to his end of the bed, I squeak. She says she wants him to kiss her. He says he does too — the pain on his face! — but they always end badly and he doesn’t want to lose her friendship. Fuck. She gets up to leave, telling him not to drop her off at home ‘cause he’ll miss the rest of the match. Olive branch: “I forgot there was a match on, to be honest.” Game on.Even though the sex is ultimately abandoned (I won’t spoil it), it doesn’t matter. This prelude is more satisfying than 99 percent of the orgasms I’ve ever watched. Despite all the sexual tension, the woman still ultimately commands the room. Theirs and ours. In that Hot Press interview, director Lenny Abrahamson, who shot the first six episodes, laughed perversely about the show coming out during a worldwide pandemic. “You start to miss the human touch, people’s skin — and that is all over the show,” he said. “God help everybody!” But it wasn’t Abrahamson behind the episode I’m talking about, it was a woman. And while it’s true that thirst can hurt, it can also take the edge off, as that scene choreographed by three women — conceived of by Rooney, directed by Macdonald, managed by O’Brien — proves. No one finished, but it wasn’t about that. Because all the elements were there, all that want and all that permission. And that was enough for me, if for no one else. And what was that line again? “When it comes to pleasure, women are the first in line.”* * *Soraya Roberts is a culture columnist at Longreads.
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
Witches we need you. Now more than ever. In the time of COVID-19 we can find respite in place-based reverence, plant magic and the divine feminine. So writes Lisa Richardson, who came to witchiness with nothing but white hetero straight-lacedness and a crush on a yoga teacher. Lisa Richardson | Longreads | April 2020 | 15 minutes (4,084 words)On a Friday afternoon, pre-COVID-19, my husband dropped some ice-cubes into glasses, ready to make us screwdrivers and cheers to surviving another week of working/parenting/wondering where the hell the years were going, only, the vodka bottle was empty.“Oh yeah,” I said, my eyes sliding sideways, trying to not cause a fuss, “I used it for medicine.” The previous week, the kitchen counter had been cluttered with a giant mason jar full of oily plant matter. “Balm of Gilead!” I explained, brightly, as he wiped away the breakfast crumbs around it.“But what is it?”“Cottonwood tips in oil.”His eyes had flicked, then, over to the brand-new bottle of extra virgin olive oil that was now nearly empty, as I enumerated the medicinal benefits of this old herbal remedy (and all this from a tree in our backyard!). Twenty-four years together means I could hear the abacus in his brain clicking, as he wordlessly calculated the cost per milliliter of a gallon jar of plant matter masticating in top-shelf olive oil, against the cost per unit of a bottle of generic aspirin tables, overlaid with the probability of me losing interest in this project.First the olive oil. Now the vodka for dozens of little jars of tinctures — garden herbs and weeds soaking in now-undrinkable booze. My midlife quest to attune more deeply to the rhythms of the natural world was starting to incur unexpected, but real, costs.He was quiet, as he opened the fridge and pulled out a beer instead.* * *In my defense, I could have pointed my finger at Natalie Rousseau, a yoga teacher living in my 5,000 person village, who I’d first encountered leading a solstice yoga class billed as a way to survive the madness of the holidays (in slightly more gracious language). Thanks to her offerings of insight I did survive the commercial horror of the “festive” season, and a few months later, as the new moon entered Aries (whatever that actually means), I plonked down $200 to subscribe to her online 13 Moons course — my foray into “slowing down and being more present,” as I pitched it to my husband when he inquired about the strange entry on the credit card statement.But I did not deflect the simmering tension between us by naming Natalie as the instigator of these “kitchen witch” experiments. Even though I am not a member of any kind of coven or cult, (I don’t think book club counts), I know deep in my bones to never throw another woman onto the fire for helping you. That has been done too many times.But there it is. The word. Witch. The wound.* * *Every day, after COVID-19 entered our world, Natalie Rousseau has responded with an offering, a teaching — a meditation, an ancient mantra of protection, a yoga practice for managing anxiety, a how-to video on harvesting poplar medicine. It’s as if she’s been resourcing herself for this moment to develop the richest arsenal imaginable, to navigate, not the public health crisis, but the billion personal crises each of us is forced to confront as life as we know it slams into pandemic mode. It’s not what I thought a witch would do, if I ever thought about them at all.Natalie doesn’t look like a witch either — not in the way I conceived it for last year’s Halloween costume, with my long black skirt, dollar-store pointy hat, and heavy black eyeliner, walking alongside my 6-year-old vampire-werewolf. Natalie is petite, just a few inches over five feet, her long blond hair still evoking the decade she spent living in a west coast surf town, her chest and lean muscled arms bright with full sleeve flowery tattoos and Mary Oliver quotes. She moves like a dancer, demonstrating yoga poses as if she’s transcending gravity. As a teacher, she speaks exactly, even in Sanskrit, and guides movement precisely, padding gently and soundlessly through the room, making an adjustment here, offering an instruction there.So, I was surprised when she used the word “witch” to launch her new online offering, The Witches Wheel. The lure was irresistible. Natalie was claiming the word “witch” without flinching, without anger, without provocation, not as a way to reclaim feminine power and stick it to the men, warranted as that may be: It was essentially an invitation to observe the cycle of the seasons.A threshold beckoned.* * *Natalie, a recent empty-nester, lives with her husband Paul and two dogs in a modest townhome, with a creek and a dozen rogue gardens installed by various residents running behind it. The garage is full of motorbikes. The porch is swept clean on the day I visit, six months into the 13 Moons program, wanting to talk with her about this radical word and why, in a world still unsure what to do with powerful women, she’s not afraid that she’s exposing herself to pitchforks and fires, haters, and trolls.Even though I am not a member of any kind of coven or cult, (I don’t think book club counts), I know deep in my bones to never throw another woman onto the fire for helping you. That has been done too many times.A tea blend of her own mixing — vanilla chaga chai — is brewing on the stove in an open saucepan. She tends to it, as I settle in, sneaking glimpses around the room, looking for evidence of witchcraft — pentagrams, cloaks, bottled frogs. Nothing. The space is uncluttered, a throw-rug on the armchair, a couple of stark white deer skulls are mounted, European-style, on a wall against a reclaimed barn board — definitely more Soho chic than occult-goth. Her husband returns from town, where he has picked up fresh croissants for us. He’s tall and strong, with a tightly cropped red beard — he looks like a guy you’d run into at the gym, at the surf break, at the hardware store.“So, what’s it like living with a witch?” I ask him as Natalie attends to our tea, a light-hearted question sprouting out of the great compost of fears I am thinking. Is it impossibly hard to be with a woman who comfortably claims her own power, magic, cycles, voice? What kind of a man can love and honor a witch? And lurking deep beneath it all: Will my husband be one of them?Paul rolls his eyes, overly-dramatically, pointing up to the light fixture in the kitchen — light bulbs housed in mason jars of all sizes, evoking summer cabins and fireflies and Kinfolk magazine dinner party lanterns. “I made this for her because everything ends up in jars. Have you seen inside these cupboards?” He walks around the house, in faux-exasperation, opening doors to reveal neat stacks of jars, full of dried petals, leaves, syrups, tonics, salves, salts. “And there’s more upstairs!” If it hadn’t been for the dinner party they’d hosted the previous night, most of their apartment’s horizontal surfaces would be covered in jars, he tells me, and the front porch would have housed a dead raven and a dead Cooper’s hawk.“She’s always sending me out in search of dead things,” he jokes. He picks up roadkill in case she can salvage feathers or skulls.“When he first met me, I was already a skull collector, and now he goes and finds them for me and brings them back,” says Natalie. “He’s gotten really good at living with witchy stuff.”The two of them are remarkably self-sufficient — an animal lover (“he loves animals more than people”), Paul realized veganism left him tired and undernourished, so took up hunting to procure his own meat humanely; one of the deer skulls mounted on the wall was harvested this fall, its meat now fills their freezer. They grow a garden, wildcraft, eat well. There is an ease between them — a tidal push and pull as they navigate their modest shared space and the morning routine, without evidence of fake niceness, of power trips or struggles.Witchcraft, in Natalie Rousseau’s mind, is too non-dogmatic and non-hierarchical to submit to a single all-encompassing definition. “As a practice, it’s so highly individual,” she says, “but across the board, it is very place-based, land-based and body-based. For me, it’s about cultivating a relationship with your own body, your own mind, your emotions, and subtle sensing faculties. It’s learning how to trust your intuition. It’s about reclaiming your own instincts, but also being able to feel: this is what stress feels like in my body, this is what relaxation feels like, this is what it feels like to say yes to something out of a sense of obligation or pressure, this is what it feels like to have a boundary. This is what it feels like when I’m safe. These cues come to us from our bodies. It has to be, for it to work well, otherwise, you’re always reaching outside yourself for another authority.”This is what she wants to help women, particularly, to reclaim: their sense that they are the first authority on themselves, that they can trust their bodies’ wisdom.“The biggest thing I want to share with people,” says Natalie of her teaching and online courses, “is how to trust themselves. Everyone can very easily make the medicines that their household would need for common household complaints — colds and flus and chest colds and menstrual cramps — so many basic things that anyone can make very simply, quite affordably. I’m not anti-pharmaceutical. There are many medications people have to take daily to live. And if I have a serious infection, I’m going to take antibiotics; if I am seriously ill, I am going to go to the doctor; if I have any kind of trauma, I’m going to be so grateful for that form of medicine. But I believe the role kitchen medicine has is in the maintenance and prevention of illness.”One of her biggest laments, though, as she makes videos and handouts and shares them with her online community, is that even people who have paid to do her course don’t feel that they have the time to take it into their kitchens. “Making a tincture is literally pouring vodka over plant materials and leaving it on your counter for four weeks!” she says. But it is easier for most people to just buy one online and have it delivered to their doorstep. “I am saddened by how easily women give their power over. This is the biggest thing I’ve noticed as a teacher in the past couple of years — how quickly women will say, ‘but how do you do this? I don’t know how to do this! I’m afraid to try this because I might not be good at it, I might be doing it wrong. I’m an imposter.’ I really struggle with this. Where is it coming from?”But she knows. We have relinquished our power, over a thousand years or more, of wounding, of witch-burnings, of patriarchy either convincing us we have none or forcibly stripping it away, (hello Harvey Weinstein), until all we feel empowered to do, now, in 2020, is consume. And we’ve been doing that with all our might.We override the listening, we ignore the nudges, we push through, like good soldiers. “Most people are running so hard,” observes Natalie. “Our culture is so focussed on productivity. We are so overly heroic — it’s all or nothing. I can’t do something unless I’m an expert. I don’t want to try. But this is a craft. It’s a path of education.”Natalie’s invitation is gentle, and she’s crafted her online course to serve that: Start with one plant and learn its taste, its smell. Spend five minutes a day on meditation or in conscious ritual and begin to notice what’s going on in your nervous system, in your mind, in your body.“When he first met me, I was already a skull collector, and now he goes and finds them for me and brings them back,” says Natalie. “He’s gotten really good at living with witchy stuff.”Don’t get so distracted by the word witch, that you fail to notice that it is connected to craft. Witchcraft, for Natalie, is a path of learning “how to trust and problem solve, from within, knowing that we are in a system of power that, for better, for worse, will strip us of any ability to trust ourselves and to always feel empty so we have to keep buying more stuff.”When she says this, a deep thrill of recognition hums in me, accompanied by a shiver of fear. Those are revolutionary things to say out loud, to cast into the open air. I recognize it viscerally as the kind of talk that gets people in trouble.* * *Last summer, before I met Natalie, I had stepped from my backyard patio stones onto freshly cut grass and spied the sinuous form of a wandering garter snake. I leaned in quickly, excitedly, about to call my 6-year-old over to glimpse the garden visitor before it shimmied away. But it was eerily still. Ugly slash wounds marked its body. It was dead. Innocent victim to the ride-on lawnmower. Obliterated by our oblivion.“Oh no,” I muttered. “I’m so sorry!”I had already begun to wake up to the natural world, it’s rhythms, it’s offerings of medicine, it’s otherness, but it had come with a shadow side, a growing despair at what we were doing to the world. Even without a malicious intention, I was causing death and destruction — just mowing the lawn, drinking my coffee, wiping my ass: My actions, all our human activity, had compounding impacts that were destroying the snakes, the ocean, the atmosphere, the forests, the icecaps — beyond repair.I wanted my garden to be a habitat. I wanted the bees to waggle-dance directions to my sunflowers to their hive-mates, I wanted the wandering garter snakes to nest in their hibernacula through the winter and bask in the long grass in the summer, I wanted to lie on my back and watch butterflies dance through the flowers and the hummingbirds zoom in and out, I wanted to inhabit innocence again.I’m so sorry, I’m so sorry. My penitence froze me in place, scared to make a move for fear of ruining something else. Then, regret overriding my squeamishness, I fetched the flat-bladed shovel and edged it under the dead snake. I carried her body over to the vegetable patch, and in a space between the beds, where the mower never goes, I laid her down. I picked marigolds and calendula from around the garden, where they’d been planted to keep the snails away, and lay the bright orange blossoms in a circle around her.Grandmother snake, I whispered, hoping that some force that exists beyond the definitively dead snake at my feet, might spread the word among the entire species, “I’m sorry. We didn’t mean it. I will try to be more careful.”It was a made-up ritual, the kind that a kid might perform deep in her dream world at the bottom of the garden, and it made my 44 year-old-self feel a little bit better. At least I’d made a gesture of repair, had expressed my desire to return into balance with the living world around me. If it had any effect, I’d never know. I went back inside, said nothing.A few days later, out in the garden, my husband tripped over the skeleton of a decomposing snake, ringed by wilted flowers, half consumed by ants.“That was spooky,” he confronted me. “What’s going on? Are you some kind of witch?”* * *Kickstart your weekend reading by getting the week’s best Longreads delivered to your inbox every Friday afternoon.Sign up* * *Natalie has always been comfortable with the word. Now she’s having fun inviting people to consider the archetype, circle it, unpack it, stumble upon some kind of recognition: Wait a second! Maybe I am a witch! “It’s cool how people in the western world can take a description that has been used mostly as a slur, and turn it around to use as something empowering,” she says.For thousands of years, witch was a term used to incite violence against women. By the most conservative estimates, half a million people, mostly women, were executed in the European witch craze between 1300 and 1650. Accusations of witchcraft were used against women, says Rousseau, “in ways that were extremely dangerous and terrifying. It was really about getting power from them, and getting land back. So, to use a word like that in an empowered way, even today, you have to know you’re safe to do it. And it’s important to realize that in many places in the world, it’s still not safe for women to say that. But if we can, in safe places, take that word and turn it around, that, to me, is extremely powerful.”I wanted the bees to waggle-dance directions to my sunflowers to their hive-mates, I wanted the wandering garter snakes to nest in their hibernacula through the winter and bask in the long grass in the summer, I wanted to lie on my back and watch butterflies dance through the flowers and the hummingbirds zoom in and out, I wanted to inhabit innocence again.Natalie herself embodies empowerment. Not in the traditional way I have come to recognize power — as someone standing over, dominating someone else, her source of power comes from within.She doesn’t need to take any from her partner.“Do you find this relationship at all emasculating?” I joke to Natalie’s husband.“I don’t. Not at all. No,” he replies.“We’ve always given each other space to be ourselves.”But that’s not always a guarantee of safety.If it is dangerous to be an empowered woman in the world, then it’s dangerous, too, for the men who love them.Lyla June Johnston is an author and activist of Diné and European heritage. Her inquiry into her disowned European heritage led to a realization: The millions of women burned alive, drowned alive, dismembered alive, beaten, raped and otherwise tortured as so-called, “witches,” were not witches at all. They were the medicine people of old Europe. Her lens, as a contemporary indigenous woman, and as a survivor of sexual violence, helped her identify that those were the women who understood the herbal medicines, the ones who prayed with stones, the ones who passed on sacred chants. And the all-out warfare of the witch burnings didn’t just harm the women. It had a profound effect on the men who loved them, their husbands, sons, brothers. She recognizes the echo of this in the story of her own time, of her own people. “Nothing makes a man go mad like watching the women of his family get burned alive. If the men respond to this hatred with hatred, the hatred is passed on. And who can blame them? While peace and love are the correct response to hatred, it is not an easy response by any means.”How many men have kept their women down, tried to keep them at home, have become the handcuffs that the women fought against because they were answering to their own unarticulated primal instinct to keep them safe?Natalie Rousseau speculates, “I am sure historically you had lots of husbands telling their wives to tone it down, not because they didn’t respect their power, but because they were genuinely afraid. I’d apply that to any women described as uppity — getting involved politically, or getting involved in local stuff that’s happening, fighting for the environment: Stop getting noticed so much. This could be dangerous.”Some dangers are too great to be able to protect each other from. And so we turn the fight on each other — little domestic power-trips that distract us from the fact that we’ve relinquished all our power any way to the Great Machine.* * *My tentative inquiries into witchcraft, becoming fluent in my own moods and emotions, and paying attention to the seasons, barely prepared me for the abrupt slow-the-fuck-down order that came when COVID-19 landed in British Columbia, in my village, as school broke for spring break. The emergency handbrake was pulled. Everything came to a squealing stop — all my plans, canceled; all the stores, closing; the whole damn world, under house arrest and in a panic. The whiplash from the stunning speed of that shift has left my whole being hypersensitive to any sudden movement, to being jerked around. But the first things I have staked my trust in, in that space of uncertainty, were Natalie’s teachings: First, trust your body. Pause. Listen.In self-imposed isolation with my husband and just-turned-7-year-old, I dance with anxiety and curiosity and disconnection and too-much-information. The well-trodden pathways we have all been racing along, flexing our power and exercising our entitlements as consumers, are suddenly bordered up with emergency tape. This invitation that Natalie has been dripping out, month after month, takes root. There is far more potency available to us, than shopping, driving, holidaying, consuming, endlessly moving around the planet.There is potency in all the feelings that have been showing up at my door. Oh, good morning frustration. Ah grief, yes, I suppose you’d like a cup of tea. Hello there, existential terror, I wondered when you’d pop by. There is potency in sitting with my back against a huge cedar tree and listening, in slowing down so much that I can give my 7-year-old my full attention. There is potency even in my words, when I soothe him down from a tantrum by saying, “you know, this is a really hard time for everyone in the whole world right now because no one knows what’s going to happen and no one can play with their friends. I’m really proud of you.” And I can feel his body relax into this space of being acknowledged in his struggles and his efforts.I don’t know if there are any medicinal properties in the tincture of St John’s Wort and valerian that I drop into water and hand my husband, to gentle his nervous system. Or in the jar of immune-boosting oxymel, that I brewed up with grated ginger and turmeric and orange peel, and shake every day. But even if it’s a placebo, there’s a relief for me in feeling I can do something, can offer my people some kind of healing intention in a little glass, that I can acknowledge that this is hard for my husband too, and that acknowledgment isn’t a concession that takes away from my own sense of struggle.For decades, we’ve bought into the illusion that our power is as consumers. Now that stores are closing and the shelves are emptying and we have to stay home and not immediately indulge every whim that arises, we all feel powerless. But that was never our truest source of power. There’s another source that we can all plug back into, our deep relationship and interbeing with the life force. Maybe, this is our threshold moment. Maybe, this is a chance to craft a few little spells, to speak the words of the world we long to inhabit — a place where the currency of kindness and wonder flow, where humans return to a deep memory of belonging among the plants and creatures, and to brew up a cup of tea, light a candle, and dream it into existence. Maybe it’s an invitation to say, “I’m sorry, we didn’t mean to, I will try and be more careful,” and to build a little altar, even if you feel kind of cray cray doing it. Let your nervous system settle as you invent some small ritual, (just ask your inner 5-year-old for guidance, she probably remembers exactly what to do), and make a gesture of repair.“I can’t think of anyone I’d rather have on my Apocalypse team,” I tell my husband, the night the global virus countertops 400,000. He’s been chopping wood, auditing the pantry, getting our kid across the finish line of the LEGO project that has absorbed him for four days. My husband was a farm kid. He’s always been practical, my polar opposite. Even when we have battled each other, (am I giving up too much of my power to him? If I acknowledge his pain and his needs, will that cancel mine out?) I’ve always known he would do anything to keep me safe. “Not that I can request an upgrade now,” I joke. “But I bet you’re glad to be stuck with me. One always wants a daydreamer at your side in a pinch.”“Oh yeah,” he spoofs me: “’ The stock market is collapsing, let me just go check my Tarot cards.’”We laugh. And hold each other. We can’t buy our way out of this. None of us. Our entire species, our global community, is being vividly reminded that we are all in this together, inextricably connected, epidemiologically entwined, in our vulnerability and our sweet potential. We didn’t need Amazon and airlines and online shopping to know what the witches have been telling us all this time. All the power we need is right here — between us, around us, within us. We just have to remember it.Editor: Carolyn Wells 
					Create your own site at WordPress.com					arrow-right
